 Story_ID: 86315 Speaker 1: My name is Adele Hodge. I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the camera person. We are talking with Gloria Owens Hemphill, who will tell us about her history-making life today and that of her father, Jesse Owens. Miss Hemphill, would you spell your full name for us, and give us your birthdate and place? Speaker 2: Okay. G-L-O-R-I-A, O-W-E-N-S, H-E-M-P-H-I-L-L. I was born in Cleveland, Ohio, August 8, 1932. Story_ID: 86316 Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give me the date and birthplace of your father and your mother, and give us, spell out their full names? Speaker 2: My father, Jesse Owens, J-E-S-S-E, O-W-E-N-S, was born... Isn't that awful, it escapes me right now... was born in Oakville, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. And his date of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth was September 12, 1913. My mother, Ruth, R-U-T-H, Solomon, S-O-L-O-M-O-N, Owens, was born in Decatur, Georgia. And her birthdate is April 27, 19... She was born three years after my father. Speaker 1: Nineteen Sixteen [1916]? Speaker 2: Nineteen Sixteen, [1916], um hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Your grandparents on your mother's side, do you know their names? Speaker 2: My grandparents on my mother's side... I knew my grandmother, because she lived with us much of the early part of my life. My grandfather, I did not know, because he died before I was born. Speaker 1: Were they from Georgia also? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And on your father's side? Speaker 2: On my father's side, I knew my grandparents vaguely. I knew both grandmothers better, because my grandfathers both died at an early age. My grandmothers were very good friends. In fact, my two grandmothers helped in the birth of my youngest sister. (Laughter.) So, and I remember--and it's so strange that I remember that so well. But I remember them running through the house because they were getting ready for this birth. Because my mother had said she did not ever want to go back to a hospital again. And so, there they were. The doctor had planned to come too, but it came a little bit early. So they did their job, and they did it very well. Speaker 1: How many siblings? Speaker 2: I have two sisters. Speaker 1: And their names? Speaker 2: Their names are Marlene Owens Rankin [HM] and Beverly Owens Prather. Speaker 1: And you are the oldest? Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Story_ID: 86317 Speaker 1: I usually like to--talk about your grandparents again. Tell me the story--aside from the day your sister was born or maybe you want to elaborate that story--a story that would illustrate your relationship with your grandmothers. Speaker 2: I was very close to my maternal grandmother. Like I said, she lived with us when I was young. And Mama was just a very important part of my life. My parents were very young when I was born. My mother [Ruth Solomon Owens] was 17, and my father [Jesse Owens] was 19 or 20. And so they were very, very young. And we'd come from a family that supports each other, and even--especially older members of the family. So I lived with my grandmother, my maternal grandmother, and my aunt and my uncle when I was a very little baby. And so, Mama was always a very special person in my life, even as an adult, because she was always there. When I went away to college, she loved to quilt. So, she made me a quilt and she gave me some goose grease. Because she said that I had to be warm, and if I got a cold that the goose grease was to help me get over my cold. And so, she was just a very, very special lady. And every summer, my sisters and I--we moved a lot. When we lived away from Cleveland [Ohio], which was the family home, every summer my sisters and I would go to Cleveland for the summer, after school was out. And my mother would put us on the train and tag us. And because I was the oldest by six and seven years of the siblings, of course, I was responsible for them. And we always knew that when we got to Glendale [Ohio], that I always knew that I was to put on Marlene [Owens Rankin] and Beverly [Owens Prather]'s coats as we prepared, because Cleveland would be the next stop. And my grandmother and my aunt and uncle were always there to meet us. And so, we spent summers with them. And they were just wonderful, because all our cousins were there and everybody. And I know now, as an adult, how special that was for them to do that. Because my father always traveled, and it gave my mother and father a chance to have some time together. But I didn't know that then. And I said how wise they were. And it just was an example of a family keeping things going. Speaker 1: That's beautiful, that's beautiful. And did you get to see your paternal grandmother as much? Speaker 2: I didn't see her as much. But when I, when we would go to Cleveland in the summers, we would spend time with them because they all lived in a neighborhood not too far apart. So, I would go to Mama Owens' house to, you know, we'd go for dinner or just to visit or something. But we always stayed with my maternal grandmother. Story_ID: 86318 Speaker 1: Your parents were extremely young, so you must have had a lot of fun, having young parents. Tell me what it was like growing up in the Owens house. Speaker 2: I guess it was. You know, we always had a lot of people around, a lot of athletes around, of course. Because my mother [Ruth Solomon Owens] and father [Jesse Owens] were kind of like the base. They were married, and many of the athletes weren't when we lived in Columbus, Ohio when my dad was in school. We had a big house, and many of the athletes lived with us, or they were always there. So, we, it was, it was a very, it was a wonderful childhood I must say. We always lived in communities and neighborhoods. And so, and we always had great neighbors. And there were lots of friends. And in Columbus when we lived in--well, when we lived in Cleveland, I was really young. But I did start grade school there. And we lived in what they called a terrace. And so, there were lots of children in this terrace, and we were all very good friends. In fact, many of the kids that I grew up with there, later after I had been away from Cleveland for many years living permanently, we met again when I went to Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio]. And it was so amazing, because last year we went for our 50th anniversary. And it was just amazing to see people that you knew as a child, and you don't--you know, you didn't see too much in-between. But here we are together, and it's just like it was yesterday. So, it was a fun life. It was interesting, in the fact that my father always traveled. And so, my mother was kind of like always the backbone, the one that was always there with us. However, my mother was very smart, in the fact that even though my father traveled quite a bit, his presence was always there. And it was always special times for us when he came home, because he would always bring us wonderful gifts from all over the world, really. And so, it was a different childhood, in the fact that my father had accomplished so many things. But it was a time when athletes did not live like they do now. And, but we always had everything. But he had to make his living on the road, because there just was no other way. And so, you know, it was just part of our life. Story_ID: 86319 Speaker 1: What kind of personality, as Dad, did he [Jesse Owens] have? Speaker 2: Oh, my dad, he was just the kind of person that very few people, if any, did not like. I mean he, he was just a warm, outgoing person. And it always amazes me now at this point in my life, I say all the time--You know, it's just so interesting. There is not a day, or I should say a week, that goes by that I don't hear a story about my dad from someone; strangers... anybody. We--and so much so that in the family, we call them "grand-dad stories." And just... if you're somewhere and someone says, "Oh, you know, that's Jesse Owens's daughter" or something like that, people will come up and say, "You know, I knew that guy, and he did this, or such and such." For instance we have a, just a current story. The Foundation has a fashion show every year at the Drake. So, one year I was sitting at the desk, and evidently someone told them what this was going on here, because they asked and everything. And he came over and he introduced himself. He was visiting Chicago [Illinois], and we were just coming from lunch. And he says, "Let me tell you a story about your dad." I said, "I don't believe this." I told him, I says, "You know, there is nowhere that I go that someone doesn't come up and tell me a grand-dad story. That is a really nice story," about either something that he's done for them, or done for their kids or, you know, it's always something that he gave of himself to do. And life was not always easy for him, and nor was it for us. It's not easy sometimes being the children of famous people. I remember when I was in grade school when we lived in Detroit [Michigan] another place where we, we lived in Detroit. And my mother [Ruth Solomon Owens] and father were both very formal people, and I think it came from their upbringing. In our house, you always sat down at the table for dinner. The table was always set, and you sat down and you had dinner. And you always were dressed. My dad was always dressed. My mother was always dressed. Mama would get up in the morning, my grandmother. She never left--she never came downstairs until she was totally dressed. And so, that was what we had always known. And so when we went to school, we were always dressed. And we, my mother had very good taste, and we had lovely things. And so sometimes that didn't work too well at school. (Laughter). I remember being chased home from school one day. And I still have the scars to prove it on my leg. And this little, this young man said to me, "You just really think you're something, but your father has all his sense in his feet." And he hauled off and kicked me. And, and that was when boys wore those big shoes with the metal buckles and stuff on them. And I still have the marks. And I could never understand that. Because unless someone else told you who my father was, you would never hear it from us. Because I'll tell you, quite frankly, we really did not know as children growing up, you know, his accomplishments and what he had done. We didn't sit around and talk about that. That was never part of family discussion. It was your father, he has this talent to do certain things, and he makes his living traveling with the Trotters, The [Harlem] Globetrotters or whatever, or with the House of David, or whoever he was working with at the time. And so, consequently, we--you get harassed a lot by kids sometimes. And you know where it comes from, as you get older. It comes from their parents, you know. So, but we still had a wonderful life and a wonderful time. Story_ID: 86320 Speaker 1: Well, how was it for you personally in dealing with the harassment of being the offspring of someone well-known? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I really--I think what I did was always work to excel. I always worked to be at the top of my class in school. And I always participated in the different contests my mother [Ruth Solomon Owens] was having. And I remember I was in the Elks oratorical contest when I was a teenager. And I did--they used to have this every year. I think it was when we lived in Detroit [Michigan]. And so it came down to the final, you know, the final contest. And I was really very good, because I had a lady that had taken an interest in me, and she had tutored me on this oratory speech that I was giving. And so, when we finally got down to the last two contestants, me and another young man, when the results came out we were told that the young man really was second, but they were going to give him first place because we could afford whatever it was. I don't even remember what the prize was. But, you know, it was if to say just because you are Jesse Owens's daughter, this young man will benefit more from this than you would. And so, you learn to live with those kinds of things, you know. I was, I was young, and I was a child, and I had worked hard. And I was disappointed, I was hurt. Because to be told that, you know. But-- Speaker 1: Did you tell your parents? Speaker 2: My mother was there. My mother, she was there. It was a big, it was a big thing. I can't quite recall--and my mother, bless her soul, is not here to tell me what, you know, what year it was. I don't recall. But I was, I was a young girl. Speaker 1: What grade were you in? Speaker 2: Probably in seventh or eighth grade. I think that's what it was, around that time. Speaker 1: So, it took you a while to get over that? Speaker 2: Yeah, it did, it did. But you know, my mother always explained those things to us, you know. And my dad [Jesse Owens] would say, "Well, baby, you knew you were the best, and that's enough." He said, "That is enough. When you know that you've given it your best, and then you have to just accept that." But I, so I think one--I always worked hard at school and I always wanted to excel. And I always did well. Speaker 1: Was this, being the child of a well-known--again, is that something you had to discuss with your mom and dad, about the feedback that you were getting--the kicks and the--? Speaker 2: They--I did. I would tell them. But they, they understood. They'd just tell me that that sometimes is part of life. And it is. A few knocks in between all the wonderful things that happen. Story_ID: 86321 Speaker 1: And, and tell us the name of your elementary school. Speaker 2: Well, I went to several. In Cleveland [Ohio], I went to Bolton Elementary School. Speaker 1: Until what grade? Speaker 2: Until I was in third grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then we moved to Columbus, Ohio. And then in Columbus, Ohio, I went to Custer Elementary School. And then we moved to Detroit, Michigan. And in Detroit, Michigan I went to Atkinson Elementary School, where I graduated. And then I went to John J. Pershing High School in Detroit. And then after graduation, before graduation, the year before my graduation, my parents moved to Chicago [Illinois] because my dad [Jesse Owens] was with Ford Motor Company, and they moved to Chicago. Well, I was in my, finishing my junior year of high school. And I was involved in everything in high school. I was on the debating team, I was going to be president of my class, I was going to be valedictorian, I was going to be, you know, all of those things. And I didn't want to leave to come to Chicago. So, we lived in a community called Conant Gardens, and I shared that book with Julie [Julieanna Richardson] that they wrote about that. And it was an African African community like you never knew; it was wonderful. So anyway, my mother [Ruth Solomon Owens]'s friend, Louise Taylor and her husband, they had two young sons, Bo and Butch. And they said, "She can stay with us." And so, I did for my senior year in high school. And you know, I'd come back. I'd come to Chicago for Christmas and, you know, breaks and stuff like that, and the summer. Because then when I graduated that year--and my father took me to my prom. (Laughter). My dad took me to my senior prom. Now, this is what he did. He--because at my high school--although the community, Conant Gardens, was an all African-American community--the high school we had, there were six of us in my graduating class. So, but my dad took me to the door. I mean he bought me a corsage and I had a pretty dress. And he took me to the door and I went in, and he came back and he picked me up. So, you know, it was really, really nice. And it didn't bother me at all. I enjoyed it, you know. But, so anyway after we came to--after I graduated, I was just in Chicago for the summer, and then I was off to Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] for college. So, actually I did not come to live in Chicago until I graduated from college. Story_ID: 86322 Speaker 1: During your earliest school years, like the elementary grades, was there any teacher or mentor that stands out to you? Speaker 2: Well, yes. I had one; my high school counselor, Vinnie Schmeltzer (ph.). He was also our tennis coach, and I played on the tennis team, also. And he was really a great person. He, he, just was a nice person to talk to. And so, he was pretty important to me. I don't remember a teacher that I had in grade school. But a teacher that my sisters had--because the grade school that we went to in Detroit [Michigan]--Atkinson [Elementary School], it was a new school. And the only black students there were the students that came from Conant Gardens. And they had one black teacher, Miss Utimy (ph.), and she was just such a special person. Because those of us... because I was an older student there. We just admired her so much. So, she was kind of like somebody we looked up to. Story_ID: 86323 Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from Pershing [High School, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: I graduated in 1949. Speaker 1: And in high school, any special mentoring? Speaker 2: No. In high school, not necessarily at school, no. But in high school, I belonged to two groups. One was the Coeds. And it was sponsored there by a woman named Mary Agnes Davis (ph.), who was absolutely a wonderful lady. And there were two groups of us there, the Coeds and the Del Sprites. And we were kind of like in competition. And Mary Agnes, we--it was a group that, we had to learn all the social graces and, you know, just do teas and, you know, stuff like that. And it was, it was really a wonderful group. And also, at the Y[MCA], we had the Older Boys and Girls Association. And what that was, was teenagers. And we were all like from the same, from families that were similar and everything. But we would have, every year we would go to the Y for activities. It played an important part in our lives. And every year we would have an Older Boys and Girls Conference, which was an opportunity for us to have sessions on preparing for college, relations... teenage relationships, you know, and stuff like that. And we would have it for a whole week, and then end it with a big party. And it was really quite an activity, you know, and it was quite a big part of our lives. So, and then included in both of those groups, we always had to do some community service. So, it, it started out early in life--knowing that you have a responsibility to do something to improve your community or to improve your organization, or to improve whatever affects your life. And so, it was nice to me. I remember we did a lot of things at what they called then, old folks homes, you know. We would--and because I like to read, you know, we would go and read stories. And we'd do dramatizations, you know, it was a lot of fun. We didn't realize then how important that type of thing was, because it was part of what we did. Story_ID: 86324 Speaker 1: So, what kind of student were you? What were your favorite subjects? Speaker 2: I was a good student. I was, I was really a good student. My favorite subjects were English and history, I loved both of them. And I had a terrible time in science. I mean I did well, but I--it was a struggle. (Laughter). But one of my best friends, her father was a principal. And he was a principal of Miller High School in Detroit [Michigan], which at that point there were a couple of black high schools. Miller and Northern, I think was the other. And but we all lived in Conant Gardens, so we all went to Pershing [High School, Detroit, Michigan]. And Mr. Cofferd (ph.) would always try to help us so much with our science and our math, but we managed just to make it through. Story_ID: 86325 Speaker 1: Okay. I forgot to do our "People" [Magazine] questions. So, we're going to do it before this tape runs out. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is yellow. Speaker 1: And your favorite food? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know that I have--mashed, my husband [Malcolm Hemphill, Jr., HM] would say mashed potatoes. (Laughter). I guess mashed potatoes are my favorite food. I love mashed potatoes. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: At this point in my life, my favorite vacation destination is--are two places. Union Pier, Michigan where we have our summer home, summer family home, which is very, very, special to us. Because my parents, when they moved to Arizona, would come back every summer and we'd spend our time back and forth between Chicago [Illinois] and there. But they came and stayed. And my father [Jesse Owens] had a birthday party there every year, because his birthday was very, very, very important to him. And that was a significant time in our lives because his friends, his teammates, would come from all over the world to this party. And my mother [Ruth Solomon Owens] would cook and we would, it was just, it just was a fantastic thing. And they would sit around, all the guys, Mr. [Ralph] Metcalfe, and just all of them. And they'd tell stories about when they were young athletes, you know, these stories. Well, they just re-lived the good old times. And we would sit around and listen. And the one thing we regret, my husband and I say this often; we didn't tape it. We didn't tape it. But they--such a friendship. Story_ID: 86206 Speaker 1: So, every year at [Jesse Owens'] birthday time, the Owens family spent, spent it together at-- Speaker 2: At our house-- Speaker 1: At the Union Pier [Michigan] family home? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And your friends could be sure they would get an invitation to this birthday party? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: Let's see what little remnants of the story you remember, something special about these grand occasions. Speaker 2: Well, the thing that is always so special about them was that they [Jesse Owens' friends] came. They came from everywhere. And they always played golf. Because as much as they cared about each other, they were always competing with each other. So, they would always play--they would come and usually spend the night at either, you know, at little hotels and stuff around there in Michigan. And then they'd have breakfast at our house and then they would go to the golf course. And then my mother [Ruth Solomon Owens] and I and my sister, we'd be getting dinner together. And then sometimes their wives came with them. And so, you know, we would just sit around and chat. And my mother and the wives would talk about the good old days when they were young people. And my dad and his friends were competing. And as they grew older and had children and, you know, just talked about life. And then the guys would come in, and they would sit down. And then they'd start talking about when they were in such and such a place, like when they were in Europe, when they came back from the Olympics, and things that happened over there. Or, when after they were older, you know, things that would happen. They would tease Mr. [Ralph] Metcalfe sometime, the Congressman, you know. And just, they would just reminisce about their old times and current times, and what they were doing now, and about their kids and their grandkids and so forth and so on. Just, just the things that friends do when they get together. But they all knew that my dad's birthday was special to him. And so it was like, it was something you looked forward to, you know, coming to. Story_ID: 86207 Speaker 1: So, Union Pier [Michigan] was a favorite place. And what is the other? Speaker 2: My other favorite place is Cancun, Mexico. Speaker 1: Going to Cancun (unclear)? Speaker 2: My husband [Malcolm Hemphill, Jr., HM] I find that--you know, it's so interesting about that, the first time I ever went there, my daughter's fiance had bought a timeshare there. And he gave it to my husband and I as a gift for our 25th anniversary--they gave us the trip. And so, we went and we had such a marvelous time. It was one of the few places--and I've been a lot of places. It's one of the few places where I felt totally relaxed and didn't have to do anything. And so, we have been going back for many years. And last--year before last, at our place we took our children for a family vacation. And it was just, it was just divine. And so, I find that it's a place to go and just totally relax from a busy life that we, that I live all year long. Story_ID: 86208 Speaker 1: You have how many children? Speaker 2: I have two daughters, two wonderful daughters. Speaker 1: And their-- Speaker 2: And two sons-in-law. I-- Speaker 1: Their names? Speaker 2: Their names are Gina Hemphill-Strachan and Marlene Hemphill Dortch. And Gina lives in upstate Westchester County in Hartsdale, New York. And Marlene lives in Fort Washington, Maryland. And I'm very proud of both of them. Marlene is an attorney, my baby. And she is Secretary of Federal Communications Commission [FCC] in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: So, she's working with Mr. [Colin] Powell [HM]'s son? Speaker 2: Yeah, with Michael [Powell, HM]. Yeah, they work together. In fact they are, they are the people in the FCC. And then my daughter, Gina, is with NBC Sports Olympics in New York. Speaker 1: And Marlene has the grandbaby? Speaker 2: Marlene has our first grandchild, my sweet little pumpkin. His name is Lou Alan Winfred Dortch, Jr (ph.). That's quite a name, isn't it? (Laughter). Speaker 1: And he'll live up to it. Speaker 2: He will, he definitely will. He definitely will. Speaker 1: How old is he now? Speaker 2: He's eighteen months. Story_ID: 86209 Speaker 1: Okay, let's go back to post-high school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And let's find--when did you meet Mr. [Malcolm] Hemphill [Jr., HM]? And how did all of that come about? Speaker 2: Oh, my husband? I met my husband the first day of teaching school. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: When I came to Chicago [Illinois], we were sitting on the bench in Burke [Elementary] School waiting for our assignment. And I just, you know, I said, "Oh, that's really a nice looking guy there." But, you know, I didn't really know him. So, anyway he was assigned to the gym because he's a physical--he was a physical education teacher. And I was assigned to this second grade classroom at the end of the hall, which the gym was at one end and my classroom was at the other end. And you could look straight down from one to the other. On that same day--and I have to tell this story because this is how we met. I met my very best friend right now that has been my friend for over fifty years. Her name is Reva Hairston. Well, I did not know either one of them, but I also did not know that they knew each other. So, we were at this wonderful school where I cannot tell you how blessed I was to get assigned to this school. Because at this school, the principal, Louise [Gaines] Daugherty, and the teachers who were there, they just don't make those kind of people anymore. They took me under their wing, and that's where I learned to teach. In Chicago, you have a, at that time, you had to take a teacher's exam, a written and a practical. Well, I didn't play the piano too well, and that was part of the practical for the primary part of the test. So, Mrs. Daugherty, the principal, every day the month before the exam she practiced with me. Now, you know, that is something. Every day. To learn a skip and a jump and then sing a song for this exam. And the other teachers at that school, they just, they just fell in love with us, and we fell in love with them. At that time he was a gym teacher, and I was a first and second grade teacher. So, and they promoted this little relationship. And my, this--I know people will think this sounds silly, but my friend, Reva would write me notes. And she'd say, "Mr. Hemphill likes you." And then, and these--we're adults. And she would write him notes and say, "Miss Owens really likes you." So then he found occasions to come down. And if something was wrong, he'd fix my pencil sharpener and everything. So, finally we started dating. And to make a long story short, he got drafted into the [U.S.] Navy. And Novia Bacon (ph.), who was a teacher at the school next door to me, in the room next to me, she said, "Well, now you know, that's terrible. Now he's getting ready to go to the service. We've got to do something about this, so they can have more time together." She took off and Mrs. Daugherty had him substituting next door to me. This is the kind of people they were. And then Nina Jones (ph.) and Vinona Johnson (ph.), and all of those wonderful women, they just did everything they could, you know, to keep us together. Hazel Remfill Huggins--Anthony--Hazel Anthony Remfill Huggins (ph.). They did everything to keep us together. And so, after he got out of the service, we got engaged. Now, can you imagine this? I came running into school, running into the principal's office to show her my engagement ring and to let her--you know, everybody was so happy. But I, I, I'm retired now from the school system. But I don't know that that happens in schools anymore, and that those relationships exist. And those were my mentors. Those were the people that loved us, and truly loved us. Now they loved us, but we walked a chalk line, too. Because when I was late for my duty, Mrs. Daugherty called me in and told me about it. And then I'd have to stay after and mark the lines as they came down the steps. I mean, you know, with that love came--that was what I call real love. Because they taught me that "We love you, and we're going to do anything for you. But we're going to teach you to be responsible also." So, that to me was really love. And I love all of them to this day. And I keep in touch. On my 65th birthday my husband had a party for me, and it was so beautiful. And those were the people that he invited--all of those ladies that mentored us at the school, and two or three other friends of mine. And they came, and it was so nice. And if I'd ever wanted anyone to be at my 65th birthday party, that's who I wanted there. Story_ID: 86210 Speaker 1: How long were you able to stay at that school [Burke Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I stayed at that school for ten years. And almost--yeah, ten years. And I'll tell you why I left. Well, Mrs. [Louise Gaines] Daugherty left too, and then she began to be the district whatever, but that wasn't why I left. I left that school because I knew that those people loved me. And it was getting to the point where I was getting very spoiled, and I knew that that was not good for me or for the school. We had another principal, Mr. Arsine Boykin (ph.). To show you how those people were, when I was pregnant with Gina [Hemphill-Strachan], my first child and we would--at that time you had to go out at five months. And so, he would come down to my room before I went on leave. And we called him "We" because he never said "I." He always said "we." He said, "Mrs. Hemphill, we feel that you are not feeling too well today. You look a little tired. Why don't you go home, and I'll take your classroom." I mean, and so I would, you know. And, you know, he respected the fact that I was pregnant and I was teaching these children, and that I did look a little tired. And I did. And when I had Gina, he wrote me a note that I still have. And he told her that I was her gold spoon, and may she live up to be that. And isn't that nice? Speaker 1: Beautiful. Speaker 2: Isn't that nice? Speaker 1: What school was this? Speaker 2: Burke School on 54th and King Drive. And when Mrs. Daugherty who was my first principal left, she wrote me this note and said--I guess I would have little fiery bits of temper sometime. And she said, "And I'll miss your little fiery bits of temper, too." (Laughter). But that was, that's the kind of relationship that I was used to in my professional setting. I found that as the years went on, things changed, but life changes. Story_ID: 86211 Speaker 1: What school did you go to after that? Speaker 2: I left there and went to the Beethoven [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois]. And I'll tell you, I had an experience there. And the reason I left there was, it was a very personal thing with me. But you know, I share it because it's what happened. At the time when I was there, "Ebony Jr!" magazine came out. And I was at my bridge club meeting, and they were talking about having gone to this reception for "Ebony Jr!" And I said, "Oh, gee, I didn't know anything about that." So, I went back to school the next day, and I asked the principal about it. And I said, "Dr. Lieberstein (ph.), did we get an invitation to this reception for 'Ebony Jr!'" Because all the schools were given a free subscription to it. And you know, we were right there in [the] Robert Taylor [Homes], an all-black school. Our kids needed that. So, somehow or other, the invitation had neglected to be presented to the faculty. And I yelled at him. I mean, I yelled, I did. And it might not have been very respectful, but I was so upset. And I said, "That is not fair to our children. They got--they would have gotten a year's subscription." And so, anyway, I told my husband [Malcolm Hemphill, Jr., HM] about that. And he said, "Baby, you know what? I think it's time for you to leave there, or do something." And what I did was--and it too was a very important time in my life. I think things happen for reasons. I knew that that was not going to be a good relationship from then on. And so I said, I need to just go back to graduate school and get a change from this. Story_ID: 86212 Speaker 1: I applied to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and then I got accepted. And then they, then I applied to a program that they had, called the Ford Training and Placement Program [FTPP], which was to train teachers at that time who were not educators, but from different fields. We were formed into cadres. And so, I became the cadre liaison between the Chicago Public Schools [CPS] and the University of Chicago in this program while working on my master's there at the University of Chicago. And it was a wonderful, wonderful, experience. Because it was an opportunity to provide whatever skills I had to these students then, who were coming in from different fields and working with African American children that had never done it before. But it also was an opportunity for me to grow. And so, it worked out very well. So, out of that situation came a good situation, and I went on to... And then after I left the U of C, after I finished graduate school there, I went to work in the, what was in the area offices in the Department of Government Funded Programs. And I worked in the Department of Government Funded Programs for seventeen years at the district, and area, and central office level. And then I went to the central office and worked in Drug-Free Schools and Communities. And from there, I retired. Story_ID: 86213 Speaker 1: What do you consider, career-wise, what do you consider your most impressive accomplishment, or most fun? What engaged you the most? Speaker 2: Well, one thing that I did was when I was with the Department of Government Funded Programs, I worked with the school community reps [representatives] and we did a lot of parent workshops. And I'll tell you, I really loved that. I loved it because the parents that we worked with were eager to learn how to help their children. And I think that we really did that. With our parent workshops, what I tried to do was not only teach them skills, academic skills, but we tried to work on things like--and I guess I did it because this is the way we grew up--preparing balanced meals. And whenever I had an in-service meeting, I'd always have refreshments. I always had the table set up with fresh flowers, and napkins, and beautiful cloths, and you know, and coordinated, just because I just wanted to share with them how it makes you feel when you come to something like that. So that when your family, you know, sits down to something like that, it just makes a difference. It just fills your life with beauty. And so, and then we did a lot on academic things, too. I did a series of workshops on self-improvement, how to look at yourself. This is when it wasn't really popular to look inside yourself and see what type of person you are, and what do you want to be? Not what someone else wants you to be, what do you want to be? What do you want to do? And I have had parents that were in there say that it meant so much to them. And, and, and, so, we fought to have that. We fought to do those kinds of things. Because according to the guidelines, they, to me, did not see that you have to have your own self-esteem and your own--feeling good about yourself before you can even help your children do anything. If you don't know how to do these things... And so, you know, you kind of write creatively so that they fit into the guidelines. And then I worked a lot with the teacher aides when they were part of a program that was at the Center for Inner City Studies that provided them with a degree in teaching. And they are still some of my friends. You know, I mean we really had a good time together. Those were the Beethoven [Elementary School] teachers and teacher's aides when I was teaching there. So those, those kinds of things were very important to me in my teaching. I loved teaching; I had wonderful students. In fact, just this spring, Mattie Hunter who is a State Senator... well, I taught Mattie. And she invited me, she invited me to come to Beethoven. They were honoring her that day, and she invited me to come over. And it was so nice, because I got to see the whole Hunter family. But my husband [Malcolm Hemphill, Jr., HM] and I were... both being in education... I'll tell you. He was at Marshall High School [John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And everybody who knows us knows we were wed to those students, I mean to those families. We still are. It's the craziest thing. It was like they were our children. And so many of those people used to say to me, "Oh, you don't have a boy." I said, "I got a million sons." Because all those young men that my husband coached, they were our children. They spent the--my daughter used to get tired. They would come over to our house and spend the night. And we would say, "Oh, it just smells so up in these rooms after they would leave." (Laughter). And we would have parties for them up in Michigan. And you know, just fun; they were just great kids. Those were, those were great times--hard times. A lot of times during the gangs--I remember one. We had been to one dance. They had had a dance at Marshall in the gym. And by the time we got everything cleared up and everything and came downstairs, one of our very favorite little girls had been shot. And you know, I mean, and it just was heart-breaking. We've gone to lots and lots of funerals of kids. We've had lots of kids to call us to come in the middle of the night to get them out of jail. But we've had lots of kids that have done extremely well--that are PhDs, that are teaching in the system, that are doctors--that are everything. So, you know, but we loved them all. And they, they love us, still do. Story_ID: 86214 Speaker 1: What made you select education as your career? Speaker 2: Because I wanted to be a doctor, and I wasn't making it. So, so, this is the truth. And so, somebody when I was in school, in college, in zoology I just was--I said oh, forget it. So, one of the ladies in the dorm, the dorm mothers, said "Gloria, you know what? I really think you would do better in a people position. Why don't you try education?" So, I transferred to the college of education, and I loved it. I loved it, you know. You know, you dream "I want to be a doctor, I want to be a pediatrician." I was going to help all the children in the world. But it was my niche, when I transferred. It was so interesting, I was back at the university--well, I'm back there often--but I was back there not too long ago to receive an award for my dad [Jesse Owens], and to speak. And I looked in the audience, and there was the lady that was my (unclear) teacher when I did my student teaching. Everybody hated to have her, because she was so strict. And, but... and I told her... I was telling the story about that. And I got an A in student teaching, because like I say, it was my niche. And... but she laughed. She said, "You know, I've often heard that no one ever had the nerve to tell me that." I said, "Well, you see now all these years, now I can tell you that." But she was wonderful; she made good teachers of us. Speaker 1: That's great. You seem like a natural. It seems like education was your first-- Speaker 2: I loved it. I loved it, I loved it. Speaker 1: Where did you get the idea about the medicine, just--since you didn't...? Speaker 2: I don' know, I don't know. Maybe, I don't know, the family, I don't know. You know I guess, you know, they say, "Well, Gloria, you're a good student. You should go on and be a doctor," you know. And I didn't know what I wanted to do, really. So, I thought that was a good idea. Story_ID: 86215 Speaker 1: And then to see your work at, especially at Beethoven [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I loved it. Speaker 1: To see that kind of student--students in that environment go both ways and be able to impact-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the positive. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. But that... you know, when we went to Beethoven, it was a different environment. Those, we, those parents were concerned and cared. We just watched that happen. And-- Speaker 1: What years were you at Beethoven? Speaker 2: I went there in, let's see. I went there in 1960, I think. It was the first year it was built. Yeah, I think it was, yeah, when it first opened. I mean we used to have teacher variety shows in the evening, and the parents and the community would come. And you know, it just got to be too big. And I mean, the community, you know, those buildings, too many people. Because I lived right there in the Rosenwald [Apartment] Building. And I look at that now, and cry. Because it was magnificent, it was beautiful. In fact, it had one of the first nursery schools. I mean, well, pre-school, you know, programs--Oneida Cockrell--that set an example for the country. And but times change. Speaker 1: So you were at Beethoven until '65 [1965], '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: I left Beethoven--no, I left Beethoven in, let's see. I graduated in '71 [1971] from U of C. So, I must have left Beethoven in '69 [1969]... '68 [1968], '69. Speaker 1: Oh, so you were there for quite a while? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, uh-huh. I was there quite a while. I loved, I mean we just, we were over-crowded. We had, it was just, we had classrooms in the building, you know, in the housing building. Story_ID: 86216 Speaker 1: During your period of--your teaching period at Burke [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and Beethoven [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], you were still speaking around the country. Speaker 2: For my dad [Jesse Owens]. Speaker 1: For your dad. Speaker 2: On occasion, not as much then. Because see, my dad was living then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: Most of the things that we have--well, I've done is after my dad passed. And he passed in 1980. Speaker 1: What kind of things did you hear him say, you know, as time went on and you started to see the difference in the American athlete? What kind of comment on that did you hear him say--the change in the human being as well as the business? Speaker 2: Believe it or not, he--I'm sure he had feelings about it. He, he continued to believe that being an athlete, you had to, you had to strive for certain things. And just to point that out--you know, when he would go to the Olympic games--I mean he and my mother [Ruth Solomon Owens] went to all of the Olympics. In fact he took my daughter, Gina [Hemphill Strachan], to the [1972 Summer] Olympics, the one in Munich [Germany] where they had the terrorist attack [Munich Massacre]. It was quite an experience for a young girl. And quite a, quite a good learning experience. But anyway, and then when they had the ones [1968 Summer Olympics] in Mexico City [Mexico], you know, and they had the "Black Power [salute]", he really tried to talk to them. Because he believed so in the Olympic movement. He believed in the Olympic movement. And he believed that basically, no matter, all the things that have happened to him, that all people were good people, and that these young athletes, it was just a phase they were going through. I mean, I really do believe that. He never talked negatively, let me say that. He may have felt negative feelings, but he never said that, not to us. He was, he was a pretty positive man. I, I realize now what a good human being he was, and what a burden he carried. Story_ID: 86060 Speaker 1: --we walked into this house, and that's the way it hit us. It was just such a warm place. Speaker 2: Do you remember what year it was, when you got to Union Pier [Michigan]? Speaker 1: Well, we'd been there for thirty years. And what's this, 2003? So, we'd been there a long time. Yeah, the kids were just little bitty things. And my dad [Jesse Owens] just wanted someplace for them to get away from the city [Chicago, Illinois] in the summertime. And our neighbors across the road were there. And they said that the house across the road from us was for sale, and they want to sell it to a family. So, we hopped, all of us hopped in our cars and we drove up there. It was a cold, rainy day in the fall. But you walked in that house, and the warmth was there. So, when we got back home to Chicago, my dad said, "Well, what do you think?" We said, "We like it." (Laughter). We were kind of spoiled. But, and he said okay. But now, he wouldn't... oh, it's beautiful now. We've added so much to it. In fact, we spent a fortune just adding on to it. But we wanted to keep the original house, because they loved that place. And we were not going to destroy the original part. And so, we just added on. Speaker 2: That's right. So, it would be like the White House, East Wing-- Speaker 1: Listen, I'm telling you. And wait a minute. Everybody laughs at this. He said, "Air conditioning and carpet, I don't get it." I said, "I do. It's easier to keep clean." (Laughter). Story_ID: 86061 Speaker 1: That's great. Did you, did your dad [Jesse Owens]--was he friends with Jackie Robinson? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. He was, he was friends with all the athletes. In fact, there is a new book ["In Black and White: The Untold Story of Joe Louis and Jesse Owens"] out that a young man [Donald McRae] in London [England] wrote. And for the life of me, the name of it escapes me right now. But what it is, it's the story of Jesse and Joe Louis' friendship that a lot of people did not really know about it. And, "granddad story": We were at the Art Institute [of Chicago] to some affair the other day. And I ran into a couple that are--people we knew. And they said, "Gloria--". They were just home from their home in Florida. "--Our neighbor brought this book over to us and said maybe you would like to read this." And it was this book about--that his friend, he said, "My friend in London wrote this book, and he's sharing it with me." He said, "It is the best book I've read in a long time." So, Jetta and Jimmy Jones (ph.) read it. And he said, "And no, you cannot have it. You cannot have it." They said, so they told us about it. They said "We read this book. We didn't know about, you know, this friendship. It is a wonderful book." And so, it's going to be printed here in this country under a different title, though. And I'm trying to think, I can't remember right now what it is. But it will soon be out. But that's the story that that tells of his relationship. I think he mentioned Jackie Robinson in there, but the friendship between he and Joe Louis. Speaker 1: Did you read the book? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about it. Speaker 2: Well, it starts out just like telling each one of their stories. And then it comes together to talk about the trials and tribulations, and their experiences and, how should I put it? Their philosophies. And it just tells about them as people, that a lot of people don't know. Because what I learned about them was when I--the engineer at my school, at a school that I worked at--told me, he says, "You know, Mrs. Hemphill, you don't realize it, but I do. Joe Louis and your dad were our heroes. They were the only heroes that we had." And he said he remembers listening on the radio to the fights and to the track meets when Jesse won in the Olympics. And he said, and he remembers how he and his friends and the neighbors and everything all got out in the street and celebrated these events. Now, I never knew that kind of stuff. And that kind of stuff is in the book, you know, about... But when the engineer at my school told me that, I couldn't believe it. Speaker 1: You hadn't heard about that before? Speaker 2: Uh-uh. Speaker 1: About people getting in the street? Speaker 2: Uh-uh. Speaker 1: That's all I ever heard. Speaker 2: I never did. I'm telling you-- Speaker 1: It was so... it was so intense for the American people, in both situations. Speaker 2: In both situations. I never knew that. And which goes to--I tell you, my parents never really, they didn't talk about this stuff, you know, at home. I never knew that. And Mr. Burke, he said, "Oh, Miss Hemphill, you just don't know. Y you just don't know." And I said "Well, I am so glad to hear that story, you know." But this... and so Jetta, they were suggesting when the book comes out that we should have a book signing here in Chicago. And I think that's a great idea. Now, I never would have thought of that unless... But they were just so excited about this. And they knew my parents. Story_ID: 86062 Speaker 1: Now, like I said, just before your dad [Jesse Owens] died, and the sports industry had changed so much. Did you ever hear him say anything about how he felt about what he was seeing? Maybe like you would comment on education-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --at some point. He never, did he-- Speaker 2: He would only say that he hoped that they were reaching out to young people. He hoped that they would take some time and spend with young people, all those people that admired them--that they... And that was his wish, because that's what he did. He really did do that. Our house, when they lived in Arizona, there were always kids knocking at the door. They were always welcome, they were always welcome into that house. And there was a, in the family room there was just a lot of his stuff, you know, and they were always welcome to come in. He would sit down and talk with them if he was home. And sometimes he'd be very, very tired, but he was never too tired to talk to youngsters. In fact, I have a tape at home this lady sent to me. So many things happened, and they just bring tears to my eyes. I know I get a little teary sometime, but her, this is a lady in Iowa. She sent it to me after my father died. Her son had MS [multiple sclerosis], and he ran track. But he developed MS, and then all his little dreams fell apart. So, he wrote to my father, and he said the one thing--she said, "The one thing he would like to do is just to meet you, just to talk with you." So, I don't know how Jesse happened--I called him by his first name--happened to get to this kid. But he went to Iowa, he visited with his kid, and he gave this kid two medals that he had won in that same event that this young man participated in in high school. And she said that that he cherished those so. And she said it just gave him enough energy to live a little longer. And they were telling this story on the radio in Iowa, and she sent me the tape of it, which is just very moving. It's a very moving thing. But that's the kind of thing he would do. That's the kind of thing. I have had friends--when my dad died, I was standing on the corner waiting on the bus to go down to the Loop in downtown Chicago [Illinois]. And a friend passed me in the car, and she said, "Where are you going?" I said, "I'm going downtown." She said, "Oh, come on, I'll give you a lift." I said "Oh, no, don't go out of your way. I can get on the bus." "Come on get in, I'll give you a lift." She said, "I would do anything for you." Now, I've known this person (unclear). I said, "Oh, well, that is so nice of you." She said, "And I'm going to tell you why. When I was in law school and I was struggling, and I did not know how I was going to buy my books for the next semester." She said, "I just couldn't pay my tuition and buy my books at the same time." And she said someone said to her, "Well, you know, why don't you ask Owens? He's really a nice guy, and he helps students." So, she did. And he did. And she said, "I'll never forget that. He gave me the money to buy my books." Now, I didn't know that. He never said a word. He never said, "I ran into a friend of yours, and she came by and she needed..." you know, never, never ever said a word about it. I would never have known that had she not told me. And so, I said there's a lot of stories like that out there that we get every now and then, you know, from people, of things that he did. He was very generous, generous to a fault sometime-- Story_ID: 86063 Speaker 1: What was life like for your mom [Ruth Solomon Owens]? Speaker 2: You know, that woman, my mother was a saint. You know, I mean we had the usual mother-daughter things. Because when you're only seventeen years older than your daughter, you know, that's a lot, a little difference, and especially as one gets older. But I, my mother and I had this type of relationship: When my father was gone, we were really friends, because I was the only person she had to talk to because my sisters were so much younger. So, I remember many nights sitting up and talking to her, just about things in general, just you know because he would be gone for long periods of time, and as an adult woman, I know now that that's lonely when you're there and you're raising three children and you're young. And so, then when my father came home of course then that was their time together. So I was her friend, I was her daughter. We, we thought alike in some ways, and not alike in other ways. And sometimes there was a little trouble in the coming together of those thoughts. But she loved us so. She loved me, and I know it. She loved my sisters, and she was just a wonderful young woman who took care of her children and loved her husband. As my nephew said at my mother's funeral--my nephew--my sister's son and my daughter spoke. And he said, "Well, one thing for sure you all know, Mama loved her some Granddad." (Laughter). And we all knew that. She, she used to have, she used to get a little upset with us because she really catered to my father. She was really one of those ladies who did everything for her husband. And she used to get a little miffed with me especially because she was "You shouldn't do that, you shouldn't do that." But she, that was just the way she was. That was-- my grandmother always called--her mother--my grandmother always called her husband "Mr. Solomon." And it was so funny to me because when my mother would say that because that was just the way it was. And my mother was a very beautiful woman. And like I say, she, my parents always insisted that you be dressed. And she was always very well-dressed. She never worked, and she--my father never wanted us to work. He wanted us to go to college, he wanted us to be educated. But he didn't really like the fact that we worked. But like I would tell him, "Listen, listen, that's the way you think. This is the way I think. I am going to be a working woman." And you know, he finally accepted it, I guess. But it was just the way that he was. And, and my mother was so--it was so hurting to us during her last days, because she suffered so. And she, she just would not come out, because she just couldn't look like she wanted to look although she was still beautiful. Speaker 1: What was she ill with? Speaker 2: She had, she had very bad arthritis. I mean it just crippled her. It's just something in the family, because her brother is the same way. And she was the last of her siblings to live. And it was just very difficult for her, because they were very close. The families were close. My father always stayed with my mother's sister and her husband whenever he was in Ohio visiting or anything. And it was always so interesting, because his sisters and brothers were there, too. But there was such a bond there. And so, after my uncle died--he was her brother, the last one to die, they had made such plans to do things together and it was very difficult for her to adjust to that. But then she had very bad arthritis and a heart condition. And it just, she just deteriorated, you know, suffered so long. Speaker 1: Did she pre-decease your daddy? Speaker 2: No, no, no. She died twenty years after my father. My mother just passed two years ago. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So, she lived to be eighty-something? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she was 85. Story_ID: 86064 Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: How old was your dad [Jesse Owens] when he died? Speaker 1: Sixty-six. He was a young man. Yeah, he was a young man. But he was-- Speaker 2: Did he remain vital? Speaker 1: To the end, to the end. When he was... they always came to Chicago [Illinois] for Christmas. And so, he was coming through Chicago. They weren't going to come this year. But we were to meet him at the airport because he was coming through Chicago. And when he got there, he called my sister Marlene [Hemphill Dortch, HM]. He was so sick. And he wanted to keep on going to Phoenix [Arizona], but we went out and got him and took him straight to Michael Reese Hospital, because he had been hospitalized there so many times. And then my mother [Ruth Solomon Owens] came. She was putting up Christmas decorations and everything, and she stopped and she came. And they told us that he had about three months to live. So, we had Christmas and then-- Speaker 2: He had cancer? Speaker 1: Cancer, he had throat--lung cancer. When they got to the airport to go back to Phoenix after they released him from the hospital and everything--he was such a proud man. And as he came into the airport, the guys all knew him. Because when you're in and out of airports every day and everything--especially the main hub like O'Hare. And the skycaps, they all loved him. Well, he was good to them. "Hi, Champ." Everybody was "Champ." They saluted him when he came. And he got on the plane and he said, "I am not riding this wheelchair onto the plane." He mustered enough energy to get on that plane and sit down. And so, he never returned until we buried him here. But he, he was--And then my mother, she just, she was such a fighter. She would just, she wasn't going to let him go. He was not going and she tried everything. And he was one of the first ones to get that interferon up in Arizona. And, but you know, the doctors had told us, and we knew. And let me tell you something, it was almost three months to the day. At the end, my sisters and I would go and spend the week. But he told me, he said, "Let me tell you something, Baby." He called me "Sis." "I have lived a good life the way I wanted to. And if I had it to do all over again, I'd do it the same way." And he said, "And I'm going to set you free, because I am fine." And that was it. I'll never forget it. Yep, he only asked me to read the obituary at his funeral, and I did, yep. Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: Yeah, a good man. Yep, a good man. Story_ID: 86065 Speaker 1: Just from your perspective, what do you think his legacy is? Speaker 2: We, us, his children. We have continued doing the things that he believed in with the Jesse Owens Foundation. My sister [Marlene Owens Rankin, HM] was the director, and I was the Chair of the Scholarship Committee. And we have worked hard to raise money to keep going, keeping kids in school, and supporting other organizations with parallel goals. And we've done it, and we continue to do it. And the wonderful thing about it is, it was getting harder and harder to raise funds to keep our kids in school. Because the kids that we selected were children who were average students, you know, that don't get usually scholarships and stuff. But let me tell you, one of my proudest accomplishments is the selection of the students that--as chairman of the scholarship committee--that we did because ninety-eight percent of our students have finished. Now, the secret to that... and these were marginal students. We don't even look at A and B, and all like that students. The secret is the mentoring. My sister by profession is a social worker, my sister, Marlene. And she was executive director. We mentored those kids. She was, she was superior at that. I mean, we gave them a chance. We've had kids that have become--we've had young men that have become fathers and wanted to drop out. And we would--they could drop out for a year and get their life together. And during that time, we continued to mentor them to show them how important it is what they could do with their lives, what they can do for their children. And, and we give them a year. We don't say, "Well, if you make a mistake, it's over." And we support them for four years through college. And our graduation rate-people, big corporations are amazed at how well we do with these kids. But I'm telling you, it's the mentoring. It's caring about who they are and helping them, and finding the resources, you know, and doing all those things. So, we're very proud of that. That was, that was what his legacy was, because he went around the country speaking to young people all the time. We have just goo gobs of letters and stuff that we get and everything. So, so, we are his legacy, and we try very hard to continue that. And fortunately our good work has been recognized, because our university, the Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio], has endowed our Foundation. And so, it is now the Jesse--and we insisted that my mother [Ruth Solomon Owens]'s name be on there, because she was as much a part of anything he did. So, it is called the Jesse and Ruth Owens Scholarship Endowment at the Ohio State University. And for years after we're gone, after our children are gone, there will be scholarships for minority students who are average students under the name of Jesse and Ruth Owens. So, we are really proud of that. Story_ID: 86066 Speaker 1: Do you know the total number of students that have come through the [Jesse Owens] Foundation? Speaker 2: I think it's ninety-six. Now, that's a lot of kids when you're giving four years of scholarships, you know. Now, that's just--now prior to that there were the ARCO Jesse Owens Scholars. We used to have the--ARCO Oil used to sponsor the ARCO Jesse Owens Games for thirty-five years. And what that was, was a track meet. Students and children from all over the country would participate in their regional meet. And then the winners from that would come to California with their parents for a long--like Friday, Saturday, Sunday--weekend, all expenses paid. And then they would compete in the track meet there. And the winners- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: --and then they would have the competitions during, you know, during the weekend. And it all ended with a great big banquet for the students. And they would... when Jesse [Owens] was living, he would speak and he would give them their medals. And it was just like a mock Olympics. And it gave the parents an opportunity to have a vacation and to see their kids perform, and the children, an opportunity to participate in something like the Games. So, it was wonderful. Speaker 1: Before we took the technical break, we were talking about--and while we were on the break, we were talking about the various--how the legacy can go on and on and on. And you were telling us Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] took it over? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you told me how that came to be. Can you repeat that for me? Speaker 2: About the Jesse... with the Jesse Owens endowment? Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 2: Well, it came about because of an interest that we had shared in doing it with one of our friends who was an officer there at the University. Fortunately, we had a president who was very enthusiastic about the idea. And we just kept pursuing it until they finally came up with an endowment fund for the Jesse and Ruth Owens Endowment that will go on for years and years. And I think that that is his real legacy... that he will continue to be part of something that helps children to develop their potential. And that was basically what his goals were, to encourage young people to be the best that they could be. And he felt that through education was one of the ways that you could do that. So, now, for years and years and years to come, the Ohio State University Jesse and Ruth Owens Endowment Fund will be able to do that. Speaker 1: That's wonderful. And you were also saying how it's so wonderful that you and your sisters have the background to keep, and even initiate, the Foundation and to keep it going--you being an educator and your sister [Marlene Owens Rankin, HM] being a sociologist [sic, social worker]. Speaker 2: And actually when the Foundation first started years ago--and I don't remember the exact year--my mother--when it really started in 1980, my mother and Herb Douglas [Herbert Paul Douglas, HM] who was a very good friend of my dad's and a fellow Olympian, created the International Amateur Athletic Association. And so, funds for the Foundation were raised in New York City [New York] and in Chicago [Illinois]. We would have a big dinner in New York every year, and we would--an athlete was presented with the international--Jesse Owens International Amateur Athletic Award, which is a major award for an athlete to receive. You did not have to be a track and field athlete to receive it. And we had an international board that selected the winners. And some of our finest Olympians have been winners of that award. Story_ID: 86067 Speaker 1: Is there any area that we didn't cover, that perhaps we should have? Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think it is important to know--a lot of people ask me, "Where do you come from, Gloria?" And one of the things that I, I used to say, "Oh, I came from Ohio," or "I came from this place, I came from that place." But after I thought about it a while, said, "Where I really came from were from parents who cared and who loved me, and who gave me opportunity and wings, and set me free. And that is where I come from. And because I hope that that is my legacy to my children because I think if we provide them with the things that they need and give them the encouragement and support, that they will become all the things that we want them to be. And even though things may not always be perfect, they can always be worked out. And I think that as long as we cherish the family concept, there is nothing--there was nothing more important in my parents' lives than the family. There is nothing more important in our lives than the family. And sometimes that family extends beyond your family. But the concept of family is, for me, the tool for our survival. And we have to be willing to open up and to try to help each other as much as we can. That is why I feel so strongly about The HistoryMakers, and I feel so strongly about community service. That's why I was determined to get the Habitat [for Humanity] house built for those young people, because there's too much, there's too much wealth of talent that we have out there. Speaker 1: Hold it right there. Story_ID: 86068 Speaker 1: You told us earlier about one of your philanthropic endeavors, the Habitat [for Humanity] house, that you and the Links-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --were working on? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you talked about how much that meant to you. Can you tell me about the Habitat project? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And tell us again about that. Speaker 2: Well, some years ago I belonged to The Links, Incorporated--the Windy City Chapter in Chicago [Illinois] in particular. And there was going to be the National Conference in Chicago in 2002. So, I was asked to bring the chapters together and determine how we could do a community project service working together. And so we did. And so, that became the Chicago area cluster chapters, and I chaired that group. And they were representatives from the eight Link chapters in the Chicago area. We met and we were trying to just focus on a project, a community service project, even though we had many community service projects going on individually. Collectively, we wanted to focus on something that would leave a mark on the community that we did. And so, we decided to attempt to build a Habitat house. The first site we had thought we would have would be in the city of Chicago. However, in the process, things happened in Chicago. And so, we thought that the project was ended. But I'll tell you. When you've got your sights set on doing something right, good things happen. And I just happened to run into a friend who I told my story to about losing the site in Chicago. And they said, "Oh, well, I know someone that wants to build one in Harvey [Illinois]." I said, "Wonderful, because it's part of the Chicago area anyway." So, I met with him on the phone. We made this decision, and thus began the process to build the Habitat house in Chicago. And we worked with their board and the committee, the South Suburban Committee for Habitat [for Humanity]. And we built--we went through the family selection process, selected this family, the Jackson family. They were a family of a mother, father, and three young children. They were living in very, very bad conditions. And they did qualify for a house. And we were building this three-bedroom house. We worked on the house along with the partnership of South Suburban College [South Holland, Illinois], because they have a program there that has to do with building and everything. So, we joined in partnership with them to build this house. And we said, "Well, if we're going to do this house, we've got to have some money." So, one of the things we decided to do was a cookbook. And the reason we decided on that was because the founders of Habitat [Millard and Linda Fuller]--one of the things--how he made his money was through a cookbook. So, we did a cookbook, and we called it "Seasoned with Love." And that was part of the source of getting our funds for building the Habitat house. We built the house-- Speaker 1: How much is it to build a Habitat house? Speaker 2: Well, it depends on where you are. Because a lot of it depends on the cost of the land and the cost of materials and how much material, how many materials you get donated to you. Because there are lots of major companies that donate things like Maytag is refrigerators--I mean, yeah, and washer-dryers and stuff like that. And there are many companies that give you supplies--Home Depot and... So, the price varies, and the price of the land and what you have to do to the land. Speaker 1: So, there's the actual cash outlay and then there's the in-kind. Story_ID: 86069 Speaker 1: So, the value of the home that you built in Harvey [Illinois], when you total those things up, what was the value of that home? Speaker 2: If I'm not mistaken, I think the value of that home was like $75,000. It's a three-bedroom house. It has a living room, dining area, kitchen, three bedrooms, a huge bath, a laundry room, a lovely side back porch and a front porch, a driveway, and a shed in the back. And so, we completed it at the end of June. And it was dedicated on July 3, 2002. And at the dedication the [Jackson] family came, and their relatives, their minister, people from their church. The Links, [Incorporated] were in town. Many Links came to the dedication ceremony. It was beautiful, I thought. We had the big tent up, and we had continental breakfast. And then there's a formal ceremony that goes with the dedication of the house. And it was absolutely beautiful. And the mother had asked me could their little girl sing? And I said, "Well, I think so. I think so." She was just a little, I think she was five years old. And she sang "God Bless this House," and it was so beautiful. But you know, I tell you. You know, when you're in a project with a group of people and it just, it gets to be, it looks like it's not going to happen. And I just prayed, I knew it was going to happen. I just prayed, "Dear Lord, please, this has to happen." And, but you get those workers in there who are going to make sure. And so, we worked and we worked and we worked, and it did. And Channel 7 was out, and it was in the papers. And the family, I'll never in my life forget, when the father was presented the keys to the house by our national president, he cried. I mean he just, it was--he just could not control it. Because he said, "All I ever wanted was a decent home for my family." And he was so happy about this. And you know, I was so thrilled, because there are millions of young men like him out there. All young, black men are not non-caring. They are mostly caring. We just have to step up and give them a hand, and understand that everybody doesn't have everything, and some people need more help. So I, I felt so proud that The Links, Incorporated, and especially the Chicago area cluster, did that. Hopefully, we will build another one, because there is such a need. And not only is it important that they have the home, but Habitat for Humanity provides them with the structure to keep that home. They provide them with financial planning, how to run a house, all of those things that go together in making a house a home. And so, we are still working with them, and the little family is moving along nicely. We nicknamed them "The Jackson Five" because there were five of them. And I just feel that it was a blessing to be involved in such a project, and that at least one by one we can make people happy and provide them with an opportunity to move along in their lives. Story_ID: 86070 Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Is there any closing, short closing comments you have that you want to make before--you've got five minutes before 12:30. Speaker 2: I just think, I'd like to say that I am very proud of my dad [Jesse Owens] and my mother [Ruth Solomon Owens] and my sisters, and our husbands, our whole family. Because it's not easy to take up the mantle of someone who has been so famous and so large. But we're so happy, because they gave us the tools to carry on this legacy. And that is what we are going to do, and that is what our children are going to do, because that's what they've been taught. And the greatest thing is to realize that we are all angels with one wing, but together we can fly. Story_ID: 86071 VIDEOGRAPHER: Are you ready? Speaker 2: This is May 1, 2003, the photographs and related materials for Gloria Owens Hemphill. This is the cookbook that Rhe Links, Incorporated sold to raise funds for the Habitat [for Humanity] house they built for a family in Harvey, Illinois. Speaker 1: This is Gloria right here. VIDEOGRAPHER: And is there a year on there anywhere? Speaker 1: There is no year on here. But this looks like, what, grade school or early high school. And this is Gloria here. Speaker 2: On the top, Row 1, this is Gloria up here. Or is this Row 1? Which one of these is Row 1? Is this... VIDEOGRAPHER: I guess probably in the front. Speaker 2: One, two, three, okay. And this is, Gloria is here in Row 1, third person from the left. That's the girls' basketball, I suppose its high school. She will later actually identify these pictures. VIDEOGRAPHER: Next. Speaker 2: An award of some kind, I guess at her school. I guess this is work-related. VIDEOGRAPHER: Does it say which school? Speaker 2: No. VIDEOGRAPHER: Next. Speaker 2: And her dad, Jesse Owens. She got married at St. Mary's. And the minister who married her and her husband is the same person that had married their parents and grandparents. However, they were married in St. Mary's Church rather than the church that their parents and grandparents were married in. VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay, next. Speaker 2: The Link House dedication. This one is in color. This is the Jackson family, now of Harvey, Illinois at the dedication of their new Habitat home which was sponsored and paid for by the efforts of Links, Incorporated. VIDEOGRAPHER: Next. Speaker 2: Mr. [Malcolm Hemphill, Jr., HM] and Mrs. Hemphill. They met as educators at Burke [Elementary] School. VIDEOGRAPHER: Alright. Speaker 2: Gloria accepting an award for her dad, the Jesse Owens Track... it may be the dedication of- VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay, next. Speaker 2: Mr. and Mrs. Hemphill. That may be their daughter, I don't know if it is or not. I can't see it. Speaker 1: The caption says "Ruth Owens, widow of track great Jesse Owens, waves to a crowd yesterday at the Jesse Owens Track and Field Classic at Ohio Stadium. Mrs. Owens received a standing ovation during the opening ceremonies of the track meet." Speaker 2: The Hemphills with their first grandbaby. He's a boy, born in 2001, September 2001. VIDEOGRAPHER: He's tiny. Okay. Speaker 2: This is a different baby. Or maybe it isn't a different baby. VIDEOGRAPHER: She said she only had one grandchild. Speaker 2: Yeah. But you know why I thought it was different? I guess it's the same. VIDEOGRAPHER: It's the same. Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is her daughter, and I believe these are her daughters. VIDEOGRAPHER: Is that Cancun? Speaker 2: Cancun, I think that's when she... I don't really know where this is. And she'll tell us. VIDEOGRAPHER: And do you know anything about this one? Speaker 2: No, I don't, maybe up in Union Pier [Michigan]. VIDEOGRAPHER: Do you know the location of this? Speaker 2: No, I don't. VIDEOGRAPHER: Alright. And can you read that sign? Does it tell you what the event is? Speaker 2: The banner says "Pepsi 10,000 Meter Series" and this is a fun run for the finish line...