 Story_ID: 597547 Speaker 1: So I'm Shawn Wilson-- Speaker 2: Hi, Shawn (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. This is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer. Speaker 2: Hey there, Neculai. Speaker 1: So, I want you to state your full name, middle name also, and spell it out for me. Speaker 2: Oh, spell it out? Speaker 1: Just so that we have it correctly-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I mean, the way you want it to-- Speaker 2: Well, my full name is Maurice Robert Hines, Jr. [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], Robert is the middle name. And I'm named after my father, Maurice Robert Hines, Sr. [Maurice Hines, Sr.], very proudly named after him, I must say. And that's it. Do you want me to spell it? Speaker 1: Yeah, go ahead, spell it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) M-A-U-R-I-C-E, H-I-N-E-S, Jr., J-R. Maurice Hines, Jr. That's it. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: Is December 13, 1943. Speaker 1: Happy birthday. Speaker 2: Yes, Wednesday. This Wednesday is my birthday, I'll be sixty-three. Speaker 1: So, it's 1943 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Forty-three [1943], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And today's date? Speaker 2: Is--I don't even know. What is today's date? (Laughter) I never know dates. Speaker 1: December 8th. Speaker 2: December 8th, 2006. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: Is at 315 West 106th Street [New York, New York], at my cousin, Laura Nurse's fabulous apartment. Speaker 1: And I'm going to--your occupation, what do you consider yourself? Speaker 2: You know, that's a great question. Although I, I remember my brother used to say--Gregory [Gregory Hines], Gregory used to say, "He was a tap dancer. No matter what he did, and who he was, (unclear) that's what he was." To me, I'm a choreographer first, a director second. Then I'm a singer, and an actor, and then a producer, in that order. I love choreo- choreo- choreographing. That's really (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, give me that order again. Speaker 2: Choreographer, director, actor, producer. Story_ID: 597548 Speaker 1: Okay. I'm going to ask you five People magazine type questions. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Black, black, I wear black all the time. Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: Well, it depends. Although I'm really, since I be- got off meat, I'm really chicken and fish, chicken and fish. That's what I--except for the holidays, and then I eat all the soul food I can get (laughter). Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. I'd say now. I'd say Christmas, December, the holidays. Because it was very happy for me and my brother. My parents, Maurice, Sr. [Maurice Hines, Sr.] and Alma, my mother, Alma Hines [Alma Lawless Hines] was, they always made Christmas very special for Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I--my brother and I-- and no matter where we were. And one of the Christmases, I remember we were doing the Playboy clubs. The Playboy had all these clubs, and we were touring cross country. And we were in Kansas City [Missouri], and we had no money. And it was cold, and we were in this, not a nice hotel. And my mother, we didn't have a Christmas tree, but somehow when we would sleep--Gregory and I slept very hard. And she got two chairs, a chair in each of our rooms, and she bought these handkerchiefs and she put a bow on them. And that's all sh- we had money enough for, handkerchiefs. My mother, a great lady, a great lady. She said, "You're going to have Christmas even if it's a package of handkerchiefs," you know. Good memories. Speaker 1: What's your favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Gotcha. (Laughter) I gotcha. That's my favorite right now, gotcha. Story_ID: 597549 Speaker 1: All right, I'm ready to dive in. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I want to start with your, your parents. Speaker 2: Okay, great. Speaker 1: And let's start with your mother, Alma. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And her maiden name was (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was Lawless. Alma I- Alma Iola Lawless [Alma Lawless Hines]. And Alma-- Speaker 1: Now, you have to spell that for us. Speaker 2: Iola? I-O-L-A. Speaker 1: Iola. Speaker 2: Iola. And she was born in Bermuda. And her, my, my, on my mother's side, it's Irish and West Indian and southern. Speaker 1: And southern being from what part of the country (unclear)? Speaker 2: Richmond, Virginia. Speaker 1: Richmond, okay. Speaker 2: Around there. Speaker 1: So, where did she grow up? Speaker 2: She grew up a little in Bermuda, but mostly in Harlem [New York, New York], in Harlem. My grandfather [Lionel Lawless]--her mother [Bernice Walker Lawless] and father came here and eventually they separated, and then my grandmother became a super of a building in Harlem (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, was she born in Bermuda? Speaker 2: She was born in Bermuda. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she didn't stay there long. Speaker 1: What was her date of birth? Do you know? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. Well, she'd be now eighty, I have no idea. Like 1919, I think, around there. Speaker 1: Nineteen nineteen [1919]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you don't know the date? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, well, I know its September. Speaker 1: September. Speaker 2: September 4th. Speaker 1: September 4th, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, that's her birthday. Speaker 1: So, she was born in Bermuda, but the family then quickly moved to the states? Speaker 2: Yes, they moved, yeah, of course she-- Speaker 1: Do you know why they moved? Speaker 2: For a better life, I think. My grandfather was running it, you know, as West Indian men have a tendency to do, and my grandmother was very subservient. And they decided--because they just had one daughter, she lost--which was my, Bernice [Bernice Lawless Nurse], my Aunt Bunny, the oldest sister. And there was one in between her and my mother, and--who passed away. And with the two girls, they decided they were going to move there, and then they had three boys. So, it was a family of five eventually, five children (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what did they do when they arrived? What did your grandfather do for a living? Speaker 2: You know, I don't really know. I know what he eventually did. He eventually ran an elevator in a warehouse. Because we used to go visit it when we were little kids. My mother would always make sure we visited him once a week. And it was down on 14th Street. Story_ID: 597550 Speaker 1: And what did your mother [Alma Lawless Hines] do then? Speaker 2: My mother was, well, she was very sickly. She had a heart murmur. Because--they gave her dance lessons because she was very thin, and they thought that would build her up. And then she developed a heart murmur, and she had to stop. And she always took tap, toe and bal- tap, toe and acrobatics (laughter). And she was only ninety-five pounds; she was always tiny her whole life. She never gained a lot of weight, even after having babies. So, she was, she looked, she was beautiful, she was beautiful. She got more beautiful as she got older (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who did she study with? Speaker 2: You know, I don't even know. I never knew, because she never talked about it much. Because it sort of, it never occurred to her that we would go in show business. That wasn't at all, she didn't know what we were going to do. You know, we were cute. But what happened was, this--I've never told this story. My mother used to dress us alike. Not that we were twins, but she didn't want us to be envious of each other. That was her way of, of me saying, oh, I like what Gregory [Gregory Hines] has on, or he like what--. So, there was a great story. It was summertime, one of the hottest days in the summer. We had these white shorts on, with these white shoes with brown trim. My mother carried the polish and everything with her. If they scuffed, she fixed them right away. She was insane, my mother, with Gregory and I. And she would walk us through, on down Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard, New York, New York]. And so, one day she brought us home and she told my father [Maurice Hines, Sr.], she said, "There's something about these two boys. I don't know, they've got something." They didn't call it charisma in those days. But she didn't know what we had. He said, "What are you talking about?" She said, "Well, I walked them down the street, people run out of stores to look at them." She said, "I thought it was a parade, so I turned around and said, well maybe there's something--but it was our boys. And I wondered has--what have they got? They're just walking. They weren't doing anything but walking. And they would say, 'Here they come. Here they--.'" You know, they had all the beauty shops in those days on Lenox, and had the liquor stores, and all the men--just to watch us walk the street (laughter). So my, my father said, "Well, you're just making that up because you love them, and you think they're the best things going." She said, "You come with me one day." And da- I asked dad, he said, "Son, I was astonished. They ran out of the stores (laughter) to look at you and Gregory. So, I said they got something, I don't know what it is." So the-, by then I was very introverted, I wou- I mean I would not say hello to people; I was so quiet. It's hard to believe because I really can talk now. And, but I was very quiet. Story_ID: 597551 Speaker 1: And so my mother [Alma Lawless Hines], they came around with free dance lessons. So she said, "Maybe we should put him in those dance classes because he'll meet other kids. He seems to like to dance around the house." Speaker 2: Who came around with free dance lessons? Speaker 1: It was Wally Wanger, Wally Wanger Dance Studio [New York, New York], which was over the Loew's [Loew's Victoria Theater, New York, New York] on 125th Street, where the Victoria Theater is now. So, I went. So the teacher said, "You like to dance. What can you do?" So I told her, this is a true story. I told her I could s- turn around. She said, "Really, you can turn around? How many times?" Of course I didn't know; I was five, see I was five. She said, "Well, do it." And I did seven pirouettes (laughter). She went, she looked at my mother and she said, "He's in." (Laughter) And my mother never saw me do it. I must have seen it on TV or something, because they had those little TVs then. They said, well they wouldn't take Gregory [Gregory Hines]. Because he was three, he was three. And even then, Gregory was a handful. Oh, please. My mother said he moved around in her belly. She was sick, because he never, he couldn't wait to get out. So, I would come home and teach him the routines. And to the day Gregory passed away, he could learn things like that (snap fingers), like that. I wouldn't care what it is, we'd do it one time, he's got it. So, even at three, he was like that. So, I would teach him. So one day he snuck in. He was always doing something he shouldn't do, and the t- behind the teacher's back. And we were doing the routines and she heard it behind her, and it was Gregory. She said, "Put him in there." And that's how it began, that's how it began. Story_ID: 597552 Speaker 1: Now, my father's [Maurice Hines, Sr.] people are from the South. And my grandmother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where in the South? Speaker 1: They were from, they were around Richmond [Virginia]. I don't think they were the same place that my mother's [Alma Lawless Hines] people were in the South, but around there. He doesn't like to talk about it too much, so I don't delve in it too much. Speaker 2: But why does he not like to talk about it? Speaker 1: That, I don't know, because my father doesn't like to talk about it (laughter). Speaker 2: He doesn't talk about it? Speaker 1: You don't ask him (laughter). Speaker 2: You don't ask. Speaker 1: Because he's still, he's the man. Speaker 2: Right. But he grew up someplace in Richmond, then? Speaker 1: Yeah. But they moved to Harlem [New York, New York] very quickly-- Speaker 2: Very quickly. Speaker 1: --his mother and her sister. Because my grandmother was a Cotton Club [New York, New York] showgirl. So, she got into the Cotton sh- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His mother? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She got into theater very fast. And she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What did she look like? Speaker 1: Well, she was beautiful, she was beautiful. You know, in those days--she was about my complexion. Because my--his father was darker. And but she was like my complexion, and very statuesque. Those women, they weren't, you know, they weren't like they are now. They were stacked up, those women. And Granny was stacked up until she died, she really was. A whole lot of woman, I used to call her. And she was very funny. Tough, tough, you know, you had to be tough. Speaker 2: But the Cotton Club was basically for white people. But they had black entertainers? Speaker 1: Yeah. But when she did the Cotton Club, by that time it had moved downtown to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. It was in the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 1: Yes, to where the Latin Quarter [New York, New York] eventually was. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So by that time, it had changed. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But when--because she didn't do it when it was in Harlem. Speaker 2: Well, what do you know about the family going beyond your grandparents? Anything at all? Speaker 1: No, I really don't. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I always wanted to do one of those family tree things. Speaker 2: But no people in show business, like in eight- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 2: --the turn of the century, 18-, you know. Speaker 1: No. Granny was the first. Speaker 2: So, Granny was the first? Speaker 1: She was the first, yes. Speaker 2: And why do you think she got into show business? Speaker 1: You know, I never really asked her. Because when, by the time we--'cause she didn't tell us that when we were young. By that time, she was into the church. And then we found out granny was a hot diva. Baby, she was fierce, her and Aunt Fafa [ph.], Aunt Florence [Florence Hines]. Aunt Florence was hanging out with Sugar Ray Robinson, and she was (laughter)--. But by that time when we were growing up, they were very religious. But they weren't so religious when they were young. But she knew Cab Calloway and she knew Duke Ellington. They all appeared at the club. And she was great friends with Mahalia Jackson, you know, because she was, she was an organist. She became the organist for the church [St. Ambrose Catholic Church, New York, New York], so she knew a lot of the gospel singers, too. Speaker 2: And what was her full name? Speaker 1: Ora Hines. And Fafa was her sister, who was a beauty, was Florence, Florence Hines. My father was, was, how can I say? Not unruly, but he was, you know, a tough customer. So it was rough for single, she was a single mother raising him. So it was very difficult at the time, because she had to work. So, Aunt Fafa, Aunt Florence, took care of Daddy. Story_ID: 597553 Speaker 1: How did your father [Maurice Hines, Sr.] discover drums, music? Speaker 2: Now, that was interesting. Because he was a White Rock [White Rock Beverages] sod- soda salesman when Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I were tapping. And we would by--we started to get hot in the business, as they say, as tap dancers. So we went to, we went to Paris [France] and--because the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas], the great Nicholas brothers, were famous over there. So we were sort of like them, and they wanted to, us to go. And they were bigger in Europe once they left America, after all their movies. And so, it was very lonely for my mother [Alma Lawless Hines], very lonely to be without him. They were very much in love. And so, Daddy decided that he was going to become a drummer so that he could travel with us, you know. And it took him a long time, because he was during the era of rock and roll. So, he did the Alan Freed shows at the Paramount [Paramount Theatre, Brooklyn, New York] with Chuck Berry and Little Richard. They always had two drummers, him and a guy named Panama Francis. Because those shows were so long, one drummer couldn't do it. And then he joined Dick Vance at the Savoy Ballroom [New York, New York], and by that time, he was really good. And then we s- became Hines, Hines, and Dad, and then he was the drummer for us. And then we brought him down front, which is another story later on in my life. But that's, that's why he became a drummer, because it was just too hard for him, we were on the road. And it never, I don't think it occurred to my father that Gregory and I were going to get that successful that young. Story_ID: 597554 Speaker 1: How old were you when you--? Speaker 2: When we started traveling? Oh, we were eight and ten when all of a sudden we hit it big. Because we got with this great teacher, Henry LeTang. And Henry took us to see--I'll tell you the punch line of the story--to see this lady at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] because he wanted us to get on the 'Amateur Night' ['Amateur Night at the Apollo']. So, we went to--upstairs, and she looked at us and she said, "Yeah, they're cute. So--but don't put them on the show, because they're cute, they'll win because they're cute." And she didn't know we really could dance. And Henry said, "Okay, do whatever you want." And I asked her, I said, "Well, what do you do?" And she said, "Well, I'm a comedian on the regular show." So, she said, "Well you go out and see the regular show" because the 'Amateur Night' was after the regular show, in between the two shows in the evening. So, we go out there and we sit in the front. She, obviously she was the, she was the star because they made seats for us. And at the end of the show when the star comes out, it was Dinah Washington. And I--she came on singing 'Blue Gardenia.' And I said, "Oh," and I remember saying--because she said she was a comedian. And of course, the place went crazy, it was Dinah Washington singing. So, then she said--we went on the show, and she stood in the wings. She said, "Henry LeTang, they really can dance." She said, "They should have been on." He said, "Well, I didn't want to tell you that, because you just thought they were cute." So, we were doing flips and dips, like the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas]. She said, "Okay, I'll tell you what. Put 'em on next week with Ruth," meaning Ruth Brown. So, that was 1955. And that was the first time we ever worked the Apollo Theater, and we worked it fifteen times. They would have us every other week. And, and we worked, oh, we worked with (unclear)--the Spaniels, (unclear) there was Lar- Larry Williams, 'Bony Maronie.' We worked it with everybody. And we did one great show. It was a wonderful show with the Four Aces, Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I, The Hines Kids, [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll, and Nipsey Russell. It was a great show, it was a great show. And I'm still friends with Diahann to this day. Speaker 1: Are any of those shows on tape? Speaker 2: No, they did not tape them. The only thing are pictures--that great photographer, he did this kind of picture with pictures around it, with one in a circle, which I have. Story_ID: 597555 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you born, you were born in Harlem [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Well, I was born in the medical center [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York], yeah, in Harlem. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right behind the Audubon Ballroom [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause my father [Maurice Hines, Sr.] was a bouncer there, and my mother [Alma Lawless Hines] was a waitress. And my father was the bouncer. Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I saw him knock a guy out. And we'd never seen that side of my father, because we never--and we used to tap for quarters in front of Tito Puente's orchestra at one of the ballrooms because we had to help--rent. And we would tap, and they'd throw quarters and we would pick them up. And so my father would hit this man. And Gregory and I lo-, and our eyes were like big. Our father was hitting somebody? So, we said, "Daddy, what did he say?" He said, "He said hello wrong." My father was (laughter), my mother was the only one who tamed him. And then we found out that Daddy was (unclear) street guy; he knocked you out, you know. But he was so sweet to us, he was Daddy. You know, so we, seeing that, we behaved a little better after we saw that (laughter). It was a wonderful time, wonderful times in my life. Speaker 1: Do you ever remember not dancing? Or dancing has always--I mean what are your earliest memories of Harlem? Speaker 2: Oh, Harlem--you know, my memories of Harlem was--I didn't know there was a downtown more than Harlem. I would--because we lived on 150th Street. So, when we said we were going downtown, we were going to 125th Street. I didn't know there was a 57th Street, and all that. To me, Harlem was, oh it was magical. And everybody dressed up, I remember that. I remember no one wore jeans to go to the store. Men wore suits and, and sports jackets, just to go to the store. And the ladies wore dresses, they didn't wear jeans. Or if they wore slacks, they were slacks. It was a very beautiful time. And they were very, (unclear) everyone was for each other, you know. You did stop on the street, you did talk to each other; you did care. You didn't just say, "Oh, how are you doing," without really meaning it, you know. And I remember my [paternal] grandmother [Ora Hines] when she was very, very old by that time, and she seldom went--she lived in the Bronx [New York]. And I--sometimes I'd say, "Granny, let's go down, let's go down to 125th Street." She said, "No," she said, "No" because she did it for a while, and she started crying. And she--so, she remembered what it was, and it was not like that anymore. And she wanted those memories, she didn't want it--. So, she would never go down. She'd drive me to--she would never--I would always have to take the train to the Bronx, she'd pick me up at the train. And then br- then drive me back to the train so I could go back home (laughter). She'd never come down here, never. But those--oh, I don't, I never remember not dancing, it's true. No one's ever asked me that before. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: We left off where you said you can't ever remember not dancing (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not dancing, okay. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: Oh, I think because da- when we'd come home, I would practice. And since I was teaching Gregory at the same time, I loved it so much, because it was something that I could do. I mean, very few kids at five could do seven pirouettes. I mean and so when I did that, and they--and all the kids looked up to me, it made me feel good. So, I knew I could get better. And I wanted to do more. I was--always wanted to do more dance-wise. I loved tapping, but I loved the other forms, too. Story_ID: 597556 Speaker 1: I really did (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well before we get into your, your training, and the different forms, let's talk about going to church. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Your religion. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: How religious was your family? Speaker 1: My--well, they were very religious when we were young, very re- we were raised Catholic, and we used to go this big, big church. I mean we always, I remember it because we always had to get dressed up. Speaker 2: Was there a Catholic church in Harlem [New York, New York]? Speaker 1: No, this is when we moved to Brooklyn [New York]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is when we went to St. Ambrose [St. Ambrose Catholic Church] in Brooklyn. But no, we did go to Catholic chu- there was a Catholic church, there was. I forgot about it. It's like a block from where Dance Center of Harlem [sic. Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] was. Because my communion was there, that's right. And there's a great picture of my Aunt Bunny [Bernice Lawless Nurse], my mother's [Alma Lawless Hines] sister, in this fabulous--she was like Josephine Baker, my Aunt Bunny, overdone with chandelier earrings, cigarette holder. And there's a great picture--I got, I got my communion there and my Confirmation. So it was right at, we were on (unclear), it was about 152nd [Street], 153rd [Street], and it was a pretty big one. Boy, boy, you made me think about it, the look of it. Because I remember the picture--the front. It looked a little like St. Patrick's Church [St. Patrick's Cathedral, New York, New York], very ornate. Speaker 2: And it was all black? Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: No, no, no, no. And I went to, what was the school? Oh, I can't remember the school there, for, for bible study they called it. Speaker 2: Now this, you went to the--a mixed church? Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean there were white people in the church? Speaker 1: Yes, there were white people, yes, yeah, yeah; all that was mixed. And even in Brooklyn, the church we went to, St. Ambrose, was that, too. Speaker 2: Why do you think they chose to be Catholic as opposed to Baptist, coming from a Baptist tradition in the South? Speaker 1: Well, well, be- I think that was the Spanish influence. Because they raised, they were Portuguese on that side of the family, and that's what I think. I never really talked about it with my mother because after a while she didn't really practice it that much, you know. So, by the time we got older, we didn't. I'm practicing it more now than I did when, in my middle years. It's strange how life does, you know. Story_ID: 597557 Speaker 1: What about holidays? Speaker 2: Oh, they were fabulous. Speaker 1: Special foods she [Hines' mother, Alma Lawless Hines] cooked at home? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well, she would cook vina dosh, which is a Portuguese dis- dish. She learned that, and my grandmother [Bernice Walker Lawless], her mother, taught her to p- cook that. Speaker 1: Now, what is it? Speaker 2: It's a, it's a beef dish. But it's, you marinate it, and it's all these different stuff they put in it. My mother stopped doing it many years afterward because we stopped eating meat. We mostly eat chicken and fish, you know. But it was a tradition in the whole family because it was five kids, and they all did it. We had big, big, Christmases together, big. All my cousins, my cousin, Richard [ph.], who went to Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] and is a great, great man, and my cousin, Wanda [ph.], Rocko [ph.]. Rocko, we used to love that because Rocko blow dries his hair (laughter). He was--on that side of the family. I'm giving you stocking caps (laughter). So we, we had, it was--our family was so mixed. And we had a wonderful cousin, Tony [ph.], and Vernon [ph.]. And they were beaute-, they were beauteous, those guys; they were beautiful. Speaker 1: Were they dark skinned, light skinned? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, dark. Speaker 1: Dark skinned. Speaker 2: About your complexion. They were just beauty, beautiful. And Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I--Gregory was more that side. Gregory was more on the Lawless side of the family, always beautiful. Speaker 1: How do you spell that name, last name? Speaker 2: L-A-W-L-E-S-S. So, he looked like my mother's side of the family. Speaker 1: Because he was darker than you. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, it's strange. I took on my mother's complexion, but I look like the Hines side of the family. Gregory took my father's [Maurice Hines, Sr.] complexion, but he looked like the Lawless, see, with very, very fine features. And I always loved, I mean Gregory was always beautiful to me, he was beautiful. You know, I didn't, I grew into my looks. I'm somewhat attractive now, not, not like him. He was just, I idolized him; I idolized everything he did. I loved him, l love him. I feel closer to him now than I ever did, you know, because he's right with me, you know, looking out for me, it's like an angel. My mother and him, they're both here (guestures). Story_ID: 597558 Speaker 1: So, what are your earliest memories of going to school, elementary school? Speaker 2: My earliest? (Laughter) My earliest memory was this girl that hit me. She hit me at P.S. fifty--P.S. 55 [ph.]. That's my memories. I loved school, though; I liked school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where was P.S. 55? Speaker 2: On a hun- that was also near the dance--no, that was further up. Where was that? 155th Street [New York, New York], maybe that's why it's called P.S. 55. I think about 155th Street, I think. Yeah, I think we could walk to school, that's right because we wouldn't take a bus. Yeah, it's about, we were on 150th [Street], so it was about five blocks from the house. Speaker 1: And were you dancing at the time? You'd--by the time you started school, you were dancing already? Speaker 2: Well, I was dancing, but not professionally. Speaker 1: No, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was just taking class. Speaker 1: You were taking classes? Speaker 2: Yes, I was. Speaker 1: And you started taking classes when they came and said we're going to offer free classes? Speaker 2: Free, yeah. Speaker 1: Free class- Speaker 2: And then we went. And then I liked it so much, and I was talking more around the house, and more outgoing. So, my mother went to my--her brother, because it was fifty dollars a month for the class. Speaker 1: I thought it was free? Speaker 2: No, you started, you started with free classes. That's to get you in there and hook you (laughter). They still do that kind of stuff, though. So it hooked me. So, my mother went to my Uncle Ly [Lionel Lawless], her brother, and he paid for--I don't know how long he paid for. He has passed away, too. But he gave her the fifty dollars. And so, when he--when we became very--well, we became famous. Uncle Ly was thrilled because he was there at the beginning. And by the time Gregory [Gregory Hines] started taking--by that time my mother had a job at, as a waitress at the Audubon Ballroom [New York, New York], and my father [Maurice Hines, Sr.] was a bouncer. So they had money for the both of us by that time. But Uncle Ly started us off. Speaker 1: And what, he was your mother's older or younger brother? Speaker 2: He was yo- younger. My mother and her--Bunny [Bernice Lawless Nurse] were the oldest of the five, so she was the oldest (Simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, list the five of them for me in the order that they-- Speaker 2: Well it was--well, Aunt Bunny, Bernice, was the first. Alma [Alma Lawless Hines] was the second, Uncle Doc [Vernon Lawless], my Uncle Doc, was the third. Then Uncle Ly, Lionel, and then Uncle Sid, Sidney [Sidney Lawless], yeah, he was the fifth, he was the baby. Speaker 1: Now, are any performers among them? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No, we were the only ones in the family. My cousin Richard [ph.] was--used to play guitar, and--in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]. But he later became a big muckety-muck at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and you know, and did that for many years. Story_ID: 597559 Speaker 1: Well, when did you see the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas] for the first time? I mean on TV or anything like that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: When did you see them, and when did you re-, yeah, when did you see them? Speaker 2: Well, the f- we saw them because Henry LeTang took us to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] to see them. And this is a funny story. I used to tell this when Fayard--when I did, they did retrospectives of the career, honor them. And I would get up and tell this story. So, in the Apollo you'd--see, you could stay all day and see the four shows. And there was a movie in between one. So, we started at the back row. And we thought--because they were so phenomenal, that it was special effects. We didn't know they were real people, because the Nicholas brothers, what they did, nobody could do. So we thought, well, we didn't know; we thought they were part of the movie, because we were real little. And we started moving up, each--and by the time the fourth show, we were right in the fir- first row, and we realized that these were real people (laughter). And we looked at Henry because he wanted us to be like them. And we said, "You're crazy. We can't do this stuff," (laughter). And we did some of it, but we were never that great, no. Nobody was ever that great. No, no dance team ever was that great, and there were a lot in those days--Buck and Bubbles [Ford L. "Buck" Washington and John W. Bubbles], the Berry brothers, the Nicholas brothers (laughter) (unclear). Speaker 1: Talk, talk to me about who the, who the others were. Speaker 2: Well the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because the Nicholas brothers were the fa- the most famous. Speaker 2: Because they did movies. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But in those days in Harlem [New York, New York], they were, I mean the Berry brothers were phenomenal. Speaker 1: Who were the Berry brothers? Speaker 2: The Berry brothers were three brothers, and they did great spins. They were, they were all l- they, y- I don't want to say they were like the Nicholas brothers because they were all individuals. No one cloned. Today they clone, they want, "Let me get the one that's hot." In Harlem, everybody was different. There was nobody like Ethel Waters. There was nobody like Lena Horne. They were all separate--Adelaide Hall, you know, Florence Mills, they were--Josephine Baker, whose was ever like that (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, let me ask you. How do you, you talked about the, how do you, how do you think those--where, where did that develop, that, the style, the Nicholas brothers style, and then the Berry brother--like, where do you think that came out of? Did it come out of minstrel shows? Speaker 2: Well no, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Did it--where did it come out of? Speaker 2: No. Fayard always said that he, he saw, I can't remember who he saw dancing. And he--our, our careers paralleled themselves, strangely enough. He used to teach Harold the way I taught Gregory [Gregory Hines]. And we, we weren't even born yet when they were dancing, and they first started. And he, that's why they never looked at other people and wanted to be like them. So, he developed this thing with his hands because he loved the breaks in the music, you know, and the arrangements. And Fayard did all that, see. And Harold didn't do that. So, he taught Harold. But their style was almost balletic. So a lot of people thought that they took ballet. No, they were just geniuses. They didn't know ronds de jambes, they didn't know those terms, they just did them. He thought up the steps, he did them. That's the genius of the, of the, of that generation. I mean when Gregory and I worked with Cab Calloway, people forget, Cab Calloway was--there was no music videos when he was--the world copied him. The world, without videos. Now, that's a tremendous gift and a tremendous talent. I mean, I mean, I, it's beyond me, how, how they reached the world. Because he didn't go to movies right away; he was the Cotton Club [New York, New York] band. But it was, the talent was so immense, and the personality was so immense. And Duke Ellington, too, he just walked in the room. And we met these people, we knew these people. And I, oh, so when I saw all of these people--because we saw them at the Apollo. Speaker 1: So, take me back to that moment you finally move up to the front row. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You see the Nicholas brothers performing, and Henry says to you--? Speaker 2: Oh, "That's what I want you to do." And we said, "You're crazy." Gregory and I, we (unclear)--, "Well, you'll do something like it." And we did. Speaker 1: And how old were you at the time? Speaker 2: S- seven, seven and nine? Seven--about seven and nine. Story_ID: 597560 Speaker 1: But then we'll--just talking about the, the giants of tap. Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you said there was Bojangles [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson], who was very clean. But then after him was Bubbles [John W. Bubbles]. Speaker 2: Yes. Bojangles was the--also, these guys were also entertainers. See, they weren't just dancers. That was their base, but they were entertainers. They loved being out there, so it wasn't just tap, go off. They would talk to the audience. And that's why Bojangles--copacetic, you know, all those things, this--phrases he made up. And it was--and the smile and it was the charisma, it was overwhelming. I mean, and, and, and then to see him do those roles with Shirley Temple was very difficult for me to see it, it's, even though Shirley loved him and she praised him, and they, and they brought him a whole new audience and made him very famous (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why was it difficult for you to see? Speaker 2: Because I didn't want him--he was so beautiful when he danced. He was always dressed impeccably. He wasn't a servant, he was a star at the Palace Theatre [New York, New York]. He was our star, you know. And to see him always like that, as a servant, it was foreign to me. And it really wasn't explained to me by my parents [Alma Lawless Hines and Maurice Hines, Sr.]. You know, we enjoyed him. That's what you did, you enjoyed them, and they were our stars. Because like I said, we lived in Harlem [New York, New York], we didn't travel during those days. And we saw them on TV. We said the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas], we'd see them on TV. But the Nicholas brothers were different. They were always in tails. So, I got real turned on by that, see. Speaker 1: Well, could you see--did you feel as a kid seeing him with Shirley Temple that he was somehow inferior to her? Or you, I mean (unclear) you said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't-- Speaker 1: What didn't you like? Speaker 2: I didn't like, it wasn't so much when he was with her. Because when he was with her, he danced. And she worked with him almost like an equal. She, she didn't talk down to him, she was a little kid. And she was crazy about him, you know. That's--as kids are. They don't see anything, they see nice, that's a nice person. But it was like the other, the other characters of the movie. Speaker 1: Well, what did you think about Shirley Temple? Because you were doing what she was doing. Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought she was adorable. And I thought it was very interesting that she could do the stair dance, going up the stairs, which she learned. And later on I found out she was one-take Shirley. She learned all that, and, and, and Bojangles loved her, and she loved him. I mean, she says it now in interviews. But I just didn't like the--how they had him in the movie-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and the clothes he wore. Story_ID: 597561 Speaker 1: And it was clear (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. But then you're saying that the gentleman after him, Bubbles, took it to the next level. Speaker 1: John Bubbles [John W. Bubbles], yes, and he-- Speaker 2: John Bubbles. Now, what was the next level? Speaker 1: The next level, because he dropped his heels in tap dancing in a syncopated way, rather than dropping it at the end of a phrase, like you would a period in a sentence. And then he was able to dance at any tempo, plus he was a great singer. I mean, he was the first Sportin' Life in 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin]. He had a great voice. They were great all-around entertainers, they didn't do just one thing. But because he tapped so fantastic--you know, he's in 'Cabin in the Sky,' in that one, that wonderful number ["Shine"] in 'Cabin in the Sky,' (laughter) just because they call me shine, baby. Fierce, fierce. It's just wonderful, with Duke Ellington and Ethel Waters. That's a great movie. So then, then we began to see all the great tap dancers, and then we went--and our own. And the one that I idolized, other than Fayard [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas], was Teddy Hale. Because he was the one, he did this great number, 'To Begin the Beguine' ['Begin the Beguine']. And it was sort of like ballet. He had this line, and I fell in love with Teddy Hale. He never got the due that he should because he was just in Harlem [New York, New York] and, you know, you stayed there. And he, I don't know what happened to him, but I loved him. And then there was Bunny Briggs, close floor work, they were all different. And then the greatest, of course, was Teddy Hale. And there was a great story on that. They had all the tap dancers come to the basement of the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], where you rehearsed. And they had this challenge--Bunny Briggs, Bubbles, all the greats. They came in from Chicago [Illinois], where they had a lot of great tap dancers. And Baby Laurence [Baby Laurence Jackson] drew a circle in the, in the, in the floor, and he tapped in the circle. And all the dancers gathered around him and he, and he danced--I may have the time wrong--but he danced for half an hour and never repeated a step, never repeated a step. And they all knew if he would, because they're tap dancers. The legendary Baby Laurence, the legendary Baby Laurence. And there's a recording of him tapping with Charlie Parker. That's how fierce he was. Those were the people that you looked up to. And you could never beat them. You will never see their like again. You will never see their like again. Story_ID: 597562 Speaker 1: Well, what other forms of dance did you study? Speaker 2: Well, I loved, I love jazz. Speaker 1: But I'm talking about when you were younger, when they were paying to go to the school [Wally Wanger Dance Studio, New York, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, just, it was just tap dancing. I wanted to take ballet, and we took it for a while. But in those days the tights were wool, and they itched. And w- Gregory [Gregory Hines] said, "I am not doing this." And we did everything together. See, we took all the classes together because Henry [Henry LeTang] wanted us to always be dancing together, to keep that chemistry there. So, when Gregory wouldn't take ballet, they said, okay, we're not going to take ballet. And I cried. I wanted ballet, I wanted to do more. I always wanted to do more, and I did later on. And that's why I became a choreographer of all different styles now. But it took many years. Speaker 1: Well, where did all the greats, like the dancers, where did they rehearse in Harlem [New York, New York]? You said they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's interesting. You know, I don't know. I only know when they all would come to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]. They--I don't think they rehearsed--it was done in h- 'The Cotton Club' movie, the Hoofers Club [New York, New York]. That was the club where they'd all go. So, it wasn't like they rehearsed, they just got up and started jamming. You know, they didn't really, it wasn't that, oh, we're going to take class, or--. And they would trade steps, like, just like they did in the movie. I mean, they could dance there. But they would be there all day. They'd play pool, and somebody would start tapping. "Well, how did you do that? Give me that step. Show me that step." And they would create routines that way. But, but because they were so individuals, they would never dance like the person that gave them the step. They would change it up in their style. And that's why there were so many great ones. Tip, Tap and Toe, there was, oh my god, I--see there were so many of them I can't even recall them. And Gregory and I were right at the end of all that. So we were around them, and we were, we were, it was like-- Speaker 1: Were there any other kids around? Or you were the only two kids who were tapping? Speaker 2: We were the only two kids like that, I mean as far as dancing-- Speaker 1: Dancing. Speaker 2: --I mean others were there-- Speaker 1: That's what I mean, dancing. Speaker 2: No--yeah, dancing. You know, Leslie [Leslie Uggams] was there as a singer. She started at the Apollo at nine. So, and she was there with Ethel Waters. And she had done--you know, Leslie--that's why we all know that, you know, those times. No, we were the only ones that I can remember that young, working that much at the Apollo (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well what did everyone else think, what did they think about the two of you? Speaker 2: Oh, they thought--oh, no, they said we had talent. Oh, no, they knew. They would never have accepted us, you know. You don't--those guys were rough. I mean if you, just because you're kids and you're cute, okay fine, stay over there. But they would give us steps, you know, we--because we really could dance, we were good. (Laughter) And we didn't think of it in those terms, like they wouldn't accept us. Story_ID: 597563 Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Because first of all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) go ahead. Speaker 2: --we were with Henry LeTang, who was-- Speaker 1: And LeTang had a reputation all his own? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I asked Henry once--I said, I've never said this either. I asked Henry, I said--because he had a big school [Henry LeTang School of Dance] on 44th Street [sic. 54th Street, New York, New York] with maybe two hundred kids. He was the b- he was the man. And I said, "Out of all those kids, why did you, why did we come out of that?" I mean we were with--. He said, "I didn't know it. I knew you were cute and you could dance. One day I was doing a routine, and you weren't in the front. You guys weren't in the front, you were in the middle somewhere. And I'm looking in the mirror, the reflection, and I notice that there's a hole that's--the middle had stopped. So I went in the back, and all the kids had circled around you and Gregory [Gregory Hines] and were watching you dance." This whole school were watching these two kids dance. And that's when he told my mother [Alma Lawless Hines], "I want to do, I want to get private lessons for them. They've got something, they've got it." She said, "What do they got, what do they got?" They did, I'm telling you. You--," and then he told her what happened. She said, "Well, that was like when they used to walk down the street [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard]." But these were other dancers, these were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how old were you at the time? Speaker 2: Seven and f-, no, six and eight, around there. I think we were with Henry by that time. Speaker 1: And when did you get your first professional break? Was that the Broadway show--'Pink Tights' ['The Girl in Pink Tights,' Jerome Chodorov and Joseph Fields]? Speaker 2: I think that was. We had done recitals, and things like that. Speaker 1: And you'd done the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we had done the Apollo by that time. Speaker 1: But the Apollo was still considered amateur talent show? Speaker 2: No, no, no. No, no, no-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --we were on the regular show by that time. Speaker 1: You were on the regular show by that time? Speaker 2: Yeah, we opened with Ruth Brown. Speaker 1: Oh, so, that was your first professional job? Speaker 2: That was the first one. Yes, the Apollo definitely was the first one. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And we had great training because we were doing four shows a day. You know, so we would, you know, and on 'Amateur Night' ['Amateur Night at the Apollo'] you didn't have two hours in between shows and a movie, you had a half hour. So, we were, we loved it. We were just in heaven. And still to this day, the Apollo is heaven to me, it's heaven. My 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah] show, we're going there; I'm trying to get it to go there for two weeks. Speaker 1: That would be awesome. Yeah. Speaker 2: Because I'm starring in it, and I'm going to go. I'm taking it to the Apollo. I'm in meetings, and you do all that stuff. Next summer we'll begin to tour, it'll be part of the tour. So but that was, it was a magical time, and Harlem [New York, New York] was all, was magical. So, it was all in one. Story_ID: 597564 Speaker 1: It was all in one. Speaker 2: Well, what-- Speaker 1: So, 'The Girl in Pink Tights' [Jerome Chodorov and Joseph Fields]-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) came out of that. We did--that was 1955, '56 [1956]. We had already worked the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], I think about three times by that. And that was where we met Agnes de Mille, and that's a very funny story. 'Cause Henry [Henry LeTang] knew Agnes, and she, of course done, had done 'Oklahoma!' and she's Agnes de Mille. So he, there was a part in there for a shoeshine boy. So, Henry brought us down, and I got it. But my mother [Alma Lawless Hines], in her ignorance about show business--because she wasn't a show, a stage mother, she didn't know about this. She says to Agnes de Mille--because she knew who Agnes de Mille was, she didn't care. She said, she said, "Well, okay, I'll take the one, the light skinned one, I'll take him." And she said, "Oh, no, no, you can't have him." Now Henry LeTang is standing in the wings. My mother walks on stage, because I had just done a little step, you know. She said, "What do you mean, I can't have him?" She said, "No, you can't break--they're a set. They're a set, and I don't break them up." (Laughter) Henry said, "Oh my God." Because Agnes was tough, she was tough. She said, "Okay, I'll tell you what" because she loved Henry. "If the little one can learn a soft shoe in twenty minutes, I'll take them both." And that's how we got on Broadway. My mother, again (laughter). Henry took us back to the studio, we learned the soft shoe in twenty minutes, brought us down, we did it, she said, "I'll take them both." And we wind up on Broadway in 1955. And they did a big thing. Jet magazine, I mean, these two African American kids on Broadway. We were the first since the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas]. The Nicholas brothers were in it. They had done 'St. Louis Woman' [Arna Bontemps and Countee Cullen], and they had done 'Babes in Arms' [Lorenz Hart and Richard Rodgers]. And now here comes these little kids. That's why we were so parallel to them; our careers mirrored them. And we did a number with the star, Zizi Jeanmaire, the great French ballerina, who fell in love with us. And then right out of that, that's when we went to Paris [France]. Speaker 2: So, out of the Broadway show came Paris (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: How long were you on Broadway for the first run? Speaker 1: Oh, it wasn't a big hit. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I think it lasted less than a year. Maybe less than-- Speaker 2: But that's long. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah. In those years, it wasn't; now, it's long. In those years those shows ran for years and years and years, you know. Speaker 2: Well, what did you do about school then? Did they have a tutor? Speaker 1: We had tutoring. Yes, we had tutors-- Speaker 2: Tutoring. Speaker 1: --yes, especially on the road. My mother did it for them, and then they hired an--Equity [Actors' Equity Association], I think. You have to have a teacher. And we got our lessons from our school, because we went to Quintano's, which was called Quintano's School for Young Professionals [New York, New York]. So there were a lot of kids in the business from that. Sal Mineo--not Sal Mineo, Rafael Campos was there, Carol Lynley, Patty Duke, a lot of kids went there. So, they would send us our lessons and then teachers would go over it. I still remember in the dressing room doing, doing those lessons. Speaker 2: So, do you--did you understand that you were on Broadway and the-- Speaker 1: Oh yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) significance it was having? Or that it had? Speaker 1: Oh yes, oh, yeah, we knew. Oh, yeah, it was big, it was big. We went to Philadel- New Haven [Connecticut] and then Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], like they did in those days, and then Broadway. And it was a big thing. And we, and we had our party-- Speaker 2: Opening night? Speaker 1: Yes. We went back to Harlem [New York, New York], where we were, where we were raised, to the Red Rooster with my father [Maurice Hines, Sr.]. And there were all of, all of the, the, our family and the guys. And it was a wonderful bar, and, oh, I haven't talked about that in a long time. I still remember it. And I walk- this is funny. I was up there about a year and a half ago. And I was walking by the Red Rooster to get to a car--a guy who was driving me, had driven me up. And a guy comes out of the Red Rooster and starts tap dancing. He said, "Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], I remember when you and your brother [Gregory Hines]--," he was there. I said, "How old are you?" He said, "I'm--," well something like seventy, close to eighty. He says, "I remember when your father brought you up here, you and your brother, and there was a party." I said, "Yeah, it was an opening night party, we were on Broad--," he says, "That's right." And I started crying, I teared up. I teared up, I did. I got to the car and I cried. Because oh, my god. Ha. Story_ID: 597565 Speaker 1: From that show ['The Girl in Pink Tights,' Jerome Chodorov and Joseph Fields]-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you meet someone. And they, he, do you meet the French guy? You said (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, it was, we were with an agency. Speaker 1: You were with--what agency? Speaker 2: We were with Associated Booking [Associated Booking Corporation, New York, New York], ABC, which was run by Joe Glaser, who was Louis Armstrong's manager. He created this agency because of his fame with Louis Armstrong. And he had Dinah Washington, Lionel Hampton; he had everybody, everybody. He was big, and he s- liked us, and he sent us over there. And that's, and we worked at the Olympia Theatre [L'Olympia Bruno Coquatrix, Paris, France] with a comedy team, like Roger Pierre--Roger Pierre and Jean-Marc Thibault. And they were like the Dean Martin and the Jer- Jerry Lewis of France. Huge success, we were a huge success. And they wanted to keep us over there, but my mother [Alma Lawless Hines] was so lonely without my father [Maurice Hines, Sr.], and we came back. Speaker 1: Now, what was your mother doing, simply traveling with you? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And taking care of you? Speaker 2: She was our business manager. Speaker 1: She was the business manager? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes, she took care of everything, the rehearsals and everything. She used to rehearse the orchestra, 'til I started doing it later on. She would do all that. She had the music, she knew what to tell them to do. We did three numbers. Speaker 1: How did she know, how did she learn that? Speaker 2: It's--that's because she just is borderline genius, because she didn't know anything about music. But once she heard the arrangement, and, and, and sh- the way it was done, and the many years we did those routines--and Henry LeTang created those routines, and she was there when he did it. She knew when the tempos increased; she knew where the music was. She knew everything, she did everything. They had a conductor. She didn't conduct for us, but she would tell them, "Here's where they do the flips and I want the drums to go," (making sounds) (laughter). She was so fierce. And I've never told this story. We were working at a place in the Catskill Mountains, and we were tapping. And we were doing like two shows a night in the mountains. And the band forgot our music. She came on stage and sang the arrangement, so we could keep dancing. She did the sax part, she went (making sounds). In a, in a long gown, and I'm--(laughter) my mother, so we could make that money. We were making seventy-five dollars a week. You're going to make that money tonight. (Laughter) She was remarkable, remarkable. And (unclear) I can still see her. Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I came down, and she said, "Keep dancing," (making sounds) (laughter). Great. Oh, she was wonderful. (Laughter) I love that story. Story_ID: 597566 Speaker 1: Well, were you often the only black performers? I mean, in the Catskills [Catskill Mountains], I can't imagine-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --many other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh su- but see, among performers, see, Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I didn't really get, we didn't get into any racism until we went to Miami [Florida] with the Cotton Club show, with Cab Calloway's 'Cotton Club Revue.' Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: Oh, my god. We were still tapping then, so, in '50s [1950s], in the '50s [1950s]. And they didn't allow--we were in the black section of town at a place called the Copa Room [Miami Beach, Florida]. And they, and they didn't allow you to go, in Miami Beach [Florida], the Jewish people didn't allow us there, which we always thought was strange because they knew what it was to felt--to be discriminated against. But the funny thing w- that happened, is in those days you had to have a cabaret license. So, you had to go to the police station. I just told this story recently. And in the police station, they had the colored fountain and the white fountain. So Greg and I are young, we had never, we didn't--when we were in New York [New York], we didn't--so Gregory, I said, "Gregory, they got colored water over here and white water. I wonder if it's the same." Gregory said, "Well let's, you taste the colored, I'm going to taste the white, and let's see." So, I'm tasting it, I said, "Well, it's not a color, it's like, looks like white." I said, "What does yours look like?" And he said, "Well, it's not white." He said, "Well, they've got a sign here, that's why it's got to be, color white." I said, "Well, let's switch." Now, my mother [Alma Lawless Hines] is having a heart attack because the police are seeing all of this. They don't know what--we're little kids, they can't jump us, you know (unclear). So she said, "Now, my sons, you can't, you've got to go to the colored, both of you." So we said, "Why?" (Laughter) "It's the same color, and (unclear), and it tastes the same" because we'd switched back and forth. We thought the colored one was Kool-Aid, and that it was going to be a color, see. Out of--kids, the mouth of babes, right, to show the ridiculousness of it. And the cops started laughing because it was ridiculous; it was ridiculous to them. So, she said, "Well, no, you can't. It's, it's a law." So we said, "It's a law that we can't drink in that fountain?" (Laughter) We were so (unclear). And she said, "Yes." "Well, that's not nice," we go, Gregory and I went, "So we both got to drink over here because it says colored?" And then we started getting it. And then she took us away from it, and then she explained slowly while we were there what it was about, and why we couldn't go to Miami Beach. Because we had heard about Miami Beach, but there was no beach where we were. And we had to live in the black section of town, so it was like in the--further inland. And, but we wanted--couldn't go to the beach, not allowed. So, those were, those were rough times once you begin--as a child because we began to realize what this is as we're--. And yet, it was almost similar to the Cotton Club [New York, New York], because Cab Calloway was so famous that all the white audiences would come to the Copa. He were selling out with black and white, you know. It was integrated there, because we were in the black section of town. The black people would come, but the white people would come too because it was Cab Calloway, see. So, we didn't see it, even where we worked. We saw everybody enjoying the show. But yet, we couldn't go over there. It's interesting. Story_ID: 597567 Speaker 1: What was the experience like out of the country, in France too (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, unbelievable. Nothing--you know there was no, you went anywhere, went anywhere you wanted, in any restaurant. And that's where we realized later on that's why a lot of musicians who were, they were over here with various orchestras. Because when they went down south they couldn't, you know, it was hard for them to do jobs because they couldn't go to the bathroom, it's all that. So, they stayed over in Europe because they were so well-respected, and there was no, there was no racism. I mean that's why--Josephine Baker. I mean, all that was true--and to feel like a human being. It's funny, a girlfriend of mine went over there, and this was, this was in the '70s [1970s]. She had been, she had been here in America and done 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell] and a lot of shows here. And we were, I was doing a show at that time at, in Monte Carlo [Monaco], and she came to see me. And I said--what's her name? She's a wonderful artist. She wasn't going to come back to America. Now, this was in the '70s [1970s]. She said, "You know why? Because when I auditioned here, I auditioned as an artist. I don't have to go to the quote African American audition call. I go as a singer, and I like it. I don't want to go back to that, and that's my country." And she stayed over there. Ursuline [Ursuline Kairson], Ursuline, great girl, fabulous. She had done 'Bubbling Brown Sugar,' I mean she was really one of those diva divas. She stayed over there, she never came back. I think she got married and, you know, children. And she said, "It's a good life for me here as a human being. I want to be treated as a human being. I don't want to wait." You know, because by that time, the civil rights thing was happening. She said, "I don't want to wait. I'm being treated nicely now. I don't know (unclear)--I don't know how long I'm going to live. Let me enjoy my life." It's wonderful. Story_ID: 597568 Speaker 1: So, how old were you when you completed school, that perf- the high school [Quintano's School for Young Professionals, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I don't remember, it's so long ago. Nineteen sixty-one [1961]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-one [1961]? Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you completed it in '61 [1961]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What were your plans then? You'd already be-, you'd guys had become (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well by that time, by that time it was almost, we were about to do Hines, Hines and Dad. Because my father [Maurice Hines, Sr.] was drumming, and-- Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about that, how your father comes--because it was when you were in Paris [France]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that your father takes up the drums. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: And decided that-- Speaker 2: --he started that, he started taking lessons I think. Speaker 1: But what made him even think he could play drums? Speaker 2: That's amazing to me. I've never asked him. I--rather than any other musician, or musical instrument. I don't know, but he was good at it. He was good, no doubt about it, especially on the shuffle beat. He was, his thing was the shuffle beat. He worked with Dick Vance's orchestra at the S- excuse me--at the Savoy Ballroom [New York, New York], he was famous for the shuffle beat. And then he did the rock and roll shows with Alan Freed, and Little Richard, and Chuck Berry, and all those (unclear). And we used to go see him. And they had two drummers, Panama Francis and him. And, but then when we started working a lot overseas, that's when he said, "Well, we've got to get together. Let's put an act together." Let's--they danced, and I mean by that time he knew we sang, see. I sang because at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] I sang 'Somewhere Over the Rainbow.' Henry [Henry LeTang] wanted them to see that we were versatile. Now, my brother didn't sing at that time. It's hard to believe because his voice was so phenomenal. Phenomenal enough to eventually sing with Luther Vandross, so you know he could sing. But I got Gregory [Gregory Hines] to sing. I was one of the few people who could Gregory to do anything. He was so lazy, he didn't want to do anything. I used to bug and drive him crazy to get him to do all that, anything I wanted. I was the only one who could get him to do that. Because he, I heard him sing. And I said, oh, my god, he sounds like Johnny Mathis. You know, I mean, so it took me a while to get him, because he was a difficult customer, but I got him. But, so Daddy w- they wanted us to do everything, to be versatile. So my father, when he joined us, we began to sing then. But Gregory would only sing up-tempo songs, and I would sing the ballads, until I convinced him that he could sing a ballad, and then he did. But then Hines, Hines and Dad was when we, we struggled a long time. Story_ID: 597569 Speaker 1: Why did you struggle as Hines, Hines and Dad? Because you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well because they didn't really know what to do with us. We weren't a dance act, we were singers. And then we wind up, Gregory [Gregory Hines] winded up being very funny. So, we were sort of like Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis. They said, "Well, how do we, what do we say? What do we say they do?" So, Daddy [Maurice Hines, Sr.] said, "Well, why don't you just say they entertain?" And then we started, then we did, we did a year of the Playboy clubs. That's what did it. And Johnny Carson--we met Stanley Kay, our manager. And we did a year of the Playboy clubs, and Johnny Carson--because we had auditioned for them eleven times, and was turned down. And we were also turned down by 'The Merv Griffin Show.' And I remember one guy told my mother [Alma Lawless Hines] that we weren't very talented. And my mother said, "Excuse me, my sons are talented." You know, no, my mother says that. So Johnny Carson saw us in Chicago [Illinois] at the Playboy Club. He was doing a concert, and he came there. And he saw us, and he said, "I'm going to put you on my show ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson']." And we said, "Yeah, right, as soon as he finds out we've failed all these auditions." Because we used to have talent coordinators in those days. And he was true to his word, and he put us on. And in New York [New York], I think we did thirty-five of the last five years he was in New York. The only African Americans he had on regularly were us and [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll. And we scored. We, he sat us down and we said something funny, and he went crazy. And that, that's the one person, I must give him his due, he made our careers, that one man, as he did for a lot of people. For Bette Midler, she says it too. We got every major room, every major room, because of that one man. Speaker 1: What are the major rooms? Speaker 2: Well, at that time it was The Americana [The Americana of New York, New York, New York]. We go- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where was The Americana? Speaker 2: The Americana was a nightclub. The nightclubs-- Speaker 1: Where was it? Speaker 2: Where the Sheraton [Sheraton New York Times Square Hotel, New York, New York] is now-- Okay. Speaker 1: --on 52nd Street. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And we got the Persian Room, Plaza Hotel [New York, New York], we got Las Vegas [Nevada], we got the Flamingo [The Fabulous Flamingo; Flamingo Las Vegas Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada]. We got Puerto Rico, we got all of them. We got the Fairmont [Fairmont San Francisco] in San Francisco [California], which was a major--Ella Fitzgerald worked there. I mean, we got The Fairmont [The Fairmont New Orleans; The Roosevelt New Orleans] in New Orleans [Louisiana], Carol Channing worked there. I mean that one man, that's how powerful he was. And we scored, of course, I mean we scored. I mean, we were good. Speaker 2: You had the talent, yeah. Speaker 1: We had the talent. But nobody saw that. Speaker 2: But the, the, what, what could he do for you? Or what, what power did he have that your agent didn't have? Speaker 1: He--because he sort of validated, he said how fabulous we were. "You guys are great." And Johnny, in those days Johnny, until he, 'til he, 'til he left that show, he was powerful. Comedians will tell you. If he said, "You are fabulous," they got jobs. Joan Rivers, you know, who we knew, he made her career; she says it. Ellen DeGeneres just recently said it. She said, "Well, I did his show. I was on the circuit, but all of a sudden--." Because he liked her, and he said it. And he knew how hard that was. See, he knew how hard it what, how hard it is, to be an entertainer--to do that, to get up in front of millions of people. That's hard to do in those days-- Story_ID: 597570 Speaker 1: Now, it's not. It's--that's not, I don't feel it's that hard--because--I really don't because you got the pyrotechnics (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's changed? Speaker 1: I think, you know, you know what's interesting? Missy Elliott, on a show [sic.] called VH1 said this. I'm dying to meet her, because I'm going to do a television show soon next year, a kind of talk show. And I'm going to meet her. She said they asked her about show business today. And she said, "Well, it's very easy, show business. It's all about attitude and image. The videos give you all that." She was trying to explain why we don't have the Chakas [Chaka Khan], or the Gladys Knights, and the Arethas [Aretha Franklin]. Because they paid their dues, they learned. I mean, they didn't just have a hit record and all of a sudden you're trying to fill up Madison Square Garden [New York, New York]. And it's unfair to the kids today. I'm not putting them down, but it's unfair to them. You can't, you c- one kid came up to me, and this is a true story. I was doing 'Sophisticated Ladies' on Broadway, I was backstage. He came up, "Oh, you're wonderful, oh, you g- you are wonderful. You know, I can tap like you and your brother." I said, "Oh, really? Oh, that's wonderful. You can tap like me and Gregory Hines? You can do that? Oh, okay, great. Well, where have you studied?" I thought maybe he studied with Henry [Henry LeTang]. He said, "Oh, I haven't studied." "Oh really?" Now, see, I don't play that. I said, "Let me explain this to you, my man. You have not studied tap at all, and you think you can tap like Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] and Gregory Hines? Wrong, you can't. You've got to pay your dues. You've got to study, you've got to learn your craft." There's no place for them to learn it anymore. You can't fail because if you fail, you're failing at Madison Square Garden. We can make mistakes, we can miss a step, because we played in them little clubs. Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.], he played in little clubs. So, when you got out there and you did it, you were fierce. And that's why I say if you can't do with just a piano, you can't do it. Sammy Davis, Lena [Lena Horne], Ella [Ella Fitzgerald], me, Gregory, [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll, we don't need a, we don't need fifteen pieces of pyrotechnics. We do two hours with just a piano, because that's what you had to do. You didn't have money to have all that. You didn't have, even the record labels, they didn't have that, what they have now. Story_ID: 597571 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when you were on Carson ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'], was it Hines, Hines and Dad? Speaker 2: Yes, it was Hines, Hines and Dad (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that made Hines, Hines and Dad-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --solidified that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the team? What worked? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. And then we did 'The Hollywood Palace,' we did the Lennon Sisters' show, we did 'Kraft Music Hall,' we did all those major shows. Major, those were major shows. And we got them, and then everybody wanted us. And then (unclear), but then it became difficult, you know, because Gregory [Gregory Hines] was so funny. We worked with Don Rickles, and we were getting standing ovations before the comedians were coming on, and they didn't like that. (Laughter) So we, so, she was the one who saved our career--you go through spurts, was Ella Fitzgerald. Because we couldn't get in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] because the comedians wouldn't take us, because Gregory was so funny, and they didn't want to follow standing ovations. So Ella said, "I'll take them," and we worked the Flamingo [The Fabulous Flamingo; Flamingo Las Vegas Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada] with her twice. Thank God, because we owed American Express a fortune (laughter). Ella Fitzgerald, and I got very close to her because we, I never left the theater, and Ella would--never left. And I would sit in her dressing room. And she was one of the great ladies, one of the great moments of my life; great moments working with her. Story_ID: 597572 Speaker 1: So, we gotta continue, but we're going to go back a little bit. Speaker 2: Okay, sure. Speaker 1: Because I want to know, you were telling me how Ella [Ella Fitzgerald] got you to-- Speaker 2: Las Vegas [Nevada]. Speaker 1: Las Vegas. Speaker 2: Yes. We, we, we had been working a lot with comedians. And the comedians started not to like us, because Gregory [Gregory Hines] was so funny, and we were getting laughs. And comedians don't like to hear laughs before them with an act that's not supposed to get them. If they're from other comedians, that's fine. Plus, we were getting standing ovations. And they are--many acts, mostly comedians, they are. I mean they're great, you know, I love them, but they've got these little quirks. And they, it got around that we were getting standing ovations, and they--so we couldn't get a job. So, Ella Fitzgerald was going into the Flamingo [The Fabulous Flamingo; Flamingo Las Vegas Hotel and Casino] in Las Vegas and it was broached, I think either Joe Glaser, or I forget the agency we were with, and they mentioned us as an opening act. She said, "I'll take them." They told her nobody was going to take us because--she said, "I know, I heard, because they're so good. I'll take them." Ella could follow anybody, she's Ella Fitzgerald, now. And we went in with her, and wonderful thing she did. We had a song which we used to do on 'Johnny Carson' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'] called 'Sweet Georgia Brown,' and that was a big song for Ella. And Stanley [Stanley Kay], our manager, went to her and said, "You know, Ella, we will not do that, because you're the star, and we will--." She said, "No, no, I saw them do it. Let them do it. I've got other things I can do." Of course, she can. She can sing the telephone book, you know. And she, she di-, and we were a big success with her. Four weeks straight, two shows a night, no day off. And Ella--I don't know how you do that vocal in Vegas, because it has no humidity to vocal, to moisturize the vocal cords. Ella Fitzgerald is--that's a separate thing. She's just a separate artist. Because I remember when she was on stage. She, I always used to catch the second show, in the wings. And I watched, and she was doing Marvin Gaye's 'What's Going On?' And I saw Tommy Flanagan and her bassist all of a sudden look at each other. And I said, oh, my god, something went wrong, you know, because they were always cool. So, at the end of the show, I asked them. I said, "What happened? I didn't--was Ella all right?" Because she was having some health problems even then. He said, "No. Ella went somewhere musically on 'What's Going On' harmonically, and we don't, we don't know how she got back." Because if she was taking a breath, okay. Then you wait for the keynote. She did something way up there, and she never took a breath, and she came back and met us. And we don't know how--that's--he was shaken. He said, "And she'll never do it again." That's the genius of Ella Fitzgerald. Sarah Vaughan would know, because she was a musician. Carmen McRae, they were pianists. Ella don't know none of that. He said, "We don't know how she did that, and we're musicians." That's why I'm getting chills talking about it. That's why Ella is the greatest. There'll never be nobody like that, nobody. And I was privy to that, I was there. Story_ID: 597573 Speaker 1: What was your treatment like in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada]? Speaker 2: Well then, then it was okay. Then, by that time, African American audiences were allowed. Speaker 1: Okay. But take, ta-, tell me the story about when you meet Tallulah-- Speaker 2: Oh, Tallulah Bankhead. Yes, she came--she'd heard about us, and we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is the first time you're in Vegas? Speaker 2: This is 1955-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the very first time. And the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] was the first integrated hotel there. It was in the black section of town. And we didn't know--that's why, again, we didn't know that we couldn't go on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] because it was an integrated hotel. There were white patrons, there were black, and Hispanics. And there was a show, and we were part of the show. So, sh- we were doing three shows a night. So, she came and saw--and on the Strip, there were only two. So she came and saw us, and she loved Gregory [Gregory Hines], with the big eyes. "Make the big eyes for Ta- Tallulah." And she'd tell, "Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], turn around. Spin, spin, for Tallulah." (Laughter) Spin, spin, and Greg, the big eyes. And she gave a party for us at the Sands Hotel [Sands Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada] and bought us things, bought us gifts. And we didn't know we weren't supposed to go on that side of town because it was Tallulah Bankhead, you did--they did what she wanted them to do. She was packing that room. So, the great story was, Pearl Bailey was a great friend of hers, who was following her in the hotel, in the, in the nightclub. She was the next artist. And she wanted to go swimming. And they said, "Well, Tallulah, Pearl Bailey cannot swim in this pool. It's a segregated hotel." So Tallulah Bankhead said, "Oh, really? Well, if she doesn't swim in the pool, then you don't have a show tonight." So, they allowed Pearl to swim in the pool. And then when Pearl got out, then they drained the water and filled it back up. And it was heartbreaking, it's heartbreaking. And that's why those performers, to me, of that generation, they took the slings and arrows for us. And m- so many of them have been forgotten by the youth; so many have been forgotten. You know, my manager [Stanley Kay] told me something really disheartening. One of the mana- he's the entertainment director for the Yankees [New York Yankees]. And the young kids coming up in the minor leagues and all that, they get this orientation. And I think it's Bobby Watson who was the manager at the time, talked to Jackie Robinson and to the black players, and they didn't know who he was. See, we're not giving, we're not giving our youth the history, we're not. Speaker 1: Well, that's why we're here (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, and that's why I'm doing this show. Speaker 1: That's why you're doing this show? Speaker 2: That's why I'm doing. When I heard HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers], I said, "I got to do it." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 597574 Speaker 1: Whose idea was it to do an all-black version of 'Guys and Dolls,' and how did you get involved? Speaker 2: Well, the version that I did of 'Guys and Dolls' was--well, the first one I did, that was the one with Debbie Allen, and Richard Roundtree, and Leslie Uggams, and myself. And Debbie played Adelaide, who was fabulous. And Leslie, of course, was great as Sarah [Sarah Brown]. Richard Roundtree was the best Sky [Sky Masterson]. He walked out there with that 'Shaft' look, and they put him in a white suit. He was fierce. And I was Nathan Detroit, this wild, crazy gambler. So but I don't know, because I did the national company. The Broadway company, they did--because by that time they had already done the African American version of 'Hello, Dolly!' So, I think it was cloning that, is what it was. And it was a big success, with Emily Yancy, Jimmy Randolph, [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume and Norma Donaldson. And Billy Wilson was the choreographer, who later did 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell]. And then when I did it, it was, it was, it toured. It went to Texas, we toured for a year. And I got my first review in a book show, and my mother [Alma Lawless Hines] kept it for all her life, in Houston [Texas]. And it was the second leg of the, the second leg of the tour. And they called me the Richard Pryor of theater. And I still have that review, I'm very proud of it. Because I don't read critics usually, but that--because Richard Pryor is Richard Pryor. And of course, I don't compare to him, but just for they said that, it made me feel good, because I had never done a book show, so I was scared. Speaker 1: And you learned the book in a day and a half. Speaker 2: I learned it in a day and a half (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you do it? Speaker 2: I went down the Riverside Drive [New York, New York], and I had the script. I had gotten two parts. I auditioned for two parts that afternoon--the part of The Wiz [in 'The Wiz'] because [HistoryMaker] Andre De Shields was leaving, and Detroit. And I picked Detroit because I thought it was the easier part (laughter). Because I'd seen Andre do The Wiz, and that part was fierce. So, Andre-- Andre De Shields, now. So I went, I said, oh, my God, here is all this dialogue, it's the book of the show, he has the book of the show because the other people sing. So, I l- I went down to Riverside Park [New York, New York] and I re- walked. And I would walk, and just go over--and by the time--I had just a week before rehearsal started, I came there off book. Richard Roundtree never forgave me for that (laughter). Every time he sees me, he said, "Maurice Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], uh-huh." Because he wasn't off book. And I just, it was, it was like the second part of my career. I'm in the third act of my--, that was the beginning of my second act of my career. Story_ID: 597575 Speaker 1: And the first act ended how, would you say (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first act ended when we, Gregory [Gregory Hines] decided he wanted to stop the kind of show business we were doing. Speaker 1: Which was? Speaker 2: Which was nightclubs. He wanted to pl- to learn to play the guitar. He was burnt out. We were burnt out, we were. I didn't feel it at the time, but, but once we stopped, I realized we were. And we had gotten as far as we were going to get. We almost got a television series on CBS, but they picked Sonny and Cher instead. We had met with Sheldon Leonard, who was the man who was behind 'I Spy' and all of that stuff with Bill Cosby. He came to Las Vegas [Nevada] to see us, to see us. And we met with him, and at that time it was before 'Good Times,' and all those shows. And it was too scary for the networks, it was. So, Sonny and Cher got it. And we, by that time, we decided to go and do different things. I wanted to stay in theater, Gregory wanted to get into rock and roll and learn the guitar, which he did. And he went to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I came back to New York [New York]. He sold guitar strings, I sold shirts for a while. You know, we paid our dues. Speaker 1: Of course. Speaker 2: We paid our dues (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Where did you sell shirts? Speaker 2: At a place called the Casual Air [ph.], which was in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] on Christopher Street, Christopher and Greenwich [Street]. Speaker 1: And what were your parents [Alma Lawless Hines and Maurice Hines, Sr.] doing at the time? Speaker 2: They were, they had moved to Las Vegas by that time. Speaker 1: What made them move to Las Vegas? Speaker 2: The weather, my mother liked it. She had, we had worked there so many times, had great friends. There's a whole life outside of the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada], and my father got a job as a maitre d' at the 'Hallelujah Hollywood!' show. And because he was so--we were so famous by that time. Like, Bob Hope and all them came there, they saw my father, he got the tips of his life. (Laughter) He was loving it. So, then they--my parents stayed there. My father's still there, still there. And my mother stayed there 'til she passed away. Story_ID: 597576 Speaker 1: So, beginning the second act. What kicks off the second act of your career, would you say (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Guys and Dolls.' Speaker 1: 'Guys and Dolls.' Speaker 2: 'Guys and Dolls,' that's what did it. And I-- Speaker 1: Had you been constantly auditioning and not getting anything, or--? Speaker 2: No, no, not really I think I took a break, I think I needed-- Speaker 1: You took a clean break? Speaker 2: I really did. I don't think, I think it was forced upon me because we did break up. But-- Speaker 1: Did it feel like a break up? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it was a break up. Oh yeah, it was a break up, yeah. Gregory [Gregory Hines] wanted to do his thing. I didn't particularly care for that because I wanted to stay together. But I respected it, you know. He was unhappy, and I didn't really realize it because I was so happy. I was happy doing it, you know. We were, we were, we were in Lake Tahoe with Bill Cosby, actually, opening up for him at Harrah's [Harrah's Lake Tahoe, Stateline, Nevada], when it, when it really came to a head. And, but in retrospect it was the best thing; it really was, it really was. I didn't, I was unhappy at first, but I thanked him because I came into my own, as my own performer and my own entertainer. We were always individual, though. See, Gregory--people tried to think-- say that we were jealous of each other, or--not at all because we were so different. Gregory has always been laidback as a performer, and I was very aggressive. That's why we worked so well together. So, if the audience wasn't for us, I went out and got them, and Gregory just laid back. And I, eventually I did everything. I conducted the or-, I rehearsed the orchestra. I did the light cues, I did the soundtrack, which I didn't know was preparing me to be a director. And my mother [Alma Lawless Hines] said, "Don't you see? The man upstairs was preparing you." Because Gregory never came to rehearsal, he did--never. No, I did everything so that he would be happy. I made sure the light hit him right. One time in the Catskill Mountains they made a mistake, and the light was not--and it's on tape. My mother--I said, "Never take the light off my brother, never." To the sound--to the (unclear) guy, the show was on, the audience was there. "No, you don't take the light off my brother, no, no, no." They had just the light on me. What was that? We were a team. And my Gr- and my mother said, "I knew then you were going to be director. You started, you directed in front of the audience. You didn't care, whether--or the spotlight guy." (Laughter) It's true. Story_ID: 597577 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You talked about a couple of people you worked with in 'Guys and Dolls,' Debbie Allen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Debbie Allen was Adelaide. Richard Roundtree-- Speaker 1: Richard Roundtree- Speaker 2: --was Sky [Sky Masterson]. And Leslie Uggams, who was a great friend of mine and we grew up together, was Sarah [Sarah Brown]. They were fabulous. It was a great production, great production; a standing ovation, I mean, wow. I just did 'Guys and Dolls' in Cambridge [Massachusetts], which also was a great production, too. Recently, I did it for years ago. Speaker 1: So, did that bring you back to Broadway, to theater? Speaker 2: It brought me back to theater. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because--then I got into, I got out of it again. I got out of it to raise my daughter. I got out of it again. And then I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When was your daughter born? Speaker 2: She was, she wasn't born; she was adopted. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We adopted her. And then I did, I moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And then I got, and the third act of my life started with 'Jelly's Last Jam' [George C. Wolfe]. Gregory [Gregory Hines] had done it on Broadway, and won a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre]. And they said the only other person who could do this part--because the artists weren't trained--like the Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] school--so, we, Gregory and I scat, we'd sing, we'd dance, we'd act, we'd do all that stuff that they don't do anymore. The kids are trying to learn it, but there's nobody to teach them like we were taught by the Sammy Davises, by the Henry LeTangs. So, they said, "We want to do the national tour," Gregory did not want to do it. I had already taken over 'Sophisticated Ladies.' Once, see, once they wrap a show around Gregory and I, we're the only ones who could do it because it's wrapped around our talents. Well, that doesn't make us the most talented, but when you wrap it around what we do, ain't too many people--and then tap, too? Can't do it. So, it was more tap, and that was 'Sophisticated Ladies,' I did that. Speaker 1: What year was 'Sophisticated Ladies'? Speaker 2: Gee, I forget. It was '81 [1981]? Seventy--'81 [1981], I think I took over. Because Gregory went to L.A. And that's another thing--we're in the 'Guinness Book of Records' ['Guinness Book of World Records'; 'Guinness World Records']. We're the only brothers that that appeared in the same role at the same time on two coasts. Gregory found that out, I didn't know that. The only other brothers that did that were the Barrymore, Lionel [Lionel Barrymore] and John [John Barrymore]. But they didn't do the same roles. But we did the same roles. So, we are the G- Gregory called me and said, "We're in the 'Guinness Book of Records.'" (Laughter) I said, "Really, what we do?" He said, "What we're doing right now." I said, "You're kidding me." And he looked it up, and it was a wonderful, fun thing, you know, it's a fun thing. A lot of stuff in our careers that were fun. Story_ID: 597578 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, he went to Hollywood? Speaker 2: Yeah, he went-- Speaker 1: And you stayed in-- Speaker 2: In theater (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) theater, in theater. Speaker 2: I loved theater, I mean I loved the immediacy of it. And I knew I was going to start to choreograph, I really did. Speaker 1: How did you know that, though? Speaker 2: Because I loved dance so much. And by that time I had gotten back with my teacher, which was Frank Hatchett. And he sort of encouraged me. He saw something in me as a choreographer. Because I'd done little choreographing things for our act. Speaker 1: And then 'A Chorus Line' came. And I'm sure you saw that, and that was huge success. Speaker 2: It was, it was. Speaker 1: And the choreography (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that didn't influence me that much. Speaker 1: It did not? Speaker 2: No, no, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. What influenced you? Who influenced you? Speaker 2: Well, my teachers, my teachers influenced me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because they're the ones that supported my dreams. Because when you're a tap dancer--because it's not as respected as the other art forms, which has always hurt me and made me angry at the same time. And I bring everybody back when they don't respect it. Because it's the one dance form that if you make a mistake, you could hear it as well as see it. There's no room for error. The others, if you turn away, you don't know a ballerina missed a turn, do you? But if you miss a tap, you're going to say, "What? Something happened there." See, so there's no room. So, when you respect it--I want you to respect it. I won't tap early in the morning. You know, then are you going to ask Baryshnikov [Mikhail Baryshnikov] to do some leaps while you're going to ask me to tap? No, these ankles hurt, this hurts. See, they forget it's metal. And you're tapping on cement floors in the television studios, and that shoots up your leg, you've got shin splints and all that. That ain't no respect. So, I make them respect it, that's all. I know Gregory [Gregory Hines] did that too, once. He wouldn't tap on this show because it was too early in the morning. Right. And you're bent over, your back, you know. No. You don't see [HistoryMaker] Savion Glover tapping early in the morning on those shows (laughter). He ain't crazy (laughter). Story_ID: 597579 Speaker 1: So you did, also in the '80s [1980s] you did the 'Bye Bye Birdie' [Michael Stewart] sequel. Speaker 2: Oh, my god, yes, I did 'Bring Back Birdie' [Michael Stewart]. And that's where I met one of my idols, Chita Rivera. When you start meeting your idols, you go crazy. I've been very lucky in my life, I've met the greatest talents in the world. Speaker 1: Now, were you choreographing then, or were you working as a talent? Speaker 2: No, I was, yeah, I kind of choreographed, because I kind of choreographed my number, even though Joe Layton was the choreographer. He loved to work, collaborate. And he knew, he also was a great influence on me. He was great. He's the one that really created Bette Midler and all that. He was a great, great choreographer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's his name again? Speaker 2: Joe Layton, great man, great. And he saw that in me too, and he nurtured it also. And he's (unclear), and he's the one that, he, he g-, he's the one that created 'No Strings' for [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll, he got her--totally. I mean he's revered, he was re- he just didn't like a lot of publicity. But he's, he's the (unclear), he's the man. But then, I wasn't, I was choreographing just little things then. I didn't really start until I did 'Uptown... It's Hot!' [Maurice Hines]. Speaker 1: And that was your breakout? Speaker 2: Oh, that was, oh, yeah. And I didn't know what I was doing. I had thirty-five dances (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how did that come about? Speaker 2: That came about through, gee, I don't even know. They wanted a show, they wanted a show at the Tropicana [Tropicana Atlantic City; Tropicana Casino and Resort Atlantic City] in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. That's how it came about. And my agent at the time said, "Well, Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] has an idea about the history of Harlem [New York, New York]." It was something that I knew. But I had thirty-five dances, I mean. Speaker 1: But you wrote it, you directed it, you cr- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I didn't write it. Speaker 1: Well, you created it. Speaker 2: I conceived it-- Speaker 1: You conceived it. Speaker 2: --directed it and choreographed it. Yes, and all the stuff that I'd learned with Gregory [Gregory Hines] with the lighting cues, I knew all that now. Speaker 1: But tell me the conception. Where did you-- Speaker 2: Well, I always wanted to do something that was, that was celebrating Harlem. That was--so, I had all that history, and I had my [paternal] grandmother [Ora Hines] to ask, and I had all these people. So, it was really the history of Harlem during Renaissance. And the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], I did a tribute to that, and all the girl groups and all of that. And up until that time it was just coming into hip-hop, so I closed with a big hip-hop number to Prince's '1999,' and it was wonderful. And I cut my teeth, and I said, "Oh, I love this, I love this. I'm good at this. I can do this," which I can. You know because I, I, I paid my dues. And I asked the great choreographers, I'm friend with George Faison [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], who did 'The Wiz.' And of course, Debbie Allen, [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson, the great Louis Johnson, who choreographed for Ailey [Alvin Ailey] and Dance Theatre of Harlem. I met Mr. Ailey, and he said, "Well, yeah, I hear--I heard about you. You've got the gift, huh?" See 'cause, the one thing, see, choreographers are really born. I didn't know that. The great ones told me there's people who make up steps, and then there's choreographers. And the great ones, when they send me--and I'm not nearly as great certainly, or close to Alvin Ailey and [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell. I mean, but they recognize me as a choreographer, not as a person who just makes up steps, especially after 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah]. They saw this ballet at the end, and they said, "Maurice has got it. He's got it." They all came and saw it--[HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder, [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade; these are giants. Speaker 1: I'm going to interview Carmen this week (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh. The history of dance. I call her the history of dance. She was with, our company, I had a called Ballet Tap USA with [HistoryMaker] Mercedes Ellington. Speaker 1: And you can--that was in the mid-'80s [1980s] that you did-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, so that toured. And that was a ballet/tap company. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison was our first star at Academy of Music in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And then we toured, and Carmen was our star. And you're around that diva--she ain't a diva for nothing, you know. They can throw that word around all they want today, but I know some real ones (laughter) believe me. And she's one of them. Tell her I said that (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: She's one of the divas. Story_ID: 597580 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about 'Eubie!' Speaker 2: Oh, 'Eubie!' That, now that brought Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I back together that br- because we had broken up, and then Gregory was not succeeding in Hollywood. And I said, "Gregory," this is before (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that before or after 'White Nights' and all of that stuff? Speaker 2: Oh, that's way before. Speaker 1: Way before, okay. Speaker 2: 'Eubie!' got him back to Hollywood. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But by that time, he couldn't get up on the horse. And I said, "Gregory, believe me, you'll score here in New York [New York]. They love me (laughter) because I can do everything." So my mother [Alma Lawless Hines] gave him, he had no money. She flew him back to New York, he auditioned for 'Last Minstrel Show' ['The Last Minstrel Show'] a show that Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett] was doing, and he got it. Because all the musicians had to, all the actors had to play. And he played drums. Gregory was a great drummer like my father [Maurice Hines, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Did he learn that from your father? Speaker 2: Yeah, no, he kind of learned that--Gregory was just, like, a borderline genius. Because he used to play with pots and pans long before my father became a drummer. He would put pots and pans on the living room floor and play. He was just one of those people, you know, he was gifted, that's it. And so, he got that show. And the show closed in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And then I was doing another show with Sarah Vaughan, a workshop. And they called me to audition for, oh that's right, he was doing 'Last Minstrel Show' when this happened. Oh, I hadn't talked about this. I--they called me to audition for the producers of a Harold Arlen show at the Manhattan Theatre Club [New York, New York]. And I went and sang 'Come Rain or Come Shine,' and I knew I killed it, I knew I killed it. I had a conga player with me. And they didn't take me for it. I said, "What? Wait a minute, now. Wait--." But she, she wanted me for 'Eubie!' And she said, she told my agent, "I want him to come and audition for it." And I got 'Eubie!' And I said, "You know the person you need to get for this is my brother." And his show was closing. I said, "Gregory, I've made it, you're going to do an audition for this. Henry LeTang is the choreographer. You're going to do it, and I want you to sing 'All the Way.'" He comes in and sings 'All the Way,' and doesn't get it. And I said, "My brother don't get what?" I said, "Why, Henry?" He said, "You know Gregory; he don't like to sing in the high keys. They need a tenor." I said, "But he is a tenor." So I called him up in Philadelphia and said, "Greg, you're coming back here, and you're singing that song in E-flat. And if you don't sing that song in E-flat, I'm going to kick your butt. You got that?" Of course, he came back and sang that song, with that gorgeous top. And they went crazy, and he got it, he got it. But he's so crazy, my brother's so crazy. And rehearsal--didn't do no- never rehearses. No, he don't give out, see. He don't--me, I'm going to fall out. I'm doing--so there's love for me. (Unclear) I don't know from rehearsal, I just fall out. Gregory don't do it. So, they were going to fire him. They were going to fire him from the show (laughter). I got, after I went through all this, I said, "You're not firing my brother." No. I told the producers, I said, "If you fire my brother, I'm leaving." And I knew they loved me. He said, "You'll leave this show if we--?" I said, "If you fire him," and Henry LeTang said the same thing. I said, "'Cause come opening night, he will get a standing ovation for his number." He was doing the so-called hot feet. They said, "Well, we don't see it now." And I said, "He's going to sing his butt off in that song with Ethel Beatty." So, they said, "Okay. But if he doesn't, we can fire him." I said, "Sure." And of course, our number that we did together got a standing ovation. I mean, and when we danced together, it's magical. Story_ID: 597581 Speaker 1: Well, how did that feel, bringing the three of you back together? You, Greg [Gregory Hines], Henry [Henry LeTang]. Speaker 2: Oh, it was fabulous, it was fabulous. And Henry did the number, and we were jumping all over the stage (unclear), and the place went wild. They went wild for us. And the show ['Eubie!'] was a huge hit. And we stayed there for three months in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the Walnut Theatre [Walnut Street Theatre]. And when we got a standing ovation, I looked at the producers like this (shakes head)--of course, it's Gregory Hines, for Christ's sake. So they said, "Well, you were right, Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.]." But then 'The Cotton Club' movie came, then Gregory went back to Hollywood. He went there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because that was enough to get him back on the radar, to get him back to Hollywood? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Now, what did you do when he went to Hollywood? Speaker 2: But he got there because Richard Pryor, when he had that thing where he burnt himself up. He was supposed to do 'History of the World' ['History of the World, Part 1'], and he burnt himself up, and then Gregory auditioned and got it. And that got him back with Mel Brooks, then he was in Hollywood. And then he did a number of movies, and then like Hollywood does, your career goes up and down, up and down. And then 'The Cotton Club' movie came. And the--and Francis Coppola [Francis Ford Coppola] said, "We've got, we've got to get a guy to play your brother that's really aggressive, and--because he gets hurt--(unclear) you get a solo number, and you hurt him." He said, "I've got the guy for you, my brother." He said, "Your brother can act?" He said, "Wait." So we went to Francis' place in The Sherry-Netherland [New York, New York], he put a tape recorder on. And he said, "Here's the scene where you discover your brother getting a solo number, and you're hurt and you're mad, and--." And we just did it. And he said, "Spectacular." (Laughter) No dialogue. And the movie, all of our dialogue is improvised. We had no script for Gregory and I. He said, "I don't need a script for you two, just go," (laughter). And, and we, he did it because he wanted to protect us. Because he didn't have script approval, and he was afraid that people would stop us. So he said, "I didn't write what they, they're brothers, there's no script. You can't, you can't take it out of the script because they're making it up." That saved us, you know. And we were wonderful in the movie, I loved doing it. And we with Henry again. And it was so funny to bring it right back to full circle. We're doing the number that we did, and Henry had my hand and Gregory's hand, and the mirror, and we were like we were seven and--seven and nine again, with Henry LeTang teaching us a step. And I cried. Gregory teared up, too. It was like full circle, and here with the man that taught us all of this. And look where we are, in a major movie with the man that gave us this. It was great, it was a great moment. We were in a little rehearsal studio all alone, and this mirror. A great moment for us. And Henry, Henry got caught up in it, too, he did. Because we were, we were his most famous, you know, and we loved him. He's still alive, ninety years old, still alive, teaching (laughter) in Las Vegas [Nevada]. Story_ID: 597582 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you like Earth, Wind and Fire back in the day? Speaker 2: Yes. The thing that was so interesting--and I had been using the song 'September' for ten years as my audition piece for my dance auditions, never knowing I would meet this great man. I just loved this music. And it was a perfect tempo for my style, which is very aggressive. Speaker 1: How does 'September' go? Remind of that. Speaker 2: (Singing), "September"-- Speaker 1: "Do you remember?"-- Speaker 2: (Making sounds). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was the tempo. My style is very aggressive and very big, and that's a very big sound. And I had seen them in concert with my best friend when they used to--with the drums turning around and all that. So, I knew they were theatrical. So, what happened was an agent at William Morris [William Morris Agency; William Morris Endeavor], they were going to do the biography of Maurice White. And Maurice happened to say to him, "You know, I want to do something new in my music. You know, I'm doing concerts, I'm writing symphonies. I want--." Because Billy Joel had just opened up with 'Movin' Out' [Twyla Tharp]. He said, "Why not Broadway? Let's think up a story." So the writer tried doing it, he couldn't come up with anything. He said, "Well, we've got a guy whose agent is down the hall from me that could, I think could do it. He's good at concept." He said, "Who is it?" He said, "Maurice Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.]." He said, "Get him out here." So they flew me out, and I'm sitting in the lobby of the Earth, Wind and Fire building (laughter) in Santa Monica [California]. And they're playing the songs, and he walks in, and there he is. I thought I was going to have a heart attack, Maurice White. And warm and wonderful, and just hugged me up. And I said, "It's an honor to meet you." And I told him the story about that, and he laughed. He just called me, he called me the other day. I owe him a call. I've got to call him back to let him know about 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah], the progress of that. But he, he said, "Tell me the story," and I told him the story. "I love it, let's go." So un-Hollywood. Because Hollywood had five thousand meetings before anybody could make a decision. Maurice White don't play that. Speaker 1: Well, why didn't you play the devil on, here in New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Well, it was too much to do. Speaker 1: Too much? Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To be, conceiving it and all that. I knew it was going to be a lot of choreography and directing, and also-- Speaker 1: And those poor kids, I mean-- Speaker 2: I worked them, didn't I work them? Speaker 1: You worked them (laughter). Speaker 2: And those kids-- Speaker 1: Those kids worked as hard as those kids worked in 'Movin' Out.' Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes, oh, yeah. See, they didn't know, they--because-- Speaker 1: But let me just ask you this. Did 'Movin' Out,' I heard 'Movin' Out' had two different casts. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you have one or two? Speaker 2: We had, we had one-- Speaker 1: You worked those kids (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) with four swings, though. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had four swings. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we--they didn't have the money to do two casts. And-- Speaker 1: But go ahead, you were going to tell me the story. Speaker 2: What story was I going to tell you? Speaker 1: You were, you were just talking about the whole concept. You (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, I gave him the concept of the show. And he knew he it was a lot of dance, which he liked. And then he came to see--I did a big class in New York. He flew in to see my choreography because he didn't know what I did. And he said, "Oh, okay." And then I got up and danced, you know, because he wanted me to be in it, of course. He said, "Maurice, you got to be, you just take the stage with these kids." I said, "No, I can't. I just wanted to show them the choreography." He said, "But when you do it, it's like--," you know, he was so, he's a great man. He's a genius, but he's, he's the kind of genius that humbles you because he's so humble. Because when I intro-, when I would introduce him to, like, all the dancers, they wouldn't stop applauding. He didn't understand why. He said, "Why do they--?" I said, "Don't you know who you are?" (Laughter) "You're Maurice White, you ain't got it yet?" Because I mean they went crazy to see him, you know. So, the experience of working with him was pure joy. And when we did the workshop version-- Speaker 1: Where did you workshop it? Speaker 2: We rehearsed at Alvin Ailey, at Ailey's school [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, New York, New York]. And then we did it at the Promenade [Promenade Theatre, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Where did you get the dancers? Speaker 2: They audi- I had six or seven dancers who showed up here in New York. These kids, I didn't know these kids. I know a lot of the dancers, but these were all new that you saw. These kids came out of--I mean I ain't seen dancing like that. In fact, Carmen [HistoryMaker Carmen De Lavallade] and Geoffrey [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Holder], when they all came to see the show, they said, "Where did you find these kids?" Because that ballet, baby, they did--and Vivian Nixon, too, you know, Debbie's [Debbie Allen] daughter, and Wynonna Smith. Those girls can dance. And in fact, Chita [Chita Rivera] came. Oh, I got to tell you that story. Story_ID: 597583 Speaker 1: Chita [Chita Rivera] came to see 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah]. And of course, she's my idol. And she sat there with her sister, Lola [Lola Rivera], and all of her brothers, Armando [Armando Rivera]. And oh, it was wonderful. Well, at intermission, she said, "Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], this is how we used to dance. This is h- what Broadway used to be. But because you're from that old school, these kids are dancing kids here." Now, she hadn't even seen the ballet yet. She just saw all the tapping and that "Fantasy" number that Vivian [Vivian Nixon] did with Michael Balderrama. She said, "You--there ain't nothing you can't do, Maurice. You got hip-hop, you got jazz, you got ballet. Your talent, I, I always knew you were talented. But this is, this is like Jerome Robbins, well just like Jerry." So then she saw the ballet, then she wanted to hit me. She said, "I'm coming--I got to hit you, I got to hit you." (Laughter) And she loved Wynonna [Wynonna Smith]. See, the "Serpentine Fire" number is her kind of number. She said, "See, that's me, that's the, that's a Chita number." So, only Chita could do that in them pumps (laughter). She loved Wynonna. But she said, she said, "Maurice, this is one of the great shows. This is one of the great moments for me as a dancer to see." And coming from her, I got choked up, because she's one of my idols. She was there, she knows what greatness is. She knows what that is. Speaker 2: Did you see her show ['Chita Rivera: the Dancer's Life,' Terrence McNally]? Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I was there, the gypsy run through. When she walked on that stage they wouldn't let her stop, they would not stop applauding, just to look at her. Speaker 2: She looks fabulous too (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just to look at her. And she's going on tour. Speaker 2: Is she? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She's taking it on the road? Speaker 1: Yes, well, she took two of my dancers. She said, "Where did you find these kids? They didn't audition for me," (laughter) she said. So, Ramon [Ramon Flowers] is doing it, who used to be with Bejart [Maurice Bejart]. I had, I had dancers from the Dance Theatre of Harlem. I had Tera-Lee [Tera-Lee Pollin], this little white girl, fierce. I called her Demi Moore, baby, she was fierce. She just did 'The Wiz' out there in California. They're do- re-doing 'The Wiz,' and she called me--and Dionne [Dionne Figgins] with Dance Theatre of Harlem. Even [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell came. Arthur Mitchell said, "Well, Maurice, you're choreographing, you're dancing." He wants to do his open house at the Fantasy [ph.] now, with Vivian and Michael Balderrama (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, what are your plans for 'Hot Feet'? Speaker 1: It's going to go on tour next year. Speaker 2: The country, or international? Speaker 1: It's going--well, it's going to go first to America, and then internationally. I don't know, they're just routing it now, so I really can't say the places. Speaker 2: And you're going to tour with it? Speaker 1: I will tour with it. I love touring. See, I like touring. I don't mind Broadway; I've done Broadway, I've been there, done that. I like taking the show to the people. So, when I did a whole year of 'Guys and Dolls,' I was out there. And I teach free jazz and hip-hop classes for the community. So, you give back, and all my dancers do that. So, we're going to teach what we do in the show to the dance community in all of the cities all over the world. Story_ID: 597584 Speaker 1: So, what do you think about other aspects of Broadway, like 'The Color Purple'? You know, and I'm just talking about this modern stuff. We still have to go back in time and cover other things in your career (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure, sure. Speaker 1: --but we'll do that next time. Speaker 2: I'm very proud of 'The Color Purple.' I think, the only thing that I think about Broadway is that wi- they're too involved with--they don't want to do new. They don't, they really don't. And I don't think it's the producers. Speaker 1: You mean new black, or new anything? Speaker 2: New anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think I mean the Twyla Tharp show ['The Times They Are A-Changin',' Twyla Tharp] just closed. Now, whether you like it or not, I think it should be nurtured. And she's trying something new. We cannot keep doing revivals. And I think what we need is new blood, on the critical end of, of, of theater. I think the critics, I think, first of all it would be nice to have the critics we have, but also have an Asian critic, have a black critic, have a Hispanic critic. Why not have four points of view, so we just don't get one? Because right now, all we have, as far as the main, the main papers, are white critics. Not that they can't enjoy African American shows, but let's have other points of view, so that we, so that--I mean, I don't read them because we were brought up in nightclubs, and in nightclubs we didn't have critics, so they didn't matter. See, so I don't read them, and I don't really go by any one person's opinion. I go by, I love--that's what I love about black people. See, black people, they don't read critics. They want to know what their girlfriend said in the beauty shop (laughter). "Girl, did you like that show? Girl, you better see that show." Or the barbershop, "Man, that's some show. You got to see that Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] show now." That's my (unclear), that's what I like. They don't know that--they don't want to know about what anybody says but their friends. And they come. Story_ID: 597585 Speaker 1: What were the challenges of mounting 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah]? Speaker 2: You know, it wasn't a challenge to me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At all? Speaker 2: No. I was so into Maurice White-- Speaker 1: Well, you had to sit through six hundred people, six hundred dancers. Speaker 2: Oh, to find the dancers? Speaker 1: You had to pick the best of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's fun. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I love, I love dancing so much. You put me in a room, I told, I told everybody. And I'm going to be frank with you, too. I love doing this, but when I'm in a room with dancers, I don't need to do interviews. I don't need to do nothing. I don't need--just put me with the dancers and some music, and I'm flying. It's like I'm flying, and I'm in heaven, I'm in heaven. It's the most amazing feeling that you get when you started choreographing and you see--and they're doing it. And they say, "Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], can I try this?" "Yeah, try that." And they soar, you know. It's--and I can still get up and do it with them. That's what's interesting, I can still get up and dance. I don't know how much longer, but these legs are still fierce, they still can get going. I still got a little six o'clock on the right side (laughter). So, when you see the great artists come see--like Ben Vereen came. Liza came, Liza Minnelli came (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was going to talk about Ben Vereen because we didn't talk about him, and he was one of the Broadway greats. Speaker 2: Yes, Ben is from the old school, too. Song and dance man, that's what we are, and we're going to try to do it. Speaker 1: And he's a good song and dance man. Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh, definitely. He knows what he does. But he came with the Sammy Davises [Sammy Davis, Jr.]. It's the audience, you know, you're grateful, you know. He came to see the show. He wanted to play the part of Victor [Victor Serpentine]. He said, "Maurice, you've got to put me in this show now." Speaker 1: Are you going to? Speaker 2: No, because the Victor we got, the (unclear), other than Keith [Keith David], he-- Speaker 1: He's going on the road? Speaker 2: He's going to go on the road. And we couldn't afford two stars' salaries. (Unclear) star salary. Ben gets star salary, now. And Liza Minnelli came, and she said--like Chita [Chita Rivera]. Chita told her, "You better see that show. You'd better see Maurice's show," and I know Liza. And she said, "Maurice," she went backstage to meet the kids. She said, "Next time I come, I want to stand in the wings because I've got to be around this." She said, "This is the old school. But because you're old school, Maurice, naturally it is." It's like she loved, they loved the idea of the dancers loving what they're doing, and that reaching the audience. So, it's not like a concert and you're just into yourself. And they're enjoying you, they're enjoying doing it, but that comes from me. Because I told them, I said, "Don't get up there and dance for the check. Because if I see you dancing for the check, you're out of here, and Equity [Actors' Equity Association] will just have to sue me." I don't want no dancer--I want you to dance for those people. Because without them, you ain't--none of this works. Speaker 1: Have you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they were young enough to get it; they weren't the old gypsies. Not that the old gypsies are bad, but the young kids, sometimes they just dance. Speaker 1: But they don't have many opportunities. Speaker 2: Exactly, and that's why I wanted, I wanted the youth, because they inspire me. And there wasn't nothing they couldn't do. See, as you saw, there's nothing I gave them they could not do. And as a choreographer, that makes you--that's, now that's a challenge. Because now, I want to please them, I want to excite them. I'm glad you made me talk about that, because that really was the challenge. Once I saw the dancers I got, I said, oh, god, I better come up with some stomping because they're going to look at me and say, okay, right, I'm going to take your little Mickey Mouse steps, (laughter). Story_ID: 597586 Speaker 1: So, they forced me. And when I was looking--and, oh, this wonderful story. When I was doing the end, the end of the ballet "Faces"--it's called "Faces" when all the dancers dance. I look over, and I see Maurice White like wiping his face. I thought, you know, he'd been there all day and he was tired. I thought he was just wiping his eyes. And he was crying. I asked his manager, I said, "Herb [Herb Powell], what's--is Maurice okay?" He said, "Yeah. He never thought that his music would inspire dancing like this." See, that's the humbleness of the man. And I, I got choked up, I did. Because I wanted him to be happy. He was, he was the one I really wanted to please. I mean, I want Maurice White to say, "It's okay." But he said more than that. He can't wait to do it again, he can't wait, you know. Speaker 2: Well, you exceeded the Joffrey Ballet. Remember when they did their little Prince thing ['Billboards'], and they did all that stuff to Prince music (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, yes. Speaker 2: And I thought that was great, until I saw 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah]. And I'm like, this is how it should be done. Speaker 1: Well, that's an honor, that's an honor. Speaker 2: This is how it should be done. Speaker 1: Because I adore Joffrey Ballet. So, that's an honor that you said that, and I'm very pleased you said it. Because I di- thought that they--but this is--that's me up there. Everyone that saw it--all the dancers, all the dancers that came--all my buddies that know me from 'Jelly's Last Jam' [George C. Wolfe], and 'Guys and Dolls,' Debbie Allen said, "Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], that's you up there. That's how you dance, you know." That's it. So, now, with me getting in it, now there'll be some tap in it. Because [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson said, "You cannot get in this show and not tap. Now, they're going to want you to tap. You can do all that other jazz stuff. But you--." I'll be part of the ballet. I'm going to do, I'm going to change the ballet, and I'm going to dance more in it with Vivian [Vivian Nixon]. Story_ID: 597587 Speaker 1: What do you--like, [HistoryMaker] Savion Glover has probably bridged the gap-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) between you guys and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the new generation of-- Speaker 2: There's no doubt about it. Speaker 1: Yeah, and-- Speaker 2: Well, he's very gifted. Speaker 1: And he reminds me a lot of Gregory [Gregory Hines]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. There's a style called hoofing, which is--but into the floor. That's Gregory, and that's what Savion is. Mine was more balletic, like [HistoryMaker] Fayard Nicholas and Teddy Hale. Speaker 1: Acrobatic, also. Speaker 2: Well, not so much acrobatic, but more-- Speaker 1: Ballet, okay. Speaker 2: --lyrical. Speaker 1: Lyrical, okay. Speaker 2: And yet I can do that-- Speaker 1: Fluid, lyrical, okay-- Speaker 2: And because Henry LeTang taught me, I can go close to the floor, too. I can do all that, but Gregory preferred from the waist down. And I told him, I said, "You know why you prefer from--because you're so beautiful on top. I got to work, baby. I had to grow this beard so I could have a chin, because without this beard I look like Jiminy Cricket. You're just too pretty, you don't have to worry about it. I do. So I'm going to do all this stuff," (laughter). Story_ID: 597588 Speaker 1: So, we're going to end. But did he ever talk about what it was like to work with Baryshnikov [Mikhail Baryshnikov]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he did. In fact, we rehearsed at Baryshnikov's studio. And Baryshnikov came to the memorial of Gregory [Gregory Hines], and he said, when he saw--he said, "You're a real choreographer, Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.]. You really--," and he loved working with Misa- Misha. He said because Misha was open to everything, and he loved dancing. The great dancers love dance. They don't categorize it. They don't say this is tap, or this ballet, or this is modern. They don't put labels. It's dance. If you love it, it's there. It comes from in here, especially the old-timers. And Misha is really an old-timer. You know, the Russian school is of that old school. You're dancing from in here, and that's what--I mean the video dancing is okay, but I don't see no--when you see them on those shows, I see only (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But didn't you choreograph a video at some point? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: You did. Speaker 2: I choreographed for [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones. Speaker 1: Yeah, you did the-- Speaker 2: But I used dances that were from Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, yeah. Speaker 2: The "I'll Be Good to You." Speaker 1: "I'll Be Good to You," yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. I had Keith McDaniels [sic. Keith McDaniel]-- Speaker 1: And it's on the 'Back on the Block' CD. Speaker 2: That's right. I had Keith McDaniels, who was out in Hollywood at that time. Wynonna [Wynonna Smith] was in it, that did Naomi [in 'Hot Feet,' Heru Ptah], she was in it; Stephanie Pope. These are divas, and they're dancing. And that was, that, that, that video was so--done so well. And I wasn't the director of it, but I helped because Ray--because the director was afraid of Ray Charles (laughter). And Ray was funny. Ray said, "Hines, what you want me to do?" I said, "I want you to teach Quincy to dance." He said, "I can do that." He was fabulous, Ray Charles was fabulous. And Quincy was late, and Ray Charles said, "Don't come in here late. You know, I leave at five." I'm going to tell you a quick story. At five o'clock, the director wanted to do more time. And I said, "I'm not going to, I've got to tell Ray it's five." So, the guy that's with Ray said, "Don't worry about. Watch, watch what happens." So the guy said, "I need to do another take. We need to change film." And the--and Ray was sitting on a chair, on the thing because that was his set. And the second hand hit five, Ray said, "That's it." Nobody told him, nobody. I--I'm getting chills thinking about it. I said, (laughter) oh, don't mess with Ray Charles. What is that? Got right up and walked off the set. He told them, they knew he stopped at five. They were trying to get in one more shot. Not for Ray Charles, unh-uh. And Quincy laughed. And I was sitting there like this, astounded. I said, "How did, did you whisper to him?" He said, "No, he's been doing this all his life." So, that's--when you saw the movie 'Ray' he just--and he was a genius. And he loved teaching Quincy to dance. At the end of it, you see him teaching him. At the end, you see him raising his leg and dancing, (laughter) and Quincy trying to keep up. Just crazy. I mean, I've had a great life. Story_ID: 597589 Speaker 1: Shawn Wilson, the interviewer, Neculai Burghelea, the videographer. Today's date is January 9, 2007. And we're continuing with Mr. Maurice Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.]. Story_ID: 597590 Speaker 1: I love the--what--you know, we do research on you, and we have you listed as Broadway star, choreographer, dancer (laughter). Speaker 2: Ah. Well, that's very nice, very nice. Speaker 1: So Broadway star. Speaker 2: Well I, you know, I really love the title choreographer, because that's really what I love doing. I mean when I'm in a room with dancers, I'm in heaven, and it's like I'm flying. And you don't know where the creativity comes from. It's a wonderful feeling. Like, when I just did 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah] I had like twenty-seven dancers, and I've got to give more steps and stuff, and entrances and exits. And it comes to you, it's a magical thing. Speaker 1: Oh, you know, one thing I want to say to you, I did see 'Dreamgirls.' Speaker 2: Oh, you did see it? Speaker 1: Yeah. And they dedicated the movie to Michael Bennett. Speaker 2: They did? Speaker 1: They did. So at the very end they, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, I wish they would have done (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and we had talked about that. Speaker 2: --Michael Bennett and Michael Peters. Speaker 1: That's what I mean. Or maybe it was-- Speaker 2: No, it's not Michael Bennett. Speaker 1: It's not Michael Pete- it's Michael Peters--. Speaker 2: No, and I heard about it, and-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --it was disappointing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because Michael Bennett adored Michael Peters, and Michael Peters was really all of that choreography. And he won a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] for the choreography along with Michael Bennett. But all of the research and stuff, that came naturally to Michael Peters because he was in that era, and he knew the Motown people. All of that stuff that he did, to be negated to not even being talked about is insulting. Speaker 1: Insulting. Speaker 2: Because I knew Michael very well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he worked very hard. And he was a great choreographer, a great one, a truly great one. Speaker 1: Okay. Just because we're talking about him, how did you meet him, Michael-- Speaker 2: I met him, I met him really through other dancers, you know, when I took class with Frank Hatchett. And he had said, he told his publicist to tell my publicist that he thought that I was the greatest all around dancer he'd ever seen. Because I could tap, and then I really could do ballet and jazz, I really could. It wasn't that I did at it, I really could do it. And I never knew he felt that way about me. And then he did interviews with all the choreographers for Essence magazine's show, television show. And he included me with Ailey [Alvin Ailey], and [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson, and Billy Wilson, and that was a great honor for me, a great honor. He's a wonderf- was a wonderful, very funny man, very funny. You know, and of course he had that great success with Michael Jackson, you know, with 'Thriller' and all those. He was great, great. So, for--but him not getting that dedication at the end was surprising, you know. So I'm, but I give it to him every chance I get. Story_ID: 597591 Speaker 1: So, moving on, we were finishing up with you standing--it was you, your brother-- Speaker 2: And Henry LeTang. Speaker 1: --at the end of 'Cotton Club' ['The Cotton Club'] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cotton Club,' and he was teaching us this tap number. Francis Coppola [Francis Ford Coppola] said, "I want them to do a number together." And he came out the blue. And Henry had us by the hands, and it was like we were little kids again. It was a wonderful feeling. And at that time I had a company called Ballet Tap USA with [HistoryMaker] Mercedes Ellington. And I remember my brother, we were driving back, our cousin was our driver. And we were driving back from the set, and he said, "Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], do you still enjoy dancing with me?" Because he knew I had this company and I was into choreography. And I said, "Gregory [Gregory Hines], it's always an honor to dance with my brother. It's beyond love, it's an honor. You know, you're one of the great tap dancers, if not the greatest I've ever seen, you know." And it's true. So it was--I--but he knew that I had moved to anoth-, going in another direction. And Francis, they wanted me to do more movies, but I didn't like sitting around. My personality is not, was not geared for movies. Francis also wanted me to do another movie that Laurence Fishburne had told me about. But I was already doing 'Harlem Suite' [Maurice Hines] in Washington [D.C.] with Jennifer Holliday. Story_ID: 597592 Speaker 1: But we're going to get to 'Harlem Suite' [Maurice Hines]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: But talk to me about [HistoryMaker] Mercedes Ellington. How did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that was, that was fabulous. We had done 'Sophisticated Ladies' together. And we decided to do this company [Ballet Tap USA] that would incorporate her style, which was ballet, although Mercedes taps too. And then my style, which is tap and ballet, and combine them both. So we were really one of, we were really the first to do that to rock music. Because I danced to 'Thriller,' and Mercedes danced to 'Flashdance,' and we would create these little scenarios. And then [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison was our first guest star, at the Academy of Music in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And then later on, [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade toured with us. So we toured for a year with that. And a dance company is very hard to keep together, but I also included them in my nightclub act, so I was able to pay them all year. Because I would do the Catskill Mountains with them, and then we'd do our season with the dance company. (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you perform in the Catskill Mountains? Speaker 2: All over. The Concord [Concord Resort Hotel, Kiamesha Lake, New York], Grossinger's [Grossinger's Catskill Resort Hotel, Liberty, New York], the Raleigh [Raleigh Hotel, South Fallsburg, New York]. Speaker 1: Are those places still around? Speaker 2: No, they--most of them are gone. The Concord is closed, Grossinger's is closed. But I hear they're trying to get gambling again, and it looks like it may go through this time. And if it does, I think the hotels will come back, because it was a wonderful time in our life. Speaker 1: Era, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a wonderful area. And it was a lot of work for a lot of people. Speaker 1: And who were some of the people that were on that circuit, the nightclub? Speaker 2: Oh, Lainie Kazan was on, Allen and Rossi [Marty Allen and Steve Rossi], Marlene Dietrich worked up there, Rudy Vallee was at the Concord, Mitzi Gaynor, Lena [Lena Horne], you know, [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt. All, we all worked--was, there were all these hotels. So you did like, maybe even two a night. And we did; they were called doubles. And you learned your craft; you learned it, you know. And you'd do one show and then you--and Jackie Mason, we used to work with him a lot up there. Billy Daniels, great artists, great. They had big fabulous hotels. I mean the Concord, the nightclub, seated three thousand people. I mean (laughter), those hotels were glamorous and the people were wonderful to us. The Raleigh Hotel was the hotel that really made us a star. George Gilbert who owned it with his family. And he did a lot of publicity for us, because he was the producer of 'Mr. Wonderful' [Joseph Stein and Will Glickman] for Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.]. And he thought Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I were like that talent. And so we were the next ones, and we worked up there maybe two or three times, well, every other weekend. Story_ID: 597593 Speaker 1: So how did you discover, though, that you were not only a dancer, but a singer? Did this come--the choreo- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, we always sang. Speaker 1: You always sang, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, most people really didn't know that. We wanted to be--because that was the generation--got to remember, Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] was the prototype. I mean, everybody wanted to do that if you could. I mean, and also John Bubbles [John W. Bubbles] sang, Harold Nicholas sang. It never occurred to us not to be triple threats, because that's what you had to do. So, when we got out here, Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I got out--everybody went so crazy over us. And we didn't understand really why, because we were just doing what we were taught to do. But we realized later on that triple threats hardly exist anymore, of that caliber. But we came up with the Sammy Davis and the John Bubbles. And Bill Robinson [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson] sang, remember. They all--Cab Calloway sang, danced. You did everything. Speaker 1: But how did you, you were telling me when we were of camera that you--after you and Gregory split, you developed a nightclub act-- Speaker 2: Yes (unclear) (simultaneous)-. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for the first time. How did that come about? Speaker 2: Well, because I wanted to work. And at that time Gregory was selling guitar strings in California, and I was selling shirts down in--oh, I'll tell you how this happened--down in, I haven't talked about this in a while--down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]. A buddy of mine took me to, to Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York] to see Leontyne Price. He was in opera, he studied with Dorothy Maynor, and we went backstage. And you stand in line afterwards, and she signs graciously and talks to everybody after doing this fabulous performance. So, I didn't get on line. He did, because he was an opera singer. And she saw me in the back in the dark. And she said, "Is that Maurice Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] over there?" I got so scared. This is Leontyne Price, oh my god. She said, "Come over here." And I went over. I said, "Ms. Price, how do you know me?" She said, "I went to see you and your brother in Paris [France]. I was going to be at the Paris Opera [Palais Garnier, Paris, France], and you and your brother and your father [Maurice Hines, Sr.] were at the Olympia [L'Olympia Bruno Coquatrix, Paris, France]. And I saw your name, and I went in to see you." And I said, "Well, why didn't you come backstage?" She said, "Oh, I didn't want to bother you." I said, "You're Leontyne Price." (Laughter) "You're Leontyne Price." So, she said, "What are you doing?" She knew we had broken up the act [Hines, Hines and Dad]. And I said, "Well, I'm working, I'm not in the business anymore. I'm working--down selling shirts in the Village." She said, "Oh, no, you're not. You get back in this business. You're too talented. You get back in this business." And the minute she said it--when it's coming from Leontyne Price, you get back in the business. And I had a chance to thank her at a big benefit that I did for a Catholic organization, and they were honoring her. And I told that story. I was doing 'Sophisticated Ladies.' I was on Broadway because of her, and I told her. She was there in that turban looking fabulous, fabulous. And I hadn't told that story in a long time. And I got a chance to thank her, because it was because of her that I did it all again, and it all came back. Story_ID: 597594 Speaker 1: And what was the first act that you, who helped you put it all back together? Speaker 2: I put it--myself. I found a guitarist and a conga player, and I started working at, there was a club called The Bush's [ph.], right off seventy-f- 73rd Street in Central Park [New York, New York]. They, they allowed you to create acts. Then I did the club The Fallen Angel [ph.], and I slowly put an act together. And it was fun, you know, I didn't think of it as work. I was coming into my own as my own performer, and one show I did at Reno Sweeney's [New York, New York], which was sort of like an open mic night. And I forgot the words to a Stevie Wonder song, and I started talking. And I was really hysterically funny, and I didn't even know I had that. And I said, "Gee, I can do a lot of different--." And it evolved, it evolved. Speaker 1: Well, you said you didn't really notice, because your uncle came. Speaker 2: Well, my Uncle Sid [Sidney Lawless] was in the audience, but that didn't make me nervous. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it was just being on stage alone. I'd never been on stage alone at that point. It had always been me and Gregory [Gregory Hines], and then me and Gregory and my father [Maurice Hines, Sr.]. So I never, it just, I just, I knew the lyrics, but I was just shaken. Speaker 1: Did you miss them? Was it empty without them? Speaker 2: I don't--no, the word wasn't empty. It was just that it was new, it was new. That's a great question, I've never thought of it like that. I never felt empty, but I felt new. And, and, because Gregory was the comedian, and I was the straight man. So, it never occurred to me that I could be funny. But I said something and they laughed, and I liked it. So that--then I became, then I got into my own as a performer. And then went to the Catskill Mountains. Didn't do well up there. That was too big a stage for me. I wasn't ready to encompass the whole stage. My personality (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's different about the small stage versus the bigger one? Speaker 2: Well, now I could do it, but-- Speaker 1: I mean, but back then. Speaker 2: My personality wasn't big enough; it had nothing to do with the talent. I could dance and I could sing, I knew I could do that. But my personality wasn't big enough because I'd always been the straight man. And Gregory's, and we complemented each other. Now, when I sang I was very aggressive. My brother was laid back, and I was aggressive. Gregory waited for the audience, I went in and grabbed them. So, that's why we were so good together. And then later on, my personality evolved from my singing, so I'm very aggressive when I talk. I, I, must have said to myself, I lost the audience there when I was talking to them. I had nothing to say. But when I sing, I can get them. So, why don't I just take that part of my personality and put it when I talk? So, it was sort of just, you know, it's in the doing. Speaker 1: And who were some of the other people that were performing at the Reiner [ph.], that club you-- Speaker 2: Oh, Reno Sweeney's. Speaker 1: Reno Sweeney's? Speaker 2: Everybody. I think Bette Midler did. There was a wonderful singer, Alaina Reed [Alaina Reed Hall]. Jane Oliver was a wonderful singer. They all--it was a hot club, it was a hot club. It was one of those little boutique cabarets, when the cabarets were all over the place. And everybody--Reno Sweeney's, Reno Sweeney's--by the time I worked in it, it was on its way out, like most clubs, you know, when you get hot and then you get cold, and you move on. Speaker 1: Does that world exist anymore, like the cabaret (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: They try to. Speaker 1: They try to. Speaker 2: You know, certainly Bobby Short at the Cafe Carlyle [New York, New York]. Now, there's more rooms, there are more rooms. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: But I've seen [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt at the Carlyle. Speaker 2: Yes, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, she does really good-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she does good stuff there. But I--and Rita Moreno's going in there now. I think with the success of the comedy clubs because that opened up the smaller clubs again. And then they would use singers sometimes. Birdland [New York, New York] does that, and that's more in the jazz room and like that. So it's not, certainly not what it was. But there are rooms out there that we can work. Story_ID: 597595 Speaker 1: So, let's get back to your career. 'Sophisticated Ladies'-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the grand tour? Speaker 2: Yeah, no, what I did, Gregory [Gregory Hines] was going to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And one of the problems with mounting the show around Gregory and I is that there are very few people who can do what we do. So, if you wrap a show around either one of us, the only other one who can play it is the other brother. So, when Gregory did 'Sophisticated Ladies,' he was going. And they said would I do it, and I said sure. And I did, and it was a great success. In fact, it lasted more than the L.A. company, which Gregory told them. He said, "When Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] gets in here, the tempos will be picked up." (Laughter) He told Merce Ellington [HistoryMaker Mercedes Ellington], and Duke Ellington, goes, he said I like up-tempo, which was good for the show. Because it had been gone, it had been on for I think seven months, so my energy came in, and it juiced it. And I don't like short tem-, you know, tempos that are slow. And he said, "Maurice--as the star goes, so does the show." Carol Channing taught Gregory and I that, "As the star goes, so does the show." So, if the star comes out and says, "Now I need that tempo right up for my style--," plus I choreograph my own tap, which we both do. And so, it was a big success for me. Big (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What--big--so, go ahead. It was a big success? Speaker 2: It was a big success for me. And then and singing Duke Ellington's music was a revelation. I mean I loved it all my life. But when you sing it--most people say that after you do a show for a long time, you get tired, or you get--you get you know, how do I keep it fresh? That's the word, how do I keep it fresh? Duke Ellington's music keeps you fresh, it really does. I'm not even, I'm lying to you. Some of them days, you know, if I have a cold or something, and all of a sudden you hear the intro, somehow you feel like you're singing for the first time. That's greatness. That's why Duke Ellington--they--you can't say Duke Ellington's great enough. When you sing his music, you really know why he's great. Story_ID: 597596 Speaker 1: So, what is the process for--you said you created your own, your own tap. What is the process for choreographing tap? Speaker 2: You know, you choreograph from your style. Since my style is closer to [HistoryMaker] Fayard Nicholas, it was involved with more l- b- I don't want to say line, because every dance has line--more balletic or modern, or using the upper body more. I think that's why Mercedes [HistoryMaker Mercedes Ellington] and I work so well together, because she's from the ballet world, and I studied ballet and jazz. And so I brought that into it, rather than just--not just--but hoofing is right to the floor, the way Gregory [Gregory Hines] did it, and [HistoryMaker] Savion Glover. Where, mine was more--I could do that. Speaker 1: Like Fred Astaire? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Like Fayard Nicholas. Speaker 1: Like Fayard Nicholas. Speaker 2: Fayard Nicholas of the Nicholas brothers--that was my idol, no one come to--no one can top him, no one can do anything. Fred Astaire was a genius in concept, but Fayard Nicholas was the greatest as I've ever seen. There's nobody greater than Fayard Nicholas, nobody, nobody. He's just special. He never got his due like I sh- I thought he should. He should have gotten his due, and he never really did, as being considered the greatest that there ever was because he could do close floor work. He taught his brother all of that; he taught Harold [Harold Nicholas]. All of that was Fayard. Harold t- Harold said it on an interview show. I didn't know that. He said, "I didn't--I didn't know how to dance. My brother came and taught me all this stuff. Everything you saw us do, Fayard did all that." He did ronds de jambes, and didn't know they were ronds de jambes, which is a ballet term. He didn't know that. That's the man, the man upstairs, got the plan (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 597597 Speaker 1: So, how did you come about--and do you remember the year of 'Uptown... It's Hot!' [Maurice Hines]? And did you totally conceive that on your own (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And where did that conception come from? Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to do a show to celebrate African American entertainment history, and--by using a lot of different clubs and venues. So, it was started at the Cotton Club [New York, New York], and then it went to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]. And then it went--it was like that, and the Apollo--the heyday of the Apollo, with all the big rock groups and the rock acts and the great singers and all that. So, I d- I put all that together, and it was my very first thing. I had thirty, thirty-five dancers. I don't know how I did that. I look back on that, and how I didn't have a nervous breakdown. I was so excited about doing it, and I, I put it all together for the Tropicana hotel [Tropicana Atlantic City; Tropicana Casino and Resort Atlantic City] in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. And they--it was going to be only four weeks, you know, but it ran seventeen weeks. And they brought to Broadway, and I came with it. And that's when I got my Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] nomination, for that show. And it was, it was just, I look back on it now. And a lot of people want to say when they look back on their old work, you know, how awful it was, and, "I didn't know anything." But it wasn't awful, it wasn't awful, it was good. And I, and I, and I had a talent which I didn't know I had. Speaker 1: And you consider that talent to be? Speaker 2: Choreography. Speaker 1: Choreography. Speaker 2: No doubt about it. I loved it, I loved being with dancers; I love being with dancers. To me, they're the greatest. They're the unsung heroes of musical theater. Speaker 1: So that would have been in the mid-'80s [1980s] when you got the Tony (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that would have been--yeah, yeah, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Like '86 [1986] is when you got the Tony nomination? Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's when it would be. Because I did 'Sophisticated Ladies,' and I did 'Eubie!' before that, and then 'Sophisticated Ladies.' Speaker 1: Now, do you consider this to be the first work of your own that you conceived in-- Speaker 2: Was it's 'Uptown... It's Hot!.' Speaker 1: --was 'Uptown.' Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah, that was the very first work of mine, yes. And then out of that, then I got into nightclubs. And then my personality was big, because I was confident, you know, I was Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.]. I was-- Speaker 1: What did Gregory [Gregory Hines] say about 'Uptown... It's Hot!'? Speaker 2: Oh, he loved it. Speaker 1: What did, I mean what was the response from the family? Because this is the first time that you're out on your own as a choreographer. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I think they were sort of surprised, because it was so big. It was so big. I mean, we were in this big theater at the Tropicana in Atlantic City, and it's huge. And I wasn't in it in Atlantic City, so I was the director. And I knew my lighting design, and I knew my costumes, and I knew how to--. And my mother [Alma Lawless Hines] said that I learned all that because my brother never liked to rehearse. He never did any of that, I did all of that for him. And who knew that that was going to be my training for being a director and telling people what to do? And I loved it, so they were thrilled for me. They were thrilled. Speaker 1: Were you surprised by the Tony nomination? Speaker 2: Yes, I was, looking back on it now. Speaker 1: What were the other shows that were nominated that year? Do you know, do you remember? Speaker 2: 'Song and Dance,' I remember. Because Bernadette Peters, of whom I'm a fan, was in that. And Peter Martins was the choreographer of that, and he was nominated. He was sitting next to me in the aisle. And it was a great feeling, you know, when your peers nominate you. It's a great feeling. Story_ID: 597598 Speaker 1: Do you ha-, how do you feel about Broadway as far as race, and is it--I mean, is it I mean is it the Great White Way? I mean-- Speaker 2: Yes, for all intents and purposes it is. You know, every now and then we'll get something. But I think it's sort of like, how do I explain it? I was just thinking about this the other day. I was thinking about it in terms of criticism of Broadway. I'll use it as an example. I just saw a show where they had all the critics, as many as they could get, you know. Not The New York Times or the Post [New York Post], but the critics around. And it was all white critics. And I think it would be very, a very positive thing if the newspapers had different voices for the shows, so we see a voice from an African American critic on a major paper, on The New York Times. Or an Asian critic, or a Hispanic critic, so that it's not the same, all coming from one viewpoint. And they're so powerful that they can close a show. I mean they closed--there's no doubt about it, the main critics closed 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah]. And they also just closed Twyla Tharp, you know, which had nothing to do with race. But I think racism, to me, in the theater--to think that it doesn't exist is living in a bubble. It exists in our world, and the theater is not separate from our world. So, why doesn't it exist? You just have to keep fighting for it in a positive way, which I do. I think, for me, now that 'Hot Feet' since it's going on tour, I'm going in another direction. I think Tyler Perry has opened up a whole world, and a template for us to use. And I think he, in his way, is a genius in that. And he's going even further in the television world, which I know about, I just heard about. And I think he's somebody to look up to, because he did it his way, and he's encouraged me. And that's what I'm doing with this tour of 'Hot Feet' that's going to go out (unclear). Speaker 1: Nice. And he comes from a very meager-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean, I know him from the old days in Atlanta [Georgia] when he, you know, couldn't give his tickets away-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for people to come to his shows. Speaker 2: But perseverance. Speaker 1: But he persevered. Speaker 2: Yeah. But that's what we know as a people, we couldn't have accomplished what we did. So, I have no problem with persevering-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --at all. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And, but now I, I'm, I'm seeing, you know, you learn from everybody. Speaker 1: So let me ask you this. Do you think that the white critics had something to do with the closing of 'Hot Feet'? Speaker 2: I think so. I think not so much racism being involved. But I think because it's so new, and we were using hip-hop in that. And I think they really want to see what they've seen before. Speaker 1: Which is (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that also--which is very musical comedy, and creative staging. I think Twyla got through with Billy Joel's show ['Movin' Out'] barely. Speaker 1: Because? Speaker 2: Barely. Speaker 1: Barely, okay. Speaker 2: But her next show, 'The Times They Are A-Changin' [Twyla Tharp] should have been encouraged also. You know, we have to have new things in the theater. They say they want them, but they don't. I think this new show, 'Spring Awakening' [Steven Sater] is wonderful, and that [HistoryMaker] Bill T. Jones, who's a great choreographer, is doing different things (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I didn't Bill T. Jones did that. Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But his, the choreography that I'm doing is very, very urban. Speaker 1: I know yours, because I've seen it. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's very urban based, even though the ballet at the end is very jazz and very balletic, because I had Vivian Nixon and Wynonna Smith, and those other great dancers. And I wanted to go in that direction. But basically, since I'm a (unclear) and all that, it's very urban. And I think that's difficult for the critics that we have today to get behind that. Speaker 1: Because they don't see it as classical? Speaker 2: They don't see it as musical theater, or something that they want to embrace. They really don't. Choreography, like in 'Color Purple' ['The Color Purple'] that's more what they're known for, that's what they're used to, even though that has an urban face, even though there's an African number in it. But there's been African choreography on before. 'Raisin' [Charlotte Zaltzberg and Robert Nemiroff] had African choreography, with [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle. So, that's okay. But this, to bring this in was difficult. I knew it would be, I knew it would be difficult. You know, I didn't go into it (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the challenge would be to have them accept this genre, this form, as the-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't really care whether they accepted it or not. Speaker 1: Or not, okay. Speaker 2: You know, there were a lot of reasons why 'Hot Feet' closed. And we were in too large a theater. We were averaging 1200 to 1300 people a show. The house manager told me that. So I knew had we been in a smaller theater-- Speaker 1: That's a big house. Speaker 2: It's 1800 seats. So, it was just too big. But we were, we were rocking and rolling there for a while. Speaker 1: Right, yeah, because '42nd Street' [Mark Bramble and Michael Stewart] was at same place. Speaker 2: Right. And I heard they never really made their money back, and they were there for almost two years. It's just too big. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's huge. Speaker 2: You know, it's not made for, for musicals, I guess, unless you get a show--'The Grinch' ['Dr. Seuss' How the Grinch Stole Christmas! The Musical,' Timothy Mason] is doing well, and I'm sure 'Pirate Queen' ['The Pirate Queen']. You wish everybody to do well, you know because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'The Grinch' is doing well? Speaker 2: It did well for-- Speaker 1: It did? Speaker 2: Yes, it did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It did very well, yeah. The kids want to come see it, that's it. Marketing is important, too, you know. Speaker 1: So-- Story_ID: 597599 Speaker 1: How do you think we will get more, like, our kids to the theater? How can you get more of our kids to the theater (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--that's an interesting point. Because the people that I'm talking to, talked to about producing 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah] again are going through the educational systems because I'm all about that. I'm about getting new audiences in. And you can't do it by doing it the same old way. So, what we do now through the education systems of every theater that we work in, we teach c- free classes for them--free hip-hop classes, free theater classes, free--we, we may even do free playwriting classes to give to the community, so they know that there's, there's something more than just hip-hop or video. And you can include that, which this show does. And it's music that they understand because it's Earth, Wind and Fire. So even if they're too young to know, their parents play Earth, Wind and Fire. And I have young dancers in the show, something that they can relate to. And it's not just--I have white dancers, and Hispanic dancers, and Greek dancers, and black dancers. So, my shows are for the world. That's, I've always done that with all my shows. So, it's very g- and it will be very interesting to go that route, to get the new audiences in. Because if you don't start getting the new audiences in, what you've got--every audience is going to dissipate. You know, so that's my next goal to do. Story_ID: 597600 Speaker 1: So, moving back to your, after the Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] nomination-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --best actor in a musical-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what does that bring about? I mean that's your, sort of the gold seal, right? Speaker 2: No, no, I--no. Speaker 1: No, it doesn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not the gold seal for African American artists. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean you have to wait for that role, or create it yourself. You know, you have to create it yourself more than anything, and I like doing that. I wasn't going to wait for another role, because they don't, especially in those days, they didn't--right, that show, I created myself. Nobody gave me that role. You know, they didn't say, "Oh, Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.]," the Broadway producer didn't say, "We need to have Maurice Hines on stage." It wasn't happening (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Does it, you know, so, it doesn't become any easier to get your work-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: --produced-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --after a Tony nomination? Speaker 2: I always have to go outside of the Broadway clique of producers, which I've always done. And that's why it takes longer, because that's how you get there, you know. And that's because it's just too difficult. Otherwise, if it wasn't difficult, a great star like Jennifer Holliday would have a Broad- Broadway show every year. Because she's one of the few African American artists that I know of that is a definite draw for Broadway. And that's all audiences want to see Jennifer Holliday sing, all of them, because it's a force of nature. There's nothing--she's a force of nature. There's nobody like that. There will never be nobody like that. Speaker 1: And you worked with her on-- Speaker 2: Yes, she did my show, 'Harlem Suite' [Maurice Hines]. Speaker 1: 'Harlem Suite,' when did 'Harlem Suite' come about? Was that before or after-- Speaker 2: That was after 'Uptown... It's Hot!' [Maurice Hines]. Speaker 1: 'Uptown... It's Hot!'? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then right after 'Uptown... It's Hot!,' was it the Louis Armstrong piece? Speaker 2: Yes, I did 'Satchmo' ['Satchmo: America's Musical Legend,' Jerry Bilik], I did. And that again, that was outside of Broadway. That was Kenneth Feld, who does the Barnum and Bailey Circus [Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey Circus]. And he saw my work, and wanted me to do it. So I was the choreographer of this great, big show that was Louis Armstrong's life, with Byron Stripling playing Louis Armstrong and Jerry Bilik directing, who later acquiesced to Joe Layton who came in and who had done--I'd done 'Bring Back Birdie' [Michael Stewart] on Broadway with Chita Rivera, one of the greatest Broadway dancers I've ever seen. So, I did that. And so, to work with Jennifer, she--to work with her--she, sort of like her voice is, it's like je- it's like god really touched her. Speaker 1: Had she, had she done 'Dreamgirls' before? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you picked her up. You worked with her after-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And did she win the Tony for 'Dreamgirls'? Speaker 2: Yes, she sure did. Speaker 1: So, she was a Tony-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --winner when she got to (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But she draws. People want to hear that voice. We packed, we packed the (unclear). And then I helped, you know, I had a name too. So we packed them-- Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and the show was smoking. Story_ID: 597601 Speaker 1: We were just gonna, I want to just have you think about it, the first black person you saw on Broadway. Speaker 2: The first black person I ever saw on Broadway was my brother when we did 'The Girl in Pink Tights' [Jerome Chodorov and Joseph Fields] together. I looked over at him and we were doing the soft shoe, and we were there together. That was the first person I saw on Broadway really. Because we, it was after that, that I saw people. And then we saw, I saw Lena [Lena Horne] in 'Jamaica' [E.Y. Harburg and Fred Saidy]. And I'm trying to think. We saw people at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], that's where they went. We thought downtown was 125th Street. Because we lived on 150th Street, we didn't know there was another downtown. The first person I ever saw--went to the movies to see--was when we got all dressed up to go downtown. And Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I thought we were going on 125th Street again. Said, no, we're going down to the 50s. And we said, "Well, what's down there?" So, he [Hines' father, Maurice Hines, Sr.] said, "We're going to go to the Rivoli Theatre [New York, New York]." And we've got on a suit and tie and everything, to see 'Carmen Jones' with Dorothy Dandridge, and [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, and Olga James, great singer. And of course, Alvin Ailey and Carmen [HistoryMaker Carmen De Lavallade] were in there, and Pearl Bailey. And it was wonderful. And we went down there, and we saw that. And we said, we saw these lights and, gee, it was a whole new world for us, you know. Gregory and I, we were little. And then we used to study down there by Henry LeTang's studio at 41st Street. But we would just take the train and study and go home; we didn't walk around down there. And so that was really a big deal to see that. Speaker 1: What do you think was the turn-around for Broadway, in sort of a massive number of black (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm trying to think which came first. I know--all shows were-- Speaker 1: 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell]-- Speaker 2: 'The Wiz,' I always say 'cause I second-acted that. There was 'The Wiz,' and there was 'Bubbling Brown Sugar.' Then there was 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.]. Then there was 'Eubie!' we did that, Gregory and I did that show. And there were a lot of shows, there was a lot of shows at that time. 'Raisin' [Charlotte Zaltzberg and Robert Nemiroff], of course, the musical version of 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry]. [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle did that. 'Purlie,' I mean we were rocking and rolling, you know we were. Then all the English shows came, and then we sort of disappeared. And that's how, and it's still to this day. I mean we have, you could say 'The Lion King,' but okay, fine. But really, 'The Color Purple' is really the only one we have. Speaker 1: But I will say about, about 'The Lion King,' you know, I had no idea what to expect. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: I clearly expected it to be like a kid's show. Speaker 2: Oh, no-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --it's fabulous. Speaker 1: I was like surprised at the number of black people, you know. I'm like, but it makes sense. It takes place in Africa. Speaker 2: Yes--that's right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of course, there are--but yeah, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, no, it was a fabulous show. Speaker 1: It was fabulous. Speaker 2: Fabulous. And the kids were wonderful. Story_ID: 597602 Speaker 1: So, talk to me a little bit about working with Jennifer Holliday [in 'Dreamgirls']. Speaker 2: Wonderful. You know, she was, we all have difficult times. And she was going through a difficult time personally. And I think that--which she's talked about it herself on 'The Rosie O'Donnell Show' when she was on, and I think that was part of it. And she just couldn't continue. We had great success in Washington [D.C.], fantastic reviews, fantastic business. And we were going to Atlanta [Georgia], and she just couldn't travel anymore, she just couldn't do it. And so, Stephanie Mills came in and took her place, and we went to Atlanta. And then when Stephanie couldn't do it--we were going to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and then [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore. Speaker 1: Had you worked with Stephanie before? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Had you seen her in 'The Wiz'? Speaker 2: Of course. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. She, and Stephanie's fabulous. Stephanie is very much like me. We're very no-nonsense. It ain't about hanging out. You don't have to wine and dine her. It's like, if she wants to do it, this what you want me to do, rehearsal? Costumes? Time for the show. It ain't about, it ain't about all that, you know, stroking her and saying you're fabulous. She knows she can sing. That's why I like her, I love Stephanie. "I can sing, I know I can sing. Give me some steps." I give her some steps, she can do--, "Are you comfortable with that?" "Fine, we can do that." She was fabulous. And Melba, too. Well, Melba, you know, these are Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] winners. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, Melba has a Tony for 'Purlie,' so she's fine, Melba's fine. They're great ladies, all three of them, great ladies. And it was an honor for me to work with each one of them, each one of them. Story_ID: 597603 Speaker 1: How did you get to do international choreography? Was 'Havana Nights' the first opportunity to do something abroad (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was. Speaker 1: How did that come about? Speaker 2: An agent from Columbia Artists [Columbia Artists Management, Inc.], Algris Graffini [ph.], was representing this lady, Nicole Durr, about bringing a show from Cuba to America. The agent went and saw it and said that it really needs polishing, and it needs a look that an American choreographer can give it--not that he's going to re-choreograph it, but you need a director. So, they came to Las Vegas [Nevada] to see me. I was then the choreographer and director of the Radio City Music Hall show ['The Great Radio City Spectacular'] at the Flamingo [Flamingo Hilton; Flamingo Las Vegas Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada], and I was also starring in it. So, she came. And we had drinks afterwards, and she said, "Okay, when you're finished with this, I'll fly you to Cuba." So, I went to Cuba. And it was, it was unbelievable. Those dancers were unbelievable. Speaker 1: How did you deal with the language? Did you speak Spanish? Speaker 2: No, but a lot of them speak English. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And for those who didn't there was an interpret- and interpreter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said the dancers were fabulous. Speaker 2: Oh, my god, they were fabulous. There was thirty of them, and fifteen musicians. They came every day for me, and they were never late once. And a lot of them lived outside of Havana [Cuba] and had to--there's no, you know, you hitchhike. They were there for eight o'clock in the morning for ballet class, and I got them at 10:30. And never late once, all thirty-five dancers and all fifteen musicians, never late once. And, and, danced. In fact, when they danced for me--to show me the show, what I needed to work on--I get up on stage and I see all these spots on the stage which I didn't see before. And of course, everything is crumbling in Havana. And there were nails coming up out of the--they were dancing on nails, these kids for me. I got so emotional. I would have never allowed it. They wouldn't--they wanted me to see what they could do. And they were bloody, their feet were bloody. So I came back, and no shoes. And I sent back five thousand dollars' worth of Capezio [Capezio Ballet Makers, Inc.] dancewear for them. I'll never forget that. And that's why the dancers here, if I hear any kind of complaining from them, I always tell that story. You have nothing to complain about. (Laughter) What do you have to complain about? You got shoes and tights and everything, and these kids had nothing. And they were wonderful. And they later went on and defected, and they were in Las Vegas, they did. Yeah, in fact I spoke to Nicole on the phone. And I think they're moving to another hotel now, you know, to work. But they're wonderful kids. It was a great experience for me, three weeks. I love Cuba. Speaker 1: Have you been since? Speaker 2: No, I haven't been since. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: I'd love to go back. Speaker 1: It's supposed to be remarkable. Speaker 2: Oh, it's wo- it's fabulous. Even with the buildings crumbling like it is, it's so majestic. And the people are wonderful, they're wonderful. I love just walking around, you know, just walk around. Speaker 1: What about 'The Red Shoes'? You did that in Dominican Republic? Speaker 2: Well, no, that one, that I was going to do. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I went there and also auditioned dancers. Great dancers there, but they needed more training in the s- in my style. And Frank Hatchett, one of his teachers was coming there. And I said, "Really?" And they were, they hadn't signed up yet, Frank told me. And I told them, "You all take those classes." And they were (unclear) because they wanted them to do the show. But then their economy evaporated, and so they were never able to bring me back over to do the show. So, but I loved Dominican Republic. Oh, I loved it, I loved it. Story_ID: 597604 Speaker 1: But before we go on, you talked about doing the Radio City Music Hall-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, did we talk about this before? You're the first African American-- Speaker 2: I'm the first, and still the first (laughter). Speaker 1: Still, to this day? Speaker 2: Well, they wou- were doing something with Graciela Daniele, which never came off, a big Brazilian show. And Graciela is a genius choreographer, someone I really look up to. But I was the first in, in, I think, sixty-seven years. Speaker 1: They didn't have any black Rockettes, I'm sure at the time? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, not then. Speaker 1: Did they even--did, did it, did it mean anything to you that they didn't? Speaker 2: Well, of course, and I spoke up about it. I'm very political that way, and I felt these--because I watched them come. I was one of the judges for the girls to come and audition. And I watched so many African American girls come, and know in my heart, it broke my heart, because I knew they weren't going to be chosen. Speaker 1: How did you know? Speaker 2: Because they weren't hiring any black girls. They, there were no African American Rockettes. So I knew they weren't hiring just by f- seeing them. Speaker 1: But bringing you on, you would assume that they would at least-- Speaker 2: You would, wouldn't you? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Laughter) You would. But I soon learned I was there because I was a good choreographer, and I could judge dancers, you know. But I got there because of Joe Layton. Joe Layton was my mentor, and I done 'Bring Back Birdie' [Michael Stewart] with him. And he called me, because he was not well. And he said, "Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], I've got this Radio City Music Hall spectacular ['The Great Radio City Spectacular'] touring, and I need to get somebody to do a big tap number for them, and I don't tap well enough. So, could you recommend somebody?" I said, "I'll do it for you, Joe. Don't worry about paying me, you're Joe Layton, you--I love you." And I went there and I did such a good job they said, "Well, will you star in the show also?" I said yes, I would. And then he said, "Maurice can choreograph this, because he choreographed this number. Why not give him another number?" And they did, and that's how it happened. And I did it for, oh, three or four years. Speaker 1: During that time, ever did they hire any black dancers? Speaker 2: Yes, they did, in Las Vegas [Nevada], in Las Vegas. Not the big one here, but in Las Vegas they did, they sure did. That was near the end of my time there, though. And she was wonderful, she was wonderful. Speaker 1: She, so it was only one? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was one, it was one. Speaker 1: And how does, how, I mean, I've never seen--how does it, how is it today? Do they have any black (unclear) today? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Several, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, several. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: Dark-skinned or light-skinned (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, okay, you can tell that they're black? Speaker 2: Oh, definitely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Definitely, yes. So they, I think they began it because I did speak up about it. And it seemed obvious. And when they needed to replace the girls in Las Vegas, there weren't that many girls, I mean, like you'd have in New York [New York], I mean, that wanted to audition for the Rockettes. The Rockettes are difficult--that's hard choreography, to be that precise. Those girls are fabulous. And they're great dancers, they're great dancers. They can do everything. Speaker 1: Tap-- Speaker 2: They can do everything (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) jazz, ballet? Speaker 2: That's right, they can do everything. And to be that precise every show is quite amazing. We were doing two, two shows a night. Speaker 1: Any desire to ever do that again here in New York at--the Christmas (unclear)? Speaker 2: I'd love to get my hands on them now because I think they're more conducive--they need to be, they need to do updated stuff, too. I mean they do--what they do is fantastic, but they need to do some choreography. Because I'd done a thing on 'Luck Be a Lady,' Frank Sinatra's song, which is very much jazz, and very precise. But it was very, very new for them. And it scored big. Those girls, they were sexy and they were hot, they--because if you do this (gesture), you can do this and be precise. But you can also do this, too (gesture). And the girls were doing this now (gesture). They were--oh, it was hot, it was hot. And I loved working with them because they were, they wanted it, they wanted it. You know, they could do everything. But, "Can we, why can't we do this, why can't we--?" I had them snapping. (Laughter) They were snapping precise, a precise snap, baby. They were fierce (laughter). Story_ID: 597605 Speaker 1: So what do you think about, where were you--and I'm just thinking. This show just came to me, I don't have it in my notes. But remember the, the--'Bring in the Noise, Bring in the Funk' ['Bring in 'da Noise, Bring in 'da Funk,' Reg E. Gaines]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --with--the George Wolfe [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And it sort of traveled through (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't say George Wolfe. I think he's a wonderful director, and I think that he was able to--but [HistoryMaker] Savion Glover, I mean without him, there is no 'Noise, Funk.' I mean, you can get another director, you could. George did a great job, George Wolfe on that. But you can get another director. But you can't get another Savion, you just can't. I mean there are dancers who can dance like that, but with his charisma and all that he represents, and that whole Savion thing he brings is special. You can't find another one like that. Speaker 1: 'Jelly's Last Jam' [George C. Wolfe]. Or, what was it, was it-- Speaker 2: That was 'Jelly's Last--' with Gregory [Gregory Hines]. Yeah, Gregory did it with Savion. I did it with Savion on the road, I did the national company (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you did? Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Again, it's hard to find--he wrapped that show around Gregory, and the only one who could do it is me. So, they had to come to me, and they did. Speaker 1: So, well, that was in '89 [1989] maybe? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. It was in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: In the '90s [1990s], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And Gregory, of course, won the Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] for it, and deservedly so. He was spectacular in it. And then they called me and I did the national company, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, who conceived that show? Speaker 2: I really don't know, to be frank with you. I think George did, George's writing. I read the script before I did it, and it was a great script; it was a great script. And I think it was a combination of the--I should know the songwriter's name [Susan Birkenhead] and I apologize for that. But it was a combination of George--I think it was mostly George's vision on that, and Gregory too. You know, Gregory was very collaborative (laughter). You don't do nothing with Gregory unless he's collaborating. And with me, because I'm a director too, naturally I would have done the same thing (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then that was-- Story_ID: 597606 Speaker 1: Gregory's [Gregory Hines] role, for me, one of his biggest movies was 'White Nights,' you know (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that was fabulous. Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about what it was like to work with the Russian, well not Russian-- Speaker 2: Oh, Baryshnikov [Mikhail Baryshnikov], yes. Speaker 1: Baryshnikov. Speaker 2: Oh yes, it was fabulous. He, it was fabulous, it was a great, great moment in his life. And I had a chance to meet Baryshnikov when we rehearsed in his studios. 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah], he loved my choreography, he was so nice to me. He's a wonderful, nice man. And he came to Gregory's memorial at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]. And he's a, well, he's Baryshnikov. What are you going to say about that? I mean that's just, that's when you have everything. He had, he had everything, you know, charisma. His ability was unbelievable, and he could dance, he could dance. You know, I say that because a lot of people don't dance anymore. They dance, but I'm talking about dancing when it comes from inside. Speaker 1: What women would you say have that--come from inside dancing? Speaker 2: Chita Rivera. Speaker 1: Chita Rivera. Debbie Allen? Speaker 2: Debbie Allen, yes, Wynonna Smith. Speaker 1: Have you ever worked with Debbie? Speaker 2: We did 'Guys and Dolls' together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the very first time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that was very early on. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We'd love to do something again together. We'd love to do something together. 'Cause she loved my work. She really loved my choreography in 'Hot Feet.' She said, "Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], you've got it, baby. You've got it." And Chita said the same thing. Chita compared me to Jerome Robbins; that was very thrilling for me. Because she said, "You're like Jerry. They don't dance like this anymore. You've got these kids dancing." See, the dancers of that era, they know real dance as opposed to creative staging. Creative staging can look like dance, but dancing is what I'm from. I'm from the old school. In fact, Liza Minnelli said the same thing. She came to see, she said, "That's dancing up there. You don't see that anymore." Because that's my training. I'm not so new that I want to do just creative staging. I'm not good at creative staging, first of all, because I want to dance. So, it was great tribute to me. So I think of course, Debbie, I think Vivian, her daughter, Vivian Nixon has it. Wynonna Smith has it, but Wynonna's from the older school. I think some of the young kids in my company have it. Holly [ph.] because she's from PHILADANCO [Philadelphia Dance Company]. And PHILADANCO is from Joan Myers. And Joan Myers is from the old school, Joan Myers Brown. So, you know tha- what I'm saying. You got to have a choreographer to get back. Carmen [HistoryMaker Carmen De Lavallade] is (unclear), that's dance. That's a history in dance--I mean Carmen, and [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder, [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson. But the dancers today are so involved with the technique that you don't feel anything. I don't feel a connection anymore. Speaker 1: It's just counts, they're just counts. Speaker 2: It's counts and ability, which is stupendous. These are dancers are, they're stupendous out there. But after a while, I'm not connected to them. And I need a connection otherwise I could be looking at a movie. But dance is to be felt live. I always tell my dancers, when you're out there, you connect with the audience. You look at them. Don't get no glassy look on your face, because you be--might as well be in the rehearsal show. Look at them. Because without them, you don't really exist in that moment. Certainly, you exist for yourself, but you're not doing it for yourself, otherwise you wouldn't be on the stage. You're doing it for them. Speaker 1: It becomes a collaboration. Speaker 2: Yes, that's a great word, it's a collaboration. You want them to yell and scream. The theater is about thrilling them. And I don't get thrilled in the theater anymore. I don't get, I want that thrilling moment. I want 'I'm Telling You I'm Not Going' ['And I Am Telling You I'm Not Going'] by Jennifer Holliday. I want to stand up and scream. I want to see 'America' with Chita Rivera. I want to see a Gwen Verdon. I want to see that. Otherwise, you go to a movie, you know. And you can be thrilled in the movies. But in the theater where I'm from, I'm a theater animal; you've got to thrill me. When you see my brother tap up there, oh. When you see me, oh, lord, look out. Look at--what. That's why I'm coming here. Story_ID: 597607 Speaker 1: Now, did you ever do any acting that made you feel that way? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You've never done any-- Speaker 2: One time. Isn't that interesting, (unclear). One time doing 'Jelly' ['Jelly's Last Jam,' George C. Wolfe] I was on the stage, and there was a sad scene. It's the only time I felt it was beyond technique, which I don't have a lot of anyway. It comes from a real space, because I didn't have that much acting training. So, I always become the part very easily. I don't have to, I just--because I don't know technique, I just become the part. And I hit it, and the k- they heard it, the kids heard it over the speaker. I hit it, and I cried real tears. That's a great moment. I think Laurence Olivier said that only happened to him twice in his whole life. You have the technique, and you know how to, I know how to get the audience; I know how to get the audience. If I've got a good script--'Jelly' was a great script. They had stuff for me to say; I know how to get them. They were there for me anyway. You know, I have the likeability quotient. They loved looking at me; they loved looking at Gregory [Gregory Hines]; they loved looking at, you know, the people that the audience loved to look at. So, I knew I had that. But to hit it when you're in that zone--only once. 'Guys and Dolls' is a different thing. 'Guys and Dolls' is what I do. I do that part in my sleep, and love every minute of it, I love every minute of it. I'm going to do it again, by the way. I'm going to do an encore version of it, like they do at City Center [New York City Center, New York, New York]. But I'm doing it at my theater [Lincoln Theatre] in Columbus [Ohio] because they're giving me my own theater. And I'm going to do it with Debbie Allen-- Speaker 1: Columbus? Speaker 2: Ohio. Speaker 1: Ohio. Speaker 2: I'm going to do it with Debbie Allen, Richard Roundtree, Leslie Uggams. That's who I first did it with. That was my very first show. So, I'm trying to get them to do it, hopefully I can. It's not until 2008, so hopefully I can get them to do it. I've already talked with Debbie about. She loves playing Adelaide (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Speaking of Leslie U-, U-, how do you pronounce her name? Speaker 2: Leslie, Leslie Uggams. Speaker 1: Uggams? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You worked with her on, did you work on 'All My Children'? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Or, she-- Speaker 2: We did 'Guys and Dolls'-- Speaker 1: You did 'Guys and Dolls' (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we knew--we grew up together. Our mothers [Alma Lawless Hines and Juanita Smith Uggams] were friends, and we grew up together. In fact, Leslie is doing the life story of Lena Horne now, which is going to be fabulous. So I can't wait to see it. It's going to open in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I can't wait, I can't wait. She'll be fabulous as her. Story_ID: 597608 Speaker 1: So, how did the, the 'Jelly'--we talked about 'Jelly's' ['Jelly's Last Jam,' George C. Wolfe] and how fabulous it was, but we didn't talk about how you came to take over for Gregory [Gregory Hines]. Speaker 2: Well, they called me, like I said. If you wrap a show around either one of us, the only other person that can do it is either one of us. So, they called me, that's what they did. Speaker 1: Well, how did you make the transition from stage and that to working with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones and doing (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, that was a different time. I was in California, and I was raising my daughter. And-- Speaker 1: Well, when did you adopt your daughter? Speaker 2: Ah, Jesus. Do you mean the date? I don't remember dates. She's twenty-four. Speaker 1: She's twenty-four. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, twenty-four years ago. Speaker 2: Twenty-four years ago-- Speaker 1: She came along. Speaker 2: She came along. Speaker 1: And what happened in your life as a result of that? Did you stop working for a little while? Speaker 2: I stopped working, yes, and I moved out to California. Speaker 1: Why did you move to California? Speaker 2: Because I felt it was a better place to raise her, plus my lover was an attorney, is an attorney, and he's from California. And I wanted her to be raised out there, so that's, that's why. Speaker 1: So, where in California were you? Speaker 2: I lived in, well, North Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], you know, where everything was. Speaker 1: So, L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: L.A. Speaker 1: Okay, you went to L.A. Speaker 2: And then I started, I said, well, I needed to work. I needed to do something, you know. And so, there was that very famous agent who is still there, Julie McDonald, and I got with her. And Quincy, he was doing the first release of 'Back on the Block' album. And they were going to do choreography, and he saw my name, and he knew who I was. Gregory and I had met him through Norman Jewison, the director who had directed 'In the Heat of the Night' a long, long time ago when we were Hines, Hines, and Dad. And he said, "Oh, well, let me see Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.]." So I met with the director of it, he liked me. Speaker 1: Who was the director? Speaker 2: I forget his name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A young kid. And all these young kids do these videos. And he, so hired me to choreograph it. And I auditioned, and a lot of them--Wynonna [Wynonna Smith] was in it, Stephanie Pope, Keith McDaniels [sic. Keith McDaniel], a lot of Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] dancers were out there at the time. I had great dancers. And I can never say his name--the African direc- the African actor [Djimon Hounsou] that did 'Amistad' and now is doing h- what, the diamond movie ['Blood Diamond']. Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 2: H- Hishou [ph.]? Oh, I can never say-- Speaker 1: I know who you're talking about, yeah. Speaker 2: You know who I'm talking about? Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was in it. He was a model, and I never--I remember going up to him and saying--because he was so startling looking. And he'd already done the Janet Jackson one ['Love Will Never Do (Without You)'], see. And I said, "What do you want to do with yourself?" He said, "I want to be an actor." I said, "Well, you go on and do that because you've got something." And when I see him up there, I'm so proud that he said, "I'm going to try." He's so classy, you know, he's so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he is classy. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: He comes across as very classy. Speaker 2: And he can get on that shoot, too. Everybody was (unclear) with the crafts table. But he was just quiet, nice, class. That's why I had to go over to him because he was so different than anybody else. You know, I'm so happy for him. Story_ID: 597609 Speaker 1: You, we didn't talk about Garth Fagan as a choreographer. Speaker 2: You know, I haven't seen that much of Garth's work, and I really should. I saw a television program on his work. He's very interesting and fascinating to me, as a personality too. And what he's done is monumental. To keep a company together is so hard. I tried, and failed. I tried and failed. Ballet Tap [Ballet Tap USA] dissipated. I couldn't do it, it's too hard to do. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you wanted to do other things, also. Speaker 2: I did, but I would have stayed with the company much longer than, than I did. It's just hard. You've got to pay these people; there's benefits, there's things. You know, the work that Alvin Ailey did to keep that company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] alive, and Judith [HistoryMaker Judith Jamison] is doing now, is to be lauded. They are giants of our business, giants, especially an African American company, oh, my god. Speaker 1: Is [HistoryMaker] Bill T. Jones still k- still holding on to his company [Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Company]? Speaker 2: I think, off and on I don't know if it's a regular company. I mean look at [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell's company, he has no company. He has his school [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] open again, but he doesn't have a season. That's terrible. Speaker 1: They don't have a season? Speaker 2: No, no. You know, not this season. You would hear that, then would go to City Center [New York City Center, New York, New York]. I think he does some things at Aaron Davis Hall [New York, New York]; he tries to do some things there. But that's terrible, you know. Because he accomplished, what he accomplished was oh, talk about hard. And the ballet world, too? (Laughter) He deserves medals. He deserves a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] and all kinds of things, just to keep that company going as long as he did, in the ballet world no less, when they said we couldn't do ballet. Ha. Story_ID: 597610 Speaker 1: So, moving to the next decade with you and your career. And then we'll talk about whatever comes around this. But 'Yo Alice' was, you were brought on to that by (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. I thought that up. Speaker 1: So that was yours, you conceived it? Speaker 2: I conceived it. Yes, I conceived it and brought in Lee Summers and Timothy Graphenreed, great writers, songwriters, and book writers. And we did a workshop on it, and we never could get the money to do it. We never, it was just too urban and too--it was, it was really--my temperament was 'The Wiz,' of course. You know, because it was so much like that fantasy. And we did a very urban version of it, 'Yo Alice,' and it was wonderful, it really was. I mean but we couldn't get the people. The English shows was here, and is it marketable? You know, all that stuff that goes on, you know, the political stuff, too. So we never could do it, but it still may get done. You know, I've never forgotten it, and it still may be done as a movie, you know, who knows? You know, you just keep it out there. Speaker 1: And the story follows 'Alice in Wonderland' ['Alice's Adventures in Wonderland,' Lewis Carroll] or (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it did, but my version of 'Alice in Wonderland'-- Speaker 1: But your version-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --which was urban? Speaker 2: It was urban, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, it definitely was, it definitely was. It was out there. Story_ID: 597611 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, why do you think you're--let's just say you lived, you're a tweener, you're from the old school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And by that I mean you saw a lot of great old dancers. Why do you think you can so easily transition and exist in this urban, modern, hip-hop world? Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know. I've got to say it's a mystery to me because I'm not quite what you see in the videos. But I'm, and I, and I can do the theater stuff. But somehow, when I get there, depending on what the project is, I'm able--that's what Maurice White said. Maurice, he didn't know my choreography. So when he decided to work with me, he came to New York [New York]. And I taught a class, so he could see. And he was fascinated by me. And he said, it's not quite the videos, but it is. And yet, these kids are dancing. In the videos, they don't dance. They, you know, they do what they do, which is fine. But in line, you've got to see some excitement. You've got to see levels, you've got to see dynamics. Like the music starts cooking in the middle, and then the hot big, big finish. You do that effortlessly. And so I don't know where that comes from, but it is my style. In other words, it is mine. I don't copy anybody. Maybe that's what it is. Because I--I can look at a video, and I can see a step there. And I say, gee, that's an interesting step. Because we all take from each other. You know, Graham [Martha Graham] said, ain't no steps after me and [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham. Come on, everybody's been out here doing ballets for about a hundred years. We created modern dancing, and Katherine Dunham had her own style. Now you just, we recycle. But you can do a twist. So, they all say Maurice Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] does twists. I don' even know what the twist is, but that's what they say, choreographically. I'm able to do it, I don't even know how. Story_ID: 597612 Speaker 1: During the years you were raising your daughter, did you work a lot, or a little (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, very little. Speaker 1: You became a stay-at-home dad? Speaker 2: I did, and I loved every minute of it. Getting her ready for school, I loved it; I loved it. I look back on it, and those were wonderful, wonderful days for me. And then s- then, then when they called for 'Jelly's Last Jam' [George C. Wolfe], I wasn't going to do it; I turned it down. I said, I don't want to go on the road. I loved the road, but I was so happy there in California, living in in Pomona [California] in a house with a pool and everything. You know, I was caught up in it. And, but I read the script (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did they convince you? You read the script. Speaker 2: They sent me the script. Speaker 1: And it wasn't that your brother had done it? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no. See, those people thought that, they think that Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I was sort of like jealous of each other. We were so different, we're so different. We were not alike at all. There's nothing about--we don't dance alike, we don't sing alike. We don't do anything alike. That's why we were so great together, I think. If we were alike, it would be boring. So, they knew my interpretation was going to be much more aggressive, and it was, it was. I remember the review I got in Houston [Texas], which was very interesting. They said, "Maurice Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] surpasses the writing and the songs." I was astounded. I'm always astounded at stuff like that. You know, because I didn't, as far as I'm concerned. I couldn't--I'm a product of that, how to do that. Speaker 1: Did you know Ben Vereen? Speaker 2: Yes, of course, I know Ben, yes. Speaker 1: And you knew, you knew, when did you meet him? Speaker 2: I met when I auditioned to take over for him for 'Pippin' [Roger O. Hirson]. Speaker 1: So, you did 'Pippin'-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. I had a little altercation with Bob Fosse. Gr- (laughter) funny story. I was auditioning, and so Bob said-- Speaker 1: Tone it down? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Usually, usually they would tell--I like when people would bring me back. But Gregory was playing guitar, because we had broken up. And he was playing the guitar, and I was singing one of his songs. And Bob said, "Well, Maurice, I need you more black." I said, "Oh, you do?" And Gregory knew me. He knew my, my brother knew me. He started packing up his guitar right then. (Laughter) He knew my mouth. And I said, "Well, Mr. Fosse, I was black when I walked in here. I don't need to be more black." Now I, of course I revered Bob Fosse, he was a genius, he's a genius. But everybody can be brought back. Don't say that to me, you know. So, and that was always my experience. So I said that to him, and I knew I wasn't going to get the role then (laughter). Obie [ph.] was there, all my buddies. We were all downstairs in the basement. Larry Riley eventually got it. And Larry was the, was the young man in 'Soldier's Story' ['A Soldier's Story'], the guita- the blues singer, he got the role of it. Then Northern Callaway got it. Great people got it. Story_ID: 597613 Speaker 1: And we're going to talk about your mentor. But I want to talk about the world that he existed in. By that I mean the people, Jerome [Jerome Robbins]. Speaker 2: Yeah, well Joe [Joe Layton], when Joe started, he told me they all started as chorus boys, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I want to mention that they were all white, these guys that we're talking about. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it was Jerome? Speaker 2: Jerome Robbins, Joe Layton; I think Tony Charmoli. I mean, there's so many choreographers. Michael Bennett came later. But they were all, they were all wonderful choreographers. And-- Speaker 1: But they didn't start as choreographers? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: They started in the chorus? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: As chorus dancers. Speaker 2: But Joe Layton said that he knew, they all knew right away Jerome Robbins was going to a choreographer; they knew right away. He said there was just something about him. And they, I don't know, he never talked about watching him create dances or anything, but we knew. That's I remember Joe telling me that, because Joe knew, I said, "Did you all know--?" because Joe didn't become a choreographer until much later. It was still early in their careers, I mean, you know. But Joe was a concept man, he thought stuff up. That was his great genius. And also he was a wonderful choreographer. But Joe was very involved with African American dancers. He revered them. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: I never asked him why. Speaker 1: Why do you, why would you assume? Because he was your mentor-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. He had created--I never knew this. He never talked about himself, all the great things he did. He did for television--they have this kinescope of it because I saw it--a version of 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin]--with--he choreographed Alvin Ailey and [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade, and a dancer named Howard Pierson [sic. Harold Pierson]. Joe Layton did that. Now, to get that on TV, that was power. Three black dancers on a major television show, and 'Porgy and Bess,' a ballet version of 'Porgy and Bess.' Joe Layton did that. He, and only worked--he worked with Diana Ross, with Lionel Richie. He thought African American performers were at the top of their game, that they were so special. Once they did something, you couldn't, no one could do it. No one could do it. It's like I used to say the singers--who can compare to Ella Fitzgerald and Sarah Vaughan? Who? (Laughter) Name, name them. Sinatra [Frank Sinatra], fabulous, (unclear) but could he do what Ella Fitzgerald did? No, you can't do it. He revered black performers. He always--but he loved women. He said he thought men had no guts, men were safe. And he worked with a lot of men, creating acts for them. He said, "The only man I would ever work for would be you, Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] because you're fearless. You're fearless." I laughed. I said, "Oh, Joe, you're just saying that because I'm here." He said, "No, I have to do that, I'm Joe Layton." (Laughter) He'd say, "I'm Joe Layton, and I don't have to say nothing." (Laughter) I used to ask him, I said, "Joe" because I was always on time, right, and Joe was always on time. And one day he came in late when we were doing 'Bring Back Birdie' [Michael Stewart]. I said, "Joe, you came in here late." He said, "Yeah, because I can." (Laughter) I love Joe Layton, I love it. Story_ID: 597614 Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And you said he did the clam shells [in 'Clams on the Half Shell Revue'] for-- Speaker 1: For Bette Midler. He created Bette Midler. Speaker 2: He created that look? Speaker 1: Yes, he did. Speaker 2: So, did you know her during her bathhouse days? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No? That was way, you were a little boy then? Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No, I just didn't go to them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I never went to bathhouses. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I didn't go, I didn't go to those places. But I'd heard of her, we'd all heard of her (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And because, you know, she's supposed to be, her and Barry Manilow made themselves by t- touring those circuits-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --and developing their acts. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Well, she's an exceptional performer, you know, she's the real thing. She's the real deal. And I know people who have worked with her. I didn't meet her when they did a memorial for Joe [Joe Layton] at Radio City [Radio City Music Hall, New York, New York]. She was there, but I didn't get a chance to meet her. [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll was there 'cause--. Joe Layton, I'm surprised you don't know this. Joe Layton directed and choreographed 'No Strings.' He got Diahann Carroll her Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre]. Joe Layton, Joe Layton was the best, that's it. The bottom line is he's the best I've ever been around, the best. And Diahann Carroll will tell you to this day. In fact, I worked with Diahann. I opened for her at the International [ph.]. And Joe did her act, did the act. So he had me coming through the audience after I did my set, and then she did hers. And I sang 'Stormy Weather' with her, and it was wonderful, it was wonderful, yeah. Diahann and I, we're friends, so it was great. Speaker 2: So, how did you meet him, Joe? For him to become your mentor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I auditioned for 'Bring Back Birdie' [Michael Stewart], and he said (laughter), he said, and I sang 'Love the One You're With' with a conga player. And he said, "You're really quite something," he yelled. I didn't know who he was at that time; I'd heard the name. I said, "Well, thank you, Mr. Layton," and I just left. I loved auditioning. I never had a problem with auditioning, I just had a good time, and I performed. He called me and said, "Why did you leave? You got the job." I said, "Well, you know, I just--." So, he called me (unclear). He found me, I was going to dinner with my brother [Gregory Hines] at his house, (unclear). He tracked me down and he called me there. He said, "You got the job." I said, "I got the job?" He said, "Yeah, you got the job," (laughter). And we bonded right away, right away, right away. He was just, and he gave me a big number, "Brand-New Beat in Heaven" ["There's A Brand New Beat in Heaven"], and I was dancing all over the place. He had me dancing everywhere. He said, "Go for it, Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.], go, do it," (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, did he choreograph as well? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Or just staged? Speaker 1: No, no, no, he did everything (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He did everything, he did everything. Speaker 1: He was the director and choreographer. And he always told me that "Once you do that, don't go backwards, don't go backwards." Speaker 2: Meaning, you don't--what does that mean? Speaker 1: Meaning once you do that, you don't want to stop doing it. You don't want to just become a choreographer. But I am, I don't like directing. So I like choreographing, I don't like directing. Story_ID: 597615 Speaker 1: So, what is the path for a choreographer? Like, I mean, you- is it you must be a dancer first to be a choreographer? Can one just become a choreographer? Do you know any choreographers who are just choreographers? Or did they all come out of the chorus or through show business like yourself? Speaker 2: I think they all came out of the, most of them came out of the chorus. But I think you can come from class to become a choreographer. I don't know all their backgrounds. So Alvin [Alvin Ailey] started with Horton [Lester Horton] and [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade in class and dance. And then when Lester Horton passed away, Alvin took over the company slowly, from what I read. [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, I think, I don't know. Katherine Dunham didn't come out of a chorus, she was Katherine Dunham (laughter). She was Katherine Dunham right off the bat (laughter). That's the only way Katherine Dunham could be. And created her thing right away. I don't know, but to me she was Katherine Dunham. But Judy, [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison, she came out of dancing with the company, and then she's a wonderful choreographer. Mercedes [HistoryMaker Mercedes Ellington] came out of dancing in class at Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York], and then with the June Taylor Dancers in the chorus. And Mercedes was the first black dancer and person on a regular TV show, which was 'The Jackie Gleason Show.' She was the first in history on, no, a regular, before [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll [in 'Julia'] and all that. I mean, that's history. Speaker 1: But do you, I mean, I don't even know, I haven't thought about this in years. But you reminded me of something. Remember 'Solid Gold'? Speaker 2: Sure, sure, I remember (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) The choreography, the-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --black dancers. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. What was her name, the black dancer on there? She was so famous. I forget her name, she has great eyes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She was fabulous, she was the star. Speaker 1: She was the star of that, 'Solid Gold.' Speaker 2: Darcel [Darcel Leonard Wynne], was it Darcel? I can't remember. Speaker 1: I think it was Darcel. Speaker 2: I'm not sure. But pardon me if it's not Darcel, but we all know you, girl. We know you were the one. Speaker 1: And then Debbie Allen had such great success with the movie, 'Fame.' Speaker 2: Yes, she did. But Debbie was a great Broadway star. But Debbie, Debbie, Debbie's just a great woman, she's a great woman. But she was, she was one of the greatest dancers you'd ever see. I mean in fact, people forget how great Debbie dances. The next time they do that Broadway gold thing, and she's doing "America" from 'West Side Story,' and she had some fierce dolls with her, baby. Marlena [Marlene Danielle], there was about three other girls that I knew that could dance. Debbie danced, oh, Debbie Allen is fierce. Now separate, separate, separate. Speaker 1: Now, was she the first African American actress to do 'Sweet Charity' [Neil Simon], like the lead in that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so. Speaker 1: --on Broadway? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I never asked her, but I think she was-- Speaker 1: Did you see that performance? Speaker 2: I didn't see it. Speaker 1: I didn't see it, either. Speaker 2: I saw her do 'West Side Story,' of course. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: But I didn't see it, no. But she's a great star and a great woman, great school in California. Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. Do you think black actors have to cross over to be accepted on Broadway? Does that ma-, does that question make any sense? Speaker 2: Yeah, of course. Because I think Broadway, up until maybe recently, within maybe in the last twenty years, the Broadway audience was basically a white audience. So, you have to be able to appeal to that audience. So, there's a certain way that you have to act, or a certain way that you have to sing, you know, there's--that the producers feel, not the audience, but the producers feel. And that's how you get on that stage, from the producers. You don't get on there from the audience. The audience gets what they want you to see. Speaker 1: Well, okay, I'm going to ask you something. After having said what you just said, you know, about you have to present yourself in a certain way-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --or you have to--does that have anything to do with--was it R- or Fosse [Bob Fosse] asking you to act, that you needed to be more black? Speaker 2: I think he had, I think he had a certain image of that character [in 'Pippin,' Roger O. Hirson] that was very, that possibly, for, for me, I felt it was stereotypical. Maybe in his mind, it wasn't. But for me as a black man for--to tell a black man to look more black was what I felt was stereotypical. Because like I said, when I walked in here, I was a black man. I don't have to act a black man. But in his mind, there was a certain way a black man acted. And I found that insulting, obviously, otherwise I wouldn't have challenged him. But I would challenge everybody. Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Much nicer way. I do it much nicer now that I'm older (laughter). I'm mellowed. Story_ID: 597616 Speaker 1: So, how did you meet Maurice White? Speaker 2: I met him through-- Speaker 1: We talked a lot about 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah]. But I want to know-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) from start to finish-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --how you were brought in, th- how it was all, how did it come about? Speaker 2: What it was, was we were both William Morris clients, William Morris Agency [William Morris Endeavor]. And they were going to do his biography, a book on him. And he, with the agent, his name was Manny Barrens [ph.]. And he said, "You know, I'd like to do something more with my music." I think he might have been inspired--I never asked Maurice this, but I'm sure he was inspired by Billy Joel's in 'Movin' Out,' which Twyla Tharp had done. So, he said, "Well, you know, we've done concerts, we've had records. Not everything. I've done symphonies of my music, and I write." So, he said, "Well, maybe now theater." So we said, "Yeah, we've got to come up with a concept. We've got to have somebody to think it up." So he said, "Well, one of my good friends who's in (unclear) has got a client that maybe you might know. And I think we could at least talk with him." He said, "Well, who is it?" He said, "Maurice Hines [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.]." He said, "Yeah, I know Maurice Hines. Get him out here." That's how quickly it happened. And they flew me out. And I'll never forget. I was sitting in the Earth, Wind and Fire building in the lobby. And I was there at one o'clock, and Maurice wasn't there yet. And he walked in, and when he walks in, you hear that music; you hear it, 'September,' 'Fantasy,' you hear it. And we hugged right away, right away. And I told him, I said, "You know, this is not only an honor, but it's supposed to happen. Because for ten years I've been using 'September' as my music to audition all my shows." He said, "You're kidding me?" I said, "No." So I went into his office, I told him the story. He loved it, he said, "Let's get going." Speaker 1: Tell me the s-. Yeah, but I know the story (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The story of, it was 'The Red Shoes,' an updated version of 'The Red Shoes,' basically. He loved it, and he loved the hook at the end. And he loved, there was going to be a lot of dancing in it. And I didn't have an idea. I had to get the compilation of all the music and all the songs, and we worked it out. But he was, he's a true genius. He's one of those people--the true geniuses humble you around them, because they're very humble about their talent. Speaker 1: So, you actually did get to do--I didn't realize you got to do a version of 'The Red Shoes' that you didn't get to do in the Dominican Republic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly. Speaker 1: --with 'Hot Feet'? Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was a completely different version. Speaker 1: Completely different, yeah. Speaker 2: It really was. Speaker 1: But I'm just saying, you got, the concept fulfilled itself in some way. Speaker 2: Yeah, but the concept was closer to the movie, called the movie 'The Red Shoes,' which was a great English film, and in 1948 I think won the Academy Award [Oscar] for it, with Moira Shearer, a great ballerina. So it was, working with him was, you wanted to please him. Because here's this giant in the music world that has survived the record business and is considered a genius. And my whole job was to make him happy, and he was. And we just spoke the other day. He's so glad we're doing it again, he's so glad that I'm going to be in it (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, you're doing the devil you told me? Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's not going to be the devil anymore. He's going to be more like Iago in 'Othello.' It's going to be more that. And I'm tapping in it. He wanted me to tap, he wants me to tap. And there was a number that he cut out, because he felt the actor who was doing it didn't really, didn't have the weight to do it. Speaker 1: What was the number? Speaker 2: He said, "Maurice," he said when he cut it out, he said, "The only one who can do this number will be you." It's called "'I'm So Fabulous.'" (Laughter) I said, "Maurice, it's so narcissistic." He said, "Yeah, but you can pull it off, Maurice." (Laughter) So now, I'm going to do it. And he's so happy about it, he's so happy. I love him, I love him. Speaker 1: So, that has come almost full circle, from-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --using the music for-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to audition-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to being on Broadway-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to now touring, and you starring in it-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --which is something you didn't do before. Speaker 2: Yeah, because I love touring. I've never been about--my whole life has been touring. You know, my brother [Gregory Hines], we went from nightclub to nightclub to nightclub. We didn't really stay in one spot. So, I don't like staying in one spot. I mean even when I did Broadway I, I, you know, it was fine. And Broadway is what it is. But I love bringing the p- the show to the people. Story_ID: 597617 Speaker 1: So, do you still feel your brother's presence with you? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. You know, it's interesting. I felt his presence when I did the memorial. And at the end, I tapped to a soft shoe, which was the very first thing Henry LeTang taught us. And I remembered all the steps. I always had a great mind, to remember the steps. And I put another spotlight on this side, as if he was with me. And I rehearsed it with a spar guy. But as I was doing it, I really forgot the audience was there. And I felt--and it was very emotional for me, because I felt him there. And at the end, I sort of shook his hand, and the audience went crazy. But I didn't even know they were there, you know. I feel his presence more now on a daily basis, almost on a daily basis, even my mother [Alma Lawless Hines], now that I've become more spiritual in my life. And I feel him guiding me, because he became more spiritual at the end of his life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He really did. He went back to church, and he really was going in that direction. And I understood it, but I wasn't there in the same space. But I am now, and now that I'm there, I feel him, wow. Speaker 1: Because you're living in the same space, see. Speaker 2: Exactly. I feel him. It's an unbelievable feeling, unbelievable. And I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you feel--it's great, because you don't feel empty. There's no great loss that you feel. Speaker 2: No. The only loss is, and I've really never talked about (unclear). The only loss is, I wish in a way he was here, so we could enjoy this together. Because he got into that space before me, but now I'm there, and how wonderful it would have been to share this with him and my mother, especially my, well, my mother, too. But Gregory [Gregory Hines] would have--because he was there, he was there. And I knew it, because he called me and told me. And he did some, some, you know, some wonderful things, and said some wonderful things to me. So he was there, and now I'm there. But I share with him, because I talk to him all the time. I share with him in church, I feel his presence with me. Speaker 1: Now, what year did he pass? Speaker 2: Was it three? You know, I don't like to think about it. To me, he doesn't--I don't like to name it. People have asked me, and I say, "Well, three years ago." I don't-- Speaker 1: You don't, yeah. Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't want to think about the way he passed. Speaker 1: Right. But over to the other side, so now he can be with you in this space. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he's with me-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --he's with me. Especially when I'm in church on Mondays when I go. He's with me. And if I, if I feel I have to discuss something with him, I do. I do, yes, it's--. And I have my mother's ashes, so I can always talk to her. But he's, he's buried in Canada, so that's what--those were his wishes. But I miss him. But the business is such that I'm happiest now in what I'm doing. Speaker 1: Why do you feel that is? Speaker 2: Because I have, I'm more at peace with myself. And it's not so much about quote success as it is doing really great work and giving back, giving back to the kids. Speaker 1: Now, when did you start to feel that? Speaker 2: About, well, I've always wanted to give back to kids, but-- Speaker 1: No, but I mean, you know, it's not so much about the work now. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: I mean, it's not about the success, it's about-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --or the comfort of knowing--it's just about doing what you love to do. Speaker 2: That's a great word, comfort. That's really, I'm going to use that word from now on. It's comfortable. I'm comfort- the comfort level is so wonderful. I'd say, about the comfort level, about four months, about four months. It's been eight months that I've been sort of like going in this direction, but about four months I sort of hit it. And also, I'm no longer afraid. Story_ID: 597618 Speaker 1: What were you afraid of before? Speaker 2: Oh, so many things. Speaker 1: Like not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The business-- Speaker 1: --making it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. N-, "Oh, the show's going to flop." Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: "Oh, lord, I'll never work again." Speaker 2: Right, right, all of that. Speaker 1: "Oh, they're not going to call me." Speaker 2: No longer afraid. There's nothing to fear, nothing to fear anymore. And that's--also helps your comfort level. Because the business that I'm in, Gregory [Gregory Hines] used to say we're like dinosaurs, he and I, because we represent a part a kind of show business that no longer exists. Ben Vereen is part of that song and dance man kind of thing, and paying your dues and learning your craft, learning your craft. The kids, because of the business is the way it is today, they don't have a chance to learn. You can't just jump out there and think you know it. You can't know it, you can't know it. You know it by doing it. And that's why, who said that? Somebody said a long time ago, "If you can't do it with just a piano, then you can't do it." Pyrotechnics and all that, fifty piece orchestra. Piano, piano, you, and the audience. Can you do that? If you can't, then you can't do it. And you hold the stage for an hour, hold it for an hour. Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.], I'll never forget when I first saw Sammy Davis at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]. He sat on the edge of that stage and started talking. I said, "What is this?" And the audience was right there. And laughing and joking, and just himself, just wonderful. Nat King Cole, oh, I'm very, very grateful, very grateful to have seen the people I've seen, you know. And the people today, they don't know them, they don't know them. And there's some people around. They should all go see [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt, see Eartha Kitt do her stuff, baby. Speaker 1: Yeah, she still has it (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, please, the Kitt. You learn that, you learn from that, you learn. And I'm still learning. I still go see Eartha Kitt and say, oh, how does she do that? How'd she do that little look, you know. Those are the greats, those are the greats. Story_ID: 597619 Speaker 1: So, when your--just talk to me a little about your, I mean because you are a father. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Your daughter is twenty-three, she's in China. Speaker 2: She's in China, my daughter, Cheryl [ph.]. She's in China teaching English. Speaker 1: And you never thought you'd be a dad? Speaker 2: I never thought I'd be a dad. Speaker 1: But when the opportunity came, you said, I'll take it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I loved it, I loved it. And it's the best thing I ever did in my life. Reviews, audiences, nothing can compare to that. Nothing can compare to her calling me and telling me how wonderful she's doing and how happy she is. And she's a lovely young woman--classy, respectful, manners, and respectful of other peoples' feelings-- Speaker 1: Empathy, yeah. Speaker 2: --very religious, very religious, and very happy about me. She couldn't believe it. She's so happy about hearing me. Because I hadn't really talked to her about it until I got on the phone, because it was evolving. Story_ID: 597620 Speaker 1: Well, tell me how, how--what do you think changed in you to make you open up to this new space? Speaker 2: I really don't know because--well, he did. Obviously, he's got the plan. And I'm just winding up in front of St. Patrick's church [St. Patrick's Cathedral, New York, New York] like that, and just walking in. I hadn't been through--walked by St. Patrick's church my whole life, I'm a New Yorker. And just to walk in there out of the blue, it was time. Like my father [Maurice Hines, Sr.] said, "Don't examine it, don't analyze it. What are you analyzing it for?" Because he felt the lightness in my voice. And I told him, and he said, "There's no time limit on it. It happened when it happened. So don't, you're talking about it and analyzing. Why did I do this, or why, how come? He took care of it, didn't he? Are you happy?" I said, "I'm so happy, Daddy, I'm so happy. I'm happy with so many things, you know, and so grateful for so many things." And like we talked about, so many of my contemporaries are gone. Speaker 1: Right, yeah. We were going to talk about that. Speaker 2: You know, the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] has devastated-- Speaker 1: Theater. Speaker 2: --theater. And we have new people coming up, but they said there was a magic time, like the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]. Everything has a magic time to me. The Apollo had a magic time, the Cotton Club [New York, New York] had a magic time. Theater had a magic time when all those great ones--[HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle thank god is still here. And but Alvin [Alvin Ailey] is gone, you know. It was a golden time for that, it was golden. Thank god I saw that. I saw Miguel Godreau; I saw [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison dance with Miguel Godreau. I saw Alvin, I met him. Oh, my god, oh, my god. You know, I feel for these kids, because they don't know. Speaker 1: But they have you. Speaker 2: Well, yeah. In fact, George Faison [HistoryMaker George W. Faison] and I talked about that, you know, who choreographed 'The Wiz.' And he said, when I did an interview for him, with him. And he said, you know, we've got to give back because we know it. And we've got this, we've lost a generation. We've lost a generation. We've got to go now to the little ones. That's what Debbie [Debbie Allen] does at her school. She goes to the little ones. Those (unclear) kids don't want to know what we got to say, they're not interested. They got what they got their time. But what we've got is something that we can give back that is golden, it's golden. And that's what I want to do. That's my thing. That's what he planned for me to do. That's why I have my own theater [Lincoln Theatre] in Columbus [Ohio]. And I'm going to start the school, the Maurice and Gregory Hines Performing Arts Center [Columbus, Ohio], so my brother's name is left somewhere. He did all that. He put in the place to see this empty theater, and I said, "What are you doing with that theater?" "Nothing." "I'll be the artistic director." Boom, that's how it happened. I've never said it before in my life, I never said that. I never thought of it. Speaker 1: And that's happened within the last eight months. Speaker 2: No, that happened about a year and a half ago. No, maybe, no, maybe almost two years ago. But now, now they're renovating it, now it's going. Speaker 1: It's become a reality (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the reality. And he waited, he waited for me to be ready for it. It's fine to say it, but was I ready for it then? No. I was just ready to say it, but now I'm ready to do it. I have the patience to do it. I don't--I was a very impatient person. It's just I don't like, I'm not from the waiters, to wait. Speaker 1: I remember somebody asked Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] once, like, well, when do you pray, or whatever. And that's when she said, which is what I'm getting so much from you now, is I live in that space. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: I don't have to just pray, I live there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's exactly what I've come to; I live there, I live there. Coming here--I--it's amazing when you live in that space, how happy you are. Speaker 1: Well, I want to get there (laughter). Speaker 2: You will. Look at me, I'm sixty-three. I got it at sixty-three. Ain't no time limit. My father said, "No time limit." I was always a good person, but to live in that space, to live there. And you do pray, you do pray. I go, I like going on Mondays. I go on my days. But then you find you find yourself praying at other times, not particularly in church, just praying. I wake up, I talk to him. How you doing? What's happening? I'm ready for today. You know, it's that--and he's ready for me, you know. This goodness, this--it's wonderful, it's wonderful (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you were going to tell me that your daughter's pleased that you have-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, she's very pleased that I-- Speaker 1: --turned the corner? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Because she was always, she's always very religious. Whenever she'd come to visit me, like in Las Vegas [Nevada], if I was working there. She wanted to go to Barnes and Nobles [Barnes and Noble], and she'd go to the religious section and read all these different books. Not just one (unclear), but like Buddhism and everything. She, I don't know, she didn't get it from me, you know. So, she would do that, and I could leave her there. I'd say, "Well, I'm going to go to the department store, and I'll pick you up on the way back." She'd be find, she'd be fine. So, she's so pleased with me, and she's anxious to come back so, so we can experience it together and read these books together. Because I'm reading these books, Rick Warren's books, and another book called 'The Secret' [Rhonda Byrne] I just got. Donna Summer, who's a friend of mine called me up. And she's, that had happened to her a long time ago, getting in that space. And when I told her about it--I just choreographed a number for her-- Speaker 1: For Donna Summers [sic.]? Speaker 2: Yeah. And Robert De Nero's wife, Grace Hightower, for a benefit for autism. And I was working with them, and I told her I was in that space, and she was so happy for me. Because she's never been one that would--well, when you do that, you're not, you don't really force anybody else to, because it has to happen at their time. And when I'd gone to Nashville [Tennessee] and met with her about a project, she was in that space. And she talked to me a little bit about it, but she obviously knew I wasn't ready for it. But I am now. So, she called me up from Florida, and said, "Well, you've got to get this book. It's called 'The Secret.'" (Laughter) I said, "Okay, Donna." So, I got it, and she was right. I'm reading, I just started reading it yesterday. It was good, it's good. And I'm read--it just keeps you, it just keeps you, keeps you mellow. Story_ID: 597621 Speaker 1: So, when you, when you look back over your career, what, you know, what stands out as the highlights for you? You have so many. Speaker 2: Oh, well, certainly dancing with my brother. And 'Eubie!' was a wonderful highlight because that--we had broken up the act [The Hines Brothers], and we got back together for that. Doing 'Guys and Dolls,' the very first 'Guys and Dolls' I did with Debbie Allen and Leslie Uggams-- Speaker 1: Richard Roundtree (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and Richard Roundtree. And that was unbelievable to me that I could do that. I never knew I could do that. 'The Cotton Club' movie, of course, dancing with Gregory [Gregory Hines], again, always, highlight. Doing, doing my, like, doing my act the way I want to do it is always a highlight for me. Like, doing this next show ['An Evening with Maurice Hines'] at the Metropolitan Room [New York, New York], I can't wait to do it. Because I haven't been on stage in a long time, because I'd been unhappy. I didn't want to go on stage anymore. I didn't want to perform anymore. But like I said, I'm in the space now-- Speaker 1: You're in the space. Speaker 2: --and I'm ready, I'm ready. Speaker 1: And something else that we, you know, it is an oral history. And you may not think about it, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, one more thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Doing 'The Johnny Carson Show' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'], doing his show, he was certainly a highlight in our career and in our family's life. He's a great man, and he was true to his word with Gregory and I. And he put us on, and we did, I think thirty-five, thirty-seven times on his show the last five years in New York [New York]. And that made us. Whatever career we have was made from that man doing that. I've always said that, and I will always give him his due. Because nobody else was putting us on, nobody, and he did. That was a true highlight, Johnny Carson. Speaker 1: Johnny Car-. Well, I mean I also want to commend you for, you know, raising a daughter twenty-three years ago, taking that on when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, well, that was-- Speaker 1: --that was almost unheard of. Speaker 2: That's the ultimate highlight, yes, that's the ultimate highlight. Speaker 1: I mean and, you know, I think I'm doing oh, whoop de, you know, twenty (unclear) years later thinking I'm a trailblazer. But here I am, a man, you know, twenty-three years ago, you know, blazed that trail for me-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to, you know, to make it possible for me to be able to do the same thing. Speaker 2: Ah. That's great (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, thank you. Speaker 2: Yeah, thank you. Story_ID: 597622 Speaker 1: 'Johnny Carson' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'] you said was a highlight. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What were the, what were the challenging times, when you had to-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Yeah, when you felt challenged, where you had to-- Speaker 2: I think the challenging times (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) pull yourself up by your bootstraps. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, when we were doing, well, the first real challenge I think was when we did the lounge in the Sands Hotel [Sands Hotel and Casino] in Las Vegas [Nevada]. We weren't the main room act yet. And we did the lounge show opposite Louis Prima, who was a huge star. So, and we alternated with him. And I remember the last show we did was from six to seven in the morning. Speaker 1: A.M.? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Las Vegas, it's a twenty-four-hour town. So, I remember nobody in the audience. There was nobody sitting there but my mother [Alma Lawless Hines]. She would sit and applaud for all the numbers. There were tables and chairs. And we did forty-five minutes, you do. And we'd walk--I remember we walked across the desert to the hotel because we didn't have to drive. And the sun was always coming up, and I felt so bad. I said, "Gee, this is hard work." It was three shows a night. I mean, and the regular times, you at least maybe--I mean Louis Prima would pack them in, and then maybe half the audience would leave and we'd have at least 50 percent of the audience. But not at six and seven in the morning. And those were, that was a hard way to go. Then the other challenging time was when we were in Canada, in Toronto [Canada]. And we did four s-, four sets in the afternoon in this bar. And we were in the middle of the bar. And over here were hookers and truck drivers. And over here were tables and chairs. So when the hookers and truck drivers got together and they wanted to splurge, they would take the wives--take the hookers on the other side (laughter). And I said, "What are we doing here?" And we did five sets. So we did four, we did nine shows a day, that's right. Those were hard times (laughter). Speaker 1: How could you do nine shows a day? Speaker 2: You do. We did them in the afternoon. We did what? We did four in the afternoon, then we'd go home for dinner and come back, I think at eight. We'd finish, and we'd start like maybe three in the afternoon and then we did--. So, these kids, when they're talking about eight shows a week, Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I used to laugh. Gregory said, "These people are complaining about doing eight shows a week. We did five shows a night in the Playboy Club with no day off." Oh, yes. So, when, so when people start complaining to me, I just look at them. Story_ID: 597623 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you think about your mom [Alma Lawless Hines], for having the--I don't even know what it is--the sensibility, the charisma, to, to, to do what she did for you guys? Speaker 2: She was a great lady. She was the greatest woman that I've ever been around or ever known in my life, that she withstood all of that and kept us together. My father [Maurice Hines, Sr.] was a very difficult man. He's mellow now, but he'll tell you himself he was a difficult man. And my mother kept this family together. She was a little woman, ninety-seven pounds, and she did it. There's no doubt about it, we owe everything to her. Because we would never have met the manager that we did, because Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I didn't want to meet him. She forced us to meet him. We were difficult. We were volatile men. And she had three of us that were volatile--my father, Gregory and I. Oh, my god. (Laughter) I don't know how she did it, I really don't. But I can look back on it now, what she went through and what we took her through--what we took her through, all three of us. A great lady. That's why I have her ashes in my house right now. So, I can say, Mother, you're fierce, girl. How you doing (laughter)? Story_ID: 597624 Speaker 1: So, just tell me a little bit about the legacy that you want to leave for your brother, Gregory [Gregory Hines]. Speaker 2: Well, I want to start this school in Columbus, Ohio along with the theater that I'm the artistic director of. It's called the Lincoln Theatre [Columbus, Ohio]. And I want it, I want the school to be the Maurice and Gregory Hines Performing Arts Center [Columbus, Ohio], and to also include a lot of like, foreign exchange students, and students from all over the world to come to the school. That's what I want to do, so that my brother's name is left somewhere. It's important for me to do that, and I intend to, and I will do it. And leave the legacy of the kind of performing that is a lost art now. Because all the greats are going. I mean, with, with Ray Charles gone, who was a great artist. I think Ray Charles said it best. He said, you know, we'll never see the show business that we grew up in. Because today all they do is clone. We didn't clone. Nobody sounded like Nat King Cole. Nobody sounds like me. Nobody sounds like Aretha [Aretha Franklin] or Gladys Knight or Patti LaBelle. They--we were all special. Nobody sounds like Lena [Lena Horne] or Ella [Ella Fitzgerald] or Sarah [Sarah Vaughan]. But today, they want everybody to sound alike. So, we'll never see their likes again, because it's not the kind of show business that's being done today. So, I want to be able to talk about that to people and the young kids, and have a library, and have films, and show them, and make it conducive, and have a repertory company where you can learn how to do this, see. I'm also going to do a television show, which is a performing version of 'Inside the Actors Studio' that I'm going to be doing out of Hartford, Connecticut (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's about time somebody does that. Speaker 2: It's called 'One of a Kind,' and I'm going to be doing that, filming two pilots, one with Donna Summer and hopefully one with John Leguizamo next su- next summer, next June. So I'm doing that, and I've got a lot of stuff. I'm touring with 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah] and doing the educational programs like that, and doing that and showing them. Because you've got to show it. You can't just talk it, they want to see it. How does it work? Story_ID: 597625 Speaker 1: And your--the CD, you have a CD out (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have a CD, which is a tribute to Nat King Cole, called 'To Nat King Cole With Love.' Speaker 1: And why did, why to Nat King Cole? Speaker 2: Well because he was the first person I ever saw that was effortless on stage. We had gone to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I, every week, and we saw Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.]. And Gregory loved Sammy Davis, he responded to Sammy Davis. And Sammy Davis was amazing. And I--who could do all of that? And I loved it, and I loved-- Speaker 1: And Sammie tapped also, didn't he? Speaker 2: Oh, he was a great tap dancer. He started as a tap dancer. Speaker 1: I thought so. Speaker 2: That's, that's what he would do. And then he sang, and he played instruments, and impersonations, and then he could talk to the audience. But Nat King Cole, when he walked on the stage--I remember the image. He stood in the corner, and the minute they said his name, he came out and stood. And the audience was screaming and yelling and screaming. And I said to Daddy [Maurice Hines, Sr.], I remember saying, I said, "Daddy, he hasn't done anything yet." He said, "He doesn't have to, he's Nat King Cole." Just stand there. And they went crazy, and they were screaming. Then he sang, and I remember I (unclear)--I couldn't figure out how he got from one side of the stage to the other. It was so effortless. He like glided, and all of a sudden he was there. And it was, and he did that, and he winked. And oh, just, and class, which is a word you don't hear anymore. You don't hear that word too much anymore. You don't hear the word class, because we don't have it. We have beauty, we have talent. But class? That's Lena [Lena Horne], Ella [Ella Fitzgerald], and Eartha [HistoryMaker Eartha Kitt], (unclear) Eartha, and Nat King Cole. But male--Belafonte [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte], class. They'd walk on the stage, and you'd say, "Good god almighty, it's there." Gregory and I have it, we had it. I have it, Gregory had it; I have it. Because we learned from them; it didn't just happen (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is it something you can teach? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It's not something you can teach? Speaker 2: No, no, no. But we learned how--my father said, "There's a way to walk on the stage." There's a way to walk on the stage. He brought us, he brought us to Atlantic City [New Jersey] to see this guy, Arthur Lee Simpkins. You've never heard of him. He had one hit record called 'Diane.' He was managed by Lou Walters, Barbara Walters' father, who also managed [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll at one time. And, but he said, "I'm bringing you down there to show you how to walk on the stage." Gregory and I said, "Don't you just walk on the stage?" He said, "No." And I can remember, it was at the Club Harlem in Atlantic City. And I remember him walking on the stage, I said, oh. Bobby Short could walk on the stage. Have you ever seen Bobby Short walk out on the stage? Whoa, Bobby Short walking on the stage now. He was like Arthur Lee Simpkins. Just take the stage; you own it, you own it. You don't have to do nothing. You don't have to dance; you don't have to dance. See, the kids have to walk out there and dance and throw themselves all--oh, no, no, no, no. Nat King Cole just walked pigeon-toed. Belafonte just walked on the stage (laughter). But there's a thing that has to be yours. That's what--Ray Charles--when Ray Charles would walk on the stage, he'd hug himself. Then he got you, he got you. He ain't sung a note, has he? The minute he stood up there and did this (gesture), it's over, it's over. Now, Lena Horne would walk on the stage in that tight dress. I don't care what you sing, don't sing, you don't have to sing nothing. That's what it is. And to think--you know who has it? Tina Turner, Tina Turner (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what's your signature? Speaker 2: You'll see it when you come see me. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: You'll see it when you come see me because I have one. This is a different one, though, that I've been doing. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: I have one. Speaker 1: It's new? Speaker 2: It's new. I'm doing it the first time when you come see me. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Because I'm new. I'm new, I'm in the right space. Speaker 1: Right, you're in your space. Speaker 2: So now I can do this, which I never, I was always afraid to do it before. I ain't afraid no more. Speaker 1: And you thought you were fearless, but now you are. Speaker 2: Now I am, now I am. Now I don't think it, I am it. And I recognize it. Speaker 1: You live it, yeah. Speaker 2: I'm living it, I'm living it, that's it. Story_ID: 597626 Speaker 1: So what do you want to be remembered for when you're not doing what you're doing now? When it's time for you to retire, what do you want to have done to be remembered for? Speaker 2: You know, I always said when people asked me, when you leave the theater, what do you want them to go away with? Do you want them to say what a great dancer you were, you want to (unclear)--. I say, I just want people to say I had a good time, I had a good time. And any show that I did, that Gregory [Gregory Hines] and I did, we wanted them to walk out of there not saying how fabulous we were, or you know, we danced great. Boy, did I have a good time. That's what I want, that's what I want them to say, you know. Because that's, that's really what I'm about, for them. I'm really for them. I brought up Tina Turner a minute ago because I saw her at Radio City [Radio City Music Hall, New York, New York] her closing night. And that's what she does. She's from the old school, she has it. They walk out having had a great time. And sure, they remember 'Proud Mary,' but they don't remember all them songs she sang. 'What's Love Got to Do With it,' they remember, because it was a hit. But she sang 'Can't Stand the Rain' ['I Can't Stand the Rain']. She sings everything, Tina sang everything. But the audience, I remember walking out, and they had a ball with her. You know, that's what I want. And they do, because I'm there for that. And my shows, I gear my shows up only for the audience. I only think of the audience. I don't think of critics, I don't think of other performers. I don't care if the other performers don't like it. But I want that audience to like it; I want them to love it. And just to go out saying--. Well, one woman said it to me, too, when she was leaving--a little old lady, in Washington [D.C.], ninety years old. She came to see the show twice. And she started dancing with the walker, she started dancing. I said, "Why did you come back here?" She said, "Baby, because I had a good time." (Laughter) I was in heaven, I was in heaven. That's, that's it. I told Maurice White, I said, "Maurice, I don't need no more than that." She's ninety years old. Now you know, she saw the greats of her day in D.C. And she's ninety, and she's been back here twice for Earth, Wind and Fire music and Maurice Hines' [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] choreography. And that's what she said, with a walker. There you go. I don't have to do no more. Now that's really what I want to leave. Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: And thank you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It has been a pleasure going on the journey with you, hearing your stories. And I'm just happy to be in your space. Speaker 2: Oh thanks so much. I'm happy you're in my space (laughter). Story_ID: 597627 Speaker 1: This is Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] and Gregory Hines. And this when we were modeling. And I think we were five and three. Look how cute Gregory looked there, just adorable. And this was taken in our apartment on 500 West 150th Street in Harlem [New York, New York] in our living room. And they moved all the tables and chairs away, and we had this fabulous wallpaper that was really, just real colorful. And my mother [Alma Lawless Hines] had these outfits that she got from Klein's [S. Klein, New York, New York] basement. I said Klein's basement. Isn't that adorable. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is when we're actually modeling at the Audubon Ballroom [New York, New York] in these outfits. And we had, I think I remember we had about four changes. And we did one with footballs and bathing suits and everything, and we were modeling away at the Audubon Ballroom. And my father [Maurice Hines, Sr.] was a bouncer there, and my mother was a waitress. And that's how we got the gig. Speaker 2: That's the Audubon Ballroom. Speaker 1: That's it. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And this is when we actually started to tap. I think we, we were, we had taken, this was before we got with Henry LeTang, though. This was taken at Wally Wanger school of dance [Wally Wanger Dance Studio, New York, New York], which was over the Loew's [Loew's Victoria Theater, New York, New York] on 125th Street. And that's when we were taking classes. And we got, my mother got, I don't know how she had these, found these tails and top hat. And we used to do a tails and top hat number. And this was when we were a little older. I think we were six and four here. Speaker 2: Next, please. Speaker 1: Ah, these were--this was taken for Jet magazine. And this is, we were in Henry LeTang's studio. This is, now we were really tapping. And he had us sort of like the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas], which we were never really as great as the Nicholas brothers, but we were close. And they did a contact sheet. And they put--the picture in the center on the top is the one they put in Jet magazine. And I think we got the cover once, and then they used that picture all the time, all the time. That was a great shot. We hit that one, Gregory and I, oh. Speaker 2: You do look like the Nicholas brothers. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: This was 1955, and Tallulah Bankhead there. She came and saw us at the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel], which was the first integrated hotel in Las Vegas [Nevada], in the black section of town. And she came and saw us, and went crazy over us. And she said, "I need to do something for them." So she bought Gregory a set of drums because he liked drums. And at that time I was twirling batons, and she bought me this rhinestone baton, which I still have to this day, and another baton for practice. And she was great to us. And she gave this party for us at the Sands [Sands Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada], which at that time they didn't allow black people to come to the hotels. And she said, "No, they're coming." Because she had the whole floor of where she lived in the hotel. So, we came and she gave a big party for us. It was wonderful. She was a great lady, great lady to us, Tallulah Bankhead. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: This was taken at The Americana Hotel [The Americana of New York; Sheraton New York Times Square Hotel, New York, New York], which is, which was a nightclub there. And we were opening for Carmen McRae. And they had all these nightclubs in New York [New York] at that time--the Plaza [Plaza Hotel, New York, New York] had the Persian Room, and the Americana had this room. And it was called just the Americana. And it was a wonderful time in our life. We were, were popular and hot. We'd done about maybe fifteen Johnny Carson shows ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'] by that time, and we were smoking. I love this picture because first I was heavy, I was real heavy then. But I think my brother looked so handsome there. He looked so handsome, like a movie star, like what he became. He looked just like a movie star. And we were really dancing up a storm then. Boy, we were really good. Speaker 2: So, this picture though looks like all white people sitting up front. Speaker 1: And it was, it was, yeah, it was. Speaker 2: When did you first perform for your first integrated audience? Speaker 1: Probably in, at the Moulin Rouge in 1955 because it was in the black section of town. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we were doing three shows a night, and all the white audiences would come over there because the big stars would come over to see--we were there with Dinah Washington and then Lionel Hampton. And they would come to see them, and that's what closed it. Because the gangsters said, wait a minute, all the white people are coming over to this black place. And they were gambling, they were making money. And it only lasted seven months. They're about to open it again. Speaker 2: Is it in the same section? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, it is. This was--you ready? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: This was taken at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York]. And this was the very first time we worked there, 1954, with Ruth Brown. And this guy was very famous for taking these pictures, the contact sheet, looking like that. And they were his signature. And I love it, I love that picture; I just do, I love it. Speaker 2: Did you ever go to Sardi's [New York, New York] and all that stuff after that show? Speaker 1: Oh, sure. Speaker 2: Most of the people did that. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, it was exciting, it was. It was very exciting. Are you ready? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: This was taken at a benefit for AIDS [auto immunodeficiency syndrome] at the Limelight [New York, New York] club. I was doing 'Sophisticated Ladies' at the time. And [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg was--had opened in her show that Mike Nichols directed. Harvey Fierstein was, I forget what he was doing. Speaker 2: I think he was doing 'Torch Song' ['Torch Song Trilogy']. Speaker 1: He might have been doing 'Torch Song,' yes, you're right. And that's Karen Akers. Speaker 2: Who is she? Speaker 1: She's a cabaret singer that was very famous. And she still is, she still sings. She was at Wolf Trap [Vienna, Virginia], and--wonderful voice, very French influenced kind of voice, and very wonderful songs, great voice. Speaker 2: This is a very historic picture. Speaker 1: It really is, it really is. Look at how young Whoopi looked. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Wow, she was so little. Speaker 2: And where were you guys, who were you looking at? Was there a performance going on? Speaker 1: No, no, no. They--we were the performers. Speaker 2: You were the performers? Speaker 1: Yes. We each got up and did something. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I sang, she did a little monologue. Harvey sang and did something, and Karen sang. And there were other people there, too. Speaker 2: Got you. Speaker 1: But they got us together, they grouped us together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that was, it was really nice, really nice. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That was taken on our very first show that we did with Wally Wanger's Dance Studio. And that was, they had a Winter Garden theatre in the Bronx [New York], like the Winter Garden on Broadway [Winter Garden Theatre, New York, New York]. This was the Winter Garden. And I love this picture, because my mother sewed those black buttons on there, and we weren't supposed to have them. But ins- instinct wise, she realized that we would be in the front in the center. And we were (laughter). And all the other mothers were very unhappy, because they were all, all the rest of the kids were in just white. But we had black buttons on there (laughter). And my mother wasn't that type of woman, but she had instincts (laughter). Speaker 2: This looks like 'The Music Man' [Meredith Willson] but it's not? Speaker 1: No, that's 'The Girl in Pink Tights' [Jerome Chodorov and Joseph Fields]. That's the first Broadway show we did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what that is. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's the very famous ballerina, Zizi Jeanmaire, who was a very, a big movie star, too. She had done the movie, 'Hans Christian Andersen' with Danny Kaye. And they--Agnes de Mille, the great Agnes de Mille, who choreographed, and legendary 'Oklahoma!' diva. She choreographed this musical called 'The Girl in Pink Tights,' which Zizi Jeanmaire and Gregory and I did this soft shoe with her, that Henry LeTang did. And we played, I played the newspaper boy and Gregory played the shoeshine boy. And then we did this dance with her. She was great to us, she loved us, oh, and we loved her. And she's still alive, she's still alive. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's me and Fayard Nicholas, the great Fayard Nicholas, who is my idol, and who in my estimation was the greatest dancer that I'd ever seen in my life. He could do everything from close floor work, to splits, to line, to balletic moves, to personality, and charisma. He's the greatest that I've ever seen. And I always wanted to be him and never could do it, never could do it. But I idolized him to the day he died. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: This was taken when I did my first nightclub act, when I became into my own as my own performer. After Gregory and I had split up the act [The Hines Brothers], we both were trying to find ourselves creatively and performance wise. And all of a sudden I evolved into this, and this is when I knew I, I had it. I owned it, and there was a focus to my work and a focus to my performance. And I loved being out there. Speaker 2: Where, where was this taken? Speaker 1: This, I think it was taken in the Catskill Mountains. I'm not sure, actually. But I had my dancers-- Speaker 2: Did you have a big band (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I had a--about fifteen pieces. I mean I was, I was smoking, I was smoking. I had it then. I knew it took me a while to get there, because I wasn't sure for at least two or three years. But when I got there, I was there. I owned that stage. That's when, that's when you know you have it--when you own the stage and the, and you're there for the audience, and they love you, and you love them for loving you...