 Story_ID: 23498 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Okay, it's Carlos R. Handy, and that's C-A-R-L-O-S, and then R for Rafael, which is R-A-F-A-E-L, and then Handy, H-A-N-D-Y, like handyman, Handy. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It's October 18th, 1950, and I was born in Havana, Cuba. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: I am professor and chair of the physics department here at Texas Southern University in Houston [Texas]. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is August 17, 2012. Speaker 1: Marcus Garvey's [Jamaican political leader] birthday. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Trailer Number 10, by the river, on the campus of Texas Southern University. That's only, that's my joke, I always say "by the river" (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23499 Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter) condensed milk, which I can't eat anymore (laughter), but I love condensed milk and a bowl of steamy hot rice (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Simple. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Green, I normally say, green. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: That's a hard one, favorite time of the year? I guess after classes end, it would be May (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: That's a hard one. I hardly take any vacation. Yeah, I would say Costa Rica. Speaker 1: All right, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, I like, I like the phrase, which is actually a phrase from here, "Greatness comes from within." I really like that phrase. Speaker 1: That's part of the motto of the school? Speaker 2: It used to be the motto of the previous president, and I'm sure they [don't] officially use it anymore, but I really love that phrase-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "Greatness comes from within." Story_ID: 23500 Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm gonna start by asking about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and your father's side, though we always start with the mother's side first. Then we'll put 'em together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yeah, Leonor, I'll give it to you fully, Leonor Maria Cartaya, that was her maiden name. And so it's L-E-O-N, as in Nancy, -O-R, Maria, and then Cartaya, C-A-R-T-A-Y-A. And then obviously, after she got married, it would be Handy, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is May 14, 1916, and she was born in Matanzas, Cuba, which is the, which is basically, the birth place of Afro-Cuban music. Speaker 1: Okay, and how do you spell Matanzas? Speaker 2: Matanzas is M-A-T-A-N-Z-A-S, Matanzas. Speaker 1: Okay, good thing I asked 'cause I had it wrong. Okay, all right, Matanzas, Cuba. This is the home of Afro-Cuban music? Speaker 2: It's the home of Afro-Cuban, and what she would always tell me, is that in her, I mean she grew up in a poor neighborhood, but every home had a piano. There was a lot of music. So it was a very music-oriented part of Cuba. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: The most I know about my mother, would be the grandparents, you know, they also derived from slaves. I think Cartaya was the slave owner. And, but I knew my grandmother. I didn't meet my grandfather 'cause he passed away before I was born, and it basically stops there. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about slavery that are passed down in the family? Speaker 2: No, not about slavery, but certainly about, you know, I guess about race relations in Cuba in the '30s [1930s] and stuff like that, yeah, stories. Not, they were not as bad as here. And so, the thing that always impressed me, in Cuba, because the racists I think were more involved, I mean a black, the black man can walk with a white woman on the street, and I don't think there'd be a problem. There were segregated clubs, but in terms of the public setting, it wasn't segregated. I know she always told me also that Woolworth which was a five and ten cents store set up shop in Havana [Cuba], and they tried to have segregated counters and a fight broke out. And that was the end of that, okay. So, so in Cuba, the impression I always had is the black man could assert himself and, and, which was certainly not the case over here in the United States. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: And the other thing also is, it's part of the Cuban history that, that famous black generals fought in the Cuban Revolution. So that's always been known. So, you know, it, it--how the black man was perceived there was a little bit different. And also there's this joke in Cuba that says, if you see a white person or you see someone that says that they're white, you would ask, and "Where are your grandparents," 'cause the blackness is so part of the genetic pool that anybody that says they're, they're white, more than likely, there's some black connection at some point. So it's just a whole different environment. Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a black, in fact, a graduate of Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] that told me that there were so many Maceos in Houston when he was coming up, all of them named for Antonio Maceo-- Speaker 2: Maceo, Tony Maceo, right, yeah. Speaker 1: --the great Cuban leader of the Revolution in the Spanish American War. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: In fact, he had defeated the Spanish colonists and the U.S. came and defeated him. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: You know. Are there stories about that in your family? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know of any family that were active, say in the Spanish American War, but, you know, but that, you know, my uncle, Juan, was the, the Number One, he was the Cuban boss of the carpenters working at Guantanamo [Cuba]. So, you know, these are little, you know, family accomplishments, but, you know, they were, they were a pretty--my mother's family, and she had about nine or ten brothers. And they, one became a judge, others were school teachers, others were carpenters and stuff like, another was a stevedore. I think that's what you call 'em, right, the, working in the, unloading boats and the ships and stuff like that. So--. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23501 Speaker 1: So your mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya], now she grew up in a different Cuba than the Cuba we have today, the [Fidel] Castro Cuba? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but she was (laughter), you know, she died seven years ago, and she, she loved Fidel [Castro], I hate to say it (laughter). I mean I don't hate to say it, but it--the only reason I hate to say it because then it puts me in a defensive position. And I remember taking her to Cuba in '93 [1993] or '95 [1995]. And we're waiting for a connection in the Bahamas, and I had to tell my mom, don't get into it with nobody about Castro because I don't feel like getting into a fight (laughter). But-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a touchy subject (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but, you know, part of it is that she grew up, you know, at an age when there was a lot of anti-American imperialist feelings 'cause they felt that America would go out there, you know, buy out the beaches, exclude the local population, either try to impose segregation, segregated, you know, establishments and stuff like that. So, you know, she's part of that. So, obviously, their, their way to reacting to things is gonna be a little bit different, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, you know, there's a lot, I've heard lots of different mixed feelings about what Cuba (unclear), (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I mean there's a romantic, I mean there's a romantic aspect to her in terms of Castro and stuff. So, but Cubans are, are very patriotic, either on the left or the right. So, you know, so that's one characteristic about Cubans. They're extremely patriotic. Story_ID: 23502 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when she [Handy's mother, Leonor Maria Cartaya] was raised up, did she have a chance to go to, to finish school? Speaker 2: Well, she, at the time, she, she--in fact, she met my father, she was, I think, in a doctoral program in pedagogy, but never finished, but she was close to getting a doctorate in education. Speaker 1: Okay, was she in the United States or in Cuba? Speaker 2: Well, she, she came on an academic, she came on an excursion in 1947. I guess it was like an academic excursion. She toured Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia], other places like that. And then she fell in love with the United States and stayed behind, rented an apartment and in that building, my father was living with his kids from his first wife. He was a widower. Speaker 1: Is this in New York? Speaker 2: In New York City. Speaker 1: New York City. Speaker 2: Okay, and little by little, they started a relationship, and, you know, one thing led to another, and they got married in 1950. So or 1949, 'cause I (laughter), heck, so I don't know. They married in 1949 or 1950, but I do know that, that we were, we popped up nine months after (laughter). So--. Speaker 1: So, they, your mother had moved back to Cuba for a minute, I guess when you were born? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause she taught. She was a school teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So she would go back and forth. She would fly--my mother hated to fly, and my father never flew. So my mother would fly from Havana [Cuba] to Miami [Florida] and then take either the train or the Greyhound Bus up the East Coast. And I do remember, she would, she, you know, she tells me that the bus driver would tell her, well, you know, you folks in the back. And so she says that on one occasion she said, or the only occasion she said, "Me no speak English," okay, so she stayed put. And my mother was of the character that she would not bow down. You know, she would find a way to (laughter) stay where she wanted to be, so--. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23503 Speaker 1: You were born in Cuba, but you don't have, I would guess you don't have a lot of memories of Cuba as a child? Speaker 2: Well, I was born in Cuba and for the first eight years, my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya]--because she would resume her teaching duties, would take us back and forth. And I do have memories of Cuba. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And the irony, well, I don't know if it's an irony or not. You know, I grew up--let's put it this way. When I got to high school in the tenth grade, I wrote an essay. And the English teacher, Ms. Poe, wrote, I can see that English is not your native language. So part of it is that I, you know, my father was in the music business. So he had odd hours. And so when he would come, he would get up late and come back late. So when I would come home from school, I'd be interacting with my mother, and that would be a Spanish conversation. So, and so, in terms of the Cuban thing, yeah, I do remember, I mean a beautiful--my best childhood was in Cuba because when my mother would bring us to the United States, she was always paranoid about, you know, I mean she did not understand American society and its customs. So she was overly protective. But in Cuba, we could roam free. I had cousins and uncles and aunts and so it was a more relaxed childhood. And I, I always look back and think it was a beautiful experience when I was in Cuba. Speaker 1: Now, what did she say about growing up in Cuba that you remember? Speaker 2: What did she say about growing up in Cuba? I guess the, the number one concerns were racial attitudes and stuff like that. You know, black men in the United States whistling at a white woman was (laughter) not to be done. Over there, she never, you know, well, she never insinuated any problems of that type in Cuba. You know, she understood, she understood the culture. I mean there were never, you know, there weren't, I mean, I think if it happened that, you know--I know that when she got married there were some issues and stuff. And I think if she had not had us, she would have probably gone back to Cuba because she, I don't think she really adjusted all that well to American society. But, but after we were born, you know, it was a mute point. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: So for the first eight years, we went back and forth. And, and I tell people that in 1958, I mean I remember as a kid hearing about, oh, somebody put a bomb at a theater and stuff like that, 'cause at that time, you know, [Fidel] Castro, I think was trying to take over. And I know when he did take over, they, they had a, they had an album of the Cuban Revolution which was made up of these baseball sized cards. And the centerfold was all the Cuban generals. And I remember as a kid going around and collecting 'em. I still have that. So, you know, I still have that. So, you know, there was a, you know, so, overall, I mean other than that, you know--but when we came back in '58 [1958], you know, it's not that we left because of Castro necessarily. We just got, we, we stayed put in the United States because every time she would come back to the United States, she would have to fight to keep us at grade level 'cause they always wanna set you back a grade. And so she, she got tired of that. And then from 1958, we stayed put. We didn't go back to Cuba till 1980. Story_ID: 23504 Speaker 1: Now, was she [Handy's mother, Leonor Maria Cartaya] the first one in her family to go to college or was there a tradition of-- Speaker 2: I think in Cuba, I mean, yeah, you have, I think, you know, being third-world, the third-world mentality is, you try to go, be educated. And so, on the, on the women's, well, there weren't that many women in the family. But, you know, there was a lawyer, who'd become a judge, and I think the common discipline was teaching. So my mother and her sister, my, my aunt, they were teachers. There were a lot of teachers in, in the extended family. So, so in terms of college, in terms of going to the University of Havana [Havana, Cuba], certainly, her, her older brother, the one who became a lawyer, her older sister, my mother and then there could have been some technical schools. So there was this, you know, this drive for, you know, for, you know, post, you know, what is it? The equivalent to an undergraduate, maybe graduate education. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I guess I'm still trying to ask you like, what--did she have any memories of Cuba growing up that she shared that are either different from what you had or what did she say about it, you know, I guess? Speaker 2: Well, other than growing up in a, in a really bad neighborhood, okay, and then there was some family experiences there, other than the, the politics that I've sort of hinted at, the food and stuff like, and she would always talk how she could go somewhere and get a huge lobster and all that kind of stuff. Nothing out of the ordinary. I mean she, you know, it was difficult, you know. She would tell me about, snippets about, you know, about Batista [Fulgencio Batista], when he first came to power, he wasn't all that bad, but then gradually, he became corrupted. And I think-- Speaker 1: This is Raoul Batista, president-- Speaker 2: I forget now, yeah, but the guy that Castro-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the president of Cuba-- Speaker 2: --bumped out [Fulgencio Batista]. But when he first came over, he said, she said that he was pretty broad minded. I think he actually allowed a lot of upward mobility for minority types in the society in terms of blacks, blacks in the military and stuff like that. But then he, then he became corrupted. And, you know, we didn't talk too much, but those, you know, you get snapshots now and then, talking to her about things like that. Speaker 1: Did she talk about the music from Matanzas [Cuba, where Handy's mother was born; the center of Afro-Cuban music]? Speaker 2: Not too much, but, you know, but Celia Cruz, the famous Celia Cruz, she, she says she remembers going to the equivalent to the Apollo Theater down in Cuba and hearing Celia Cruz, and she was skinny and whatever, and, you know, so there're a lot of musical groups and stuff like that. So, but, you know, not an extensive expose, but, you know, I've seen photographs. I mean I've seen her old photographs, and they're just beautiful. I mean it's like, you know, it's a very, I mean for her in terms of, you know, her, I guess--I'm not sure, I don't think you would call her middle class. She was like top, lower class, that kind of thing. But, you know, there were challenges, but still the economy was reasonable, and from the photographs, the old photographs I've seen, she enjoyed her life, and she got to come to the United States and stuff like that. So, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she play any instrument herself? Speaker 2: No, my mother is deceased, so you're talking present, but she, actually, in terms of music, her, my aunt, Mayserita (ph.), she, you know, the famous Cuban pianist, Ernesto Lecuona, Lecuona, my, my aunt was a classical, classically trained pianist. And, and my mother kind of knew a little, basic chords with the piano, but nothing other, nothing major in music. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23505 Speaker 1: Well, let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father was William C., for Christopher, Handy, Jr. And he was born in Clarksdale, Mississippi in 1904 in August. I gotta pin down the exact birthday, but he was born in August-- Speaker 1: August-- Speaker 2: --1904, Clarksdale, Mississippi. Speaker 1: 1904, and Clarksdale, Mississippi. Speaker 2: Right, he passed away in 1972 from prostate cancer or complications of prostate cancer in New York City. And-- Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us, well, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family and how far back can you trace 'em? Speaker 2: All right, the, you know, with a name like William C. Handy, Jr., it's not too surprising that his father was William C. Handy, and he's considered the father of the Blues [genre of music] 'cause he was the first to develop Blues compositions, Memphis Blues being the first and then St. Louis Blues, one of the most famous Blues around. And so, my grandfather was born in Florence, Alabama in 1873. And it's actually a beautiful part of Alabama, northwest corner of Alabama. And what's interesting is, after I got my Ph.D. in 1978, I'd never been to the South, but when I relocated back east from Los Alamos, New Mexico, I actually drove through--I got married. I drove through Florence, Alabama, and for some reason I really liked the town. And then I learned on that that town, Florence, Alabama, two things they told me. Every, every year they celebrate the Handy Festival, I believe in late July. And, and on one of those occasions that I visit them, they told me two things that just shocked me. One is, and I hope I heard this right. They said, that part of Alabama voted not to secede from the Union and, and I forgot the second one, voted not to secede and they voted for McGovern [George Stanley McGovern , Democratic Party presidential nominee in the 1972 presidential election], I believe. Speaker 1: Oh, when he was, when he ran for president? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they said they voted for McGovern and they voted not to secede from the Union. And my father, my grandfather wrote his autobiography. And it's really a very poetic, a very lyric, you know, nostalgic look as to how he developed as a kid and became the famous person he became. And there's not a harsh word about Florence. So I don't know, you know, so he was very lucky to live in that part of Alabama, and I'm obviously very grateful that he did. But, you know, that was, that was nice. And, and then there is a family tree on my father's side, and it goes back to the 1700s. I forget, I don't remember the oldest, but the family tree does go back to the 1700s. Now, I can get you a copy of that if you'd like. Speaker 1: Okay, now, Florence is part of the quad-cities in northern Alabama, Florence, Tuscumbia [Alabama],-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: What, Muscle Shoals [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Is Huntsville [Alabama] part of that? Speaker 1: No, Florence, Tuscumbia, Muscle Shoals and, 'cause I've got a friend that's from there, and I've been there once, you know, once. That's the only--but I didn't know there were four cities-Sheffield [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sheffield, Florence, Tuscumbia and Muscle Shoals, they're right there on Alabama where the big Joe Wheeler dam is and all that-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, and together, they make a nice, little sized city. It's the kind of thing that-- Speaker 2: Right, and they, I think at one time they were pretty active in the recording area, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, Muscle Shoals Horns and all that, they've got, the studio now is a museum. You can go through the studio. Speaker 2: Right, right, and, on that point, so my grandfather's home or they, it's been renovated somewhat, but it's also a museum there. So it's very--and there's a lot of memorabilia that was donated to the museum. And they do a really a splendid job, I think, of preserving the legacy and stuff like that. Speaker 1: I never heard about the liberal legacy of the quad cities, but now I know something-- Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I, I swear that's what they told me, (laughter) and I was like really impressed. I was really impressed. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's interesting. William Still's [African American abolitionist] brother was sold into slavery there, and then made it back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: But back in the 1850s and '60s [1860s]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It's an interesting place. Story_ID: 23506 Speaker 1: So, at any rate, so your [paternal] grandfather [W.C. Handy, known as the "Father of the Blues"] was born there [Florence, Alabama]. Now, is, who was his father and mother? Speaker 2: You're asking me an embarrassing question. All right, I wanna say that my great grandfather was Charles, but I, I don't wanna swear to it, but I, I know of, I know of them, but I haven't really codified them in my memory. But they're, they're in the family--and, you know, certainly, my, my great grandfather in the book plays a prominent part. I've sure you've seen the movie of 'W. C. Handy' with Nat King Cole [jazz pianist] playing the part of my grandfather. Have you seen that movie? Speaker 1: (No audible response). Speaker 2: Well, actually, I never, (laughter) I never could actually sit through it, but then Texas Southern [University, Houston, Alabama] was, a year ago or two years ago was hosting like a black history month, and they actually played it for the students. And I sat through it, and actually, it wasn't too bad. But, because there are a lot of historical facts. There are a lot of chronological things that are out of order, but overall, I think it does a nice job of sort of capturing my grandfather. But in that movie, you know, and it's well known that my great grandfather was very, very much against my grandfather pursuing music as a career. And I think the famous quote was that, pursuing that kind of career would, you know, basically, be a guarantee to go to hell and stuff like that. I mean I'm paraphrasing, but it's the, you know, the work of the devil and so forth, even playing a guitar. My grandfather was interested in the guitar. And I think he, he managed to sneak--well, actually, he did learn to play the guitar because actually there's a recording of him strumming a guitar, but his principal instrument was the coronet, the trumpet. And, and there's an irony there because I like classical music, I mean I hate to say this. It's almost embarrassing because when I was growing up, my father [William Christopher Handy, Jr.] would play gospels, Dixieland, but never Blues. And so I didn't really grow, I grew up because my sister liked classical ballet, I grew up exposed more to classical music. And so instinctively, I identify more with classical music. But then when I look, when I think back at my, my grandfather, I say, well, wait a minute. He was a trumpet player, and he was a classical trumpet player because there was no other style, right. There was no other style. And so, and the other irony is that, well, you're a reed man. There's a technique called triple tonguing on the trumpet, and in his autobiography, he, he says that there were three very prominent coronetists at his time, and so and so was great for his street playing, so and so was great for this. And he was great because of his tonality and his triple tonguing, which were the two things that I'm always being complimented on (laughter). So, anyway, so, so in terms of the family tree and my great grandfather, I only know of that, the legend of my great grandfather as being a, a figure very much against my grandfather's development as a musician. But later on, you know, when my grandfather became famous, my great grandfather, you know, came to terms and accepted that. Speaker 1: Was your great grandfather a minister? Speaker 2: He was a minister, right. Speaker 1: Okay, Reverend--Baptist or do you know? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Is it, is it the--what is it? The AFME church-- Speaker 1: AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church-- Speaker 2: AME-- Speaker 1: Or CME, it could AME, CME. I mean the AME church is an independent black denomination. Speaker 2: I think, okay, I think (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now, this story is almost like what the Al Jolson [singer and comedian of Jewish descent] movie, the first talking movie, 'The Blues Singer', you know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He's the son of a Rabbi, and he-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: -- they wanted him to be the cantor, and he wants to sing the Blues. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: You know, his father is against it, and then when he gets to be a success, of course, everybody likes that. Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) success convinces a lot of people. Speaker 1: Right, so-- Speaker 2: Now, I know very little about my great grandmother. And also I know also very little about my grandmother, on my--my biological grandmother on my father's side. She, I'm not sure at what point she passed away, but certainly--now, I did meet my grandfather because he was, he passed away in '58 [1958], and so when I was living in New York City, he would throw these lavish parties where everybody would come. And so I would remember either, he was a little bit incapacitated. So he would ride down the stairwell on one of these automatic chair lifts. And I remember I-- Speaker 1: This is in the-- Speaker 2: --I just have this sensation of touching his hand. There are photos of me sitting next to him with my sister and stuff like that. So I, I do have a recollection of being next to him. Speaker 1: So you were seven or eight years old then? Speaker 2: When he passed away, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I certainly remember his funeral, so--but my grandmother, his wife, she passed away. And then my grandfather remarried his secretary, Irma Louise Handy, and she is, you know, in that sense, my step-grandmother. She's the, the figure that I remember the most, so--. Story_ID: 23507 Speaker 1: Okay, you were talking about how you met your grandfather [William Christopher Handy, famous blues musician; knows as the "Father of the Blues"] in 1958, you remember meeting him. Was that the only time you met him or-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure we probably went to his house on several occasions, two or three times. He was in White Plains, New York, so that wasn't too far from New York City, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you remember--such a meeting, I think deserves us to pause and kind of savor it. So, do you remember the circumstances and everything? Speaker 2: The only, the only real memory is him riding down, grabbing his hand and, but I can't remember any exchanges, words or anything like that. But, you know, for me he was a big guy. I mean he's--the other thing is, I should say is, I'm almost sure my birth certificate says, Charles Handy, but I don't have a copy of it. And my, his brother was Charles. When, the company they formed was 'Handy Brothers Music Publishing Company'. And the brother was Charles, so Uncle Charles. And so everybody in the family calls me Charlie. But at some point in my early development, I decided to call myself Carlos. And so when my half sister, Minnie, who just passed away not too long ago, I said, I must have been so sick and tired of my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] calling me Charlie all the time, I wanted to call myself Carlos. But I, I think my birth certificate name says Charlie, but I can't, Charles, okay. In fact, I'm almost sure it says Charles (laughter), okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But anyway, so in terms of my grandfather, I have the, the impression of an image and the more direct impression was that one time, seeing him ride down the stairwell and sort of shaking his hand or grabbing his hand. Speaker 1: Now, was he, do you remember if he was, was he kind of about your size or-- Speaker 2: Well, he was, especially now, yeah, he was about my size, I would say. I mean I would think he, I would, I'm slightly--well, I was a little bit bigger than my, slightly--my father [William Christopher Handy, Jr.] was a little taller, but I was a little stockier. And, and I think both my grandfather and his brother were stocky, okay, and tended to be stocky. So, and my Uncle Charlie, I mean I swear, he was in his 80s. He had these massive hands. And, and I asked him, how'd you get--he was a piano mover. He's very elegant. And you see in his photographs, I mean like an English gentleman. But he had massive hands, even for an old guy. They were like vice grips, man, he could (laughter), move pianos. So, yeah, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a sense when you were eight of the fame of your grandfather? Speaker 2: Eight, I don't know, but certainly, you know, when I got a little older, I had a sense that he was an important person. And certainly, you know--and, I guess I should say this. In, you know, I always liked education. I always liked to study and stuff like that. But I wasn't, my sister was actually a little bit better--we're twins. My sister, I--well, my father married twice. He had four kids by his first wife. And all of them, all my half siblings until about a year ago were alive. The eldest passed away, Minnie, she--so I have three surviving half siblings. And I have a twin sister with, in terms of my father's second marriage. So, now I forgot the question you were asking--what was the question? How'd we start on this (laughter)? Speaker 1: Okay, I see, let's see. Let's, get, oh, were you aware of his stature? Speaker 2: Yeah, so, you know, the teachers in the elementary school, junior high school, you know, when my mother would visit them because, you know, she wanted us to be in a certain class, it got known among the teachers. And I think their reaction to it made me realize that my grandfather was an important person. So, but I, I mean instinctively, I kind of knew, but I think it was, you know, reconfirmed as, and did a little name dropping. I do know, in fact, this is the queue, in the sixth grade in the New York City public school system, they would test to see if you go into chorus, dancing or instrumentation. And you would think I would make it instrumentation. No, they put me in dancing, okay. So I get to the seventh grade. And in those days, it, you know, it was square dancing. That was the dancing, square dance and girls in these bloomers and stuff. And after a while I got tired of that. So I started doing some name dropping, you know, you know, I'm related to (laughter) W. C. Handy, get me out of this. So I found myself in the band, and I did very well, became first chair, (unclear) Manhattan Orchestra and stuff like that. Story_ID: 23508 Speaker 1: But the reason I find that comical is that, so, so in terms of name dropping and having a sense--so certainly, at the age of thirteen, which I was in seventh grade, I knew who my grandfather [W.C. Handy; "Father of the Blues"] was. But, but then what's really funny is, you know, when I went to the university and then Ph.D., I never really went out and danced or anything in New York City. I didn't go to any disco. My first disco was in Santa Fe, New Mexico after I'd just gotten my Ph.D. I went to a disco, and man, I didn't know I loved to dance. I mean I loved to dance, and I just look back, when I took that test, and I don't know if it was rhythmic pattern or what. I'm not sure what they test for to see if you go to dancing. But I loved to dance, and I said, well, New York City [in school] got it right. And then what's even funnier, if, if they test you for rhythmic patterns, what's funny is my father [William Christopher Handy, Jr.], when, when he had--by his second marriage, I never thought of him as a musician. I always thought of him as a businessman 'cause he would, he became the president of his grandfather's company, and he, he bought a Steinway, a beautiful, vertical Steinway 'cause I told him I wanted to learn the piano and never actually got to learn to play the piano. But he would strum these stupid chords, and that was the most musicality I thought my father possessed. But then after he passed away, there's a poster with my grandfather's [William Christopher Handy, "Father of the Blues"] orchestra, and I'm looking at the back. And I say, well, who's this fool in the percussion section. And I looked at the names, and it's my father. So he was like, it--he must have been a teenager. It's, if you read the, the date posted below the photograph, he must have been like fifteen 'cause I think that photograph was 1919. He was the percussionist for my grandfather's, W. C. Handy Orchestra. And then I asked my half brother who's, who lives up in Long Island [New York] now--he's William C. Handy III. And he says, oh, yeah, dad had, you know, batteries and stuff in the house, you know, before he remarried with your mom. And so my father, I learned unfortunately, very late that my father actually was a musician, a percussionist. And so I said, well, maybe this rhythmic pattern (laughter) is something I get from my father, 'cause, you know, like, most men, you know, you hear a beat and you wanna, you know, hit the drums and stuff. And I really get into that. So, I don't know if that's, there's that instinct there. But, but in terms of my father, he, so he played--he was a percussionist. He, Lionel Hampton [jazz vibraphonist, pianist, percussionist, bandleader and actor] even interacted with him, I guess, taught him or something like that, the, the, what do you call it? What do you call these things that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the vibraharp [vibraphone], yeah, the xylophone. Speaker 1: Yeah, the xylophone. And my, my aunt, Aunt Katherine, was a singer, and there's actually, there is actually a video of her singing the St. Louis [Missouri] Blues when she was in her twenties or some young age. My uncle, a very handsome, Wire Handy, was a pianist and choral arranger, composer type. So, so my father's siblings, at least the ones that I knew, were alive when I was born, you know, born, they were musically prone. But, you know, they, they went in other directions. They basically assumed different positions within the small company and stuff like that. Story_ID: 23509 Speaker 1: So, but your father [William Christopher Handy, Jr.], did he grow up in New York or-- Speaker 2: He, he lived a long time--I know he married in New York the first time. I think they lived in Chicago [Illinois] at one time. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just wondering if he was like born in the South, raised in the South-- Speaker 2: No, my father was born in Clarksdale, Mississippi-- Speaker 1: Clarksdale, okay, yeah. Speaker 2: I don't know. I think they moved to Chicago early on-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then eventually, to New York City. I think he, I know he, he--I would hazard to guess that from the teens on, he was in the New York City area. Speaker 1: Okay. And did he accompany your grandfather [William Christopher Handy, "Father of the Blues"] on trips around the world, to other countries and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Well, that's a very good question. That's a good question. I, I know that, I know my grandfather toured a lot with his--he used to be part of a minstrel show, minstrel band. And I think they toured somewhat. And he had a probably small band in the early years 'cause I know he says he went to Mexico and he even talks about passing through Orange, Texas or something like that and Canada and places like that. But after my grandfather became recognized, I don't know if he traveled, I don't think he traveled that much because he lost his sight twice. And so he became permanently blind--I know he got blind the, maybe the first time in his forties, and then he got blind again in his sixties, and what's interesting is that, you know, before coming to Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas], I used to be at Clark-Atlanta University, in Atlanta, Georgia. And I was the faculty representative to the board there. And there was a board member from New York, and I can't, I forget his name. But what happened was, the second time my father got, went blind, supposedly he fell off the subway platform in New York City and hit his head and went blind. His, the relative of this fellow on the board member was the one that helped him back up, okay. But so, so in his--cause when he wrote the, when he became famous, St. Louis Blues, he was already like forty-one, okay. So he was pretty well developed. And so I think some time in his sixties, he went blind again. I mean I forget the actual age. And so he went blind twice. So I think he was a little limited. And he, I don't think he traveled that much. So in terms of my father accompanying him, the general answer is probably no. Now, I'm sure my grandfather made trips to the South and stuff like that. But on a related thing, my father never took me on any trips to the South. And I don't know if he, you know, if that was like a protective gesture on his part because of segregation in the South and stuff like that. But that's something that always struck. I know he attended some activities, both musical and perhaps even--I don't think political 'cause my father wasn't normally a politician, but I think there was an occasion where Martin Luther King [Jr.] was around, and I never accompanied my father. So I'm not sure if he was trying to protect me from just seeing the unfortunate aspects of life in the South and stuff like that. Speaker 1: One person I haven't asked you about at all was your [paternal] grandmother, W. C. Handy's wife? Speaker 2: Right, right. I know very little about her. And she was from Kentucky, okay, and, but I know very little about her. She passed away before I was born. Speaker 1: Okay, she was from Kentucky. Do you know where? Speaker 2: I know there's a Frank, is it Frank, something? Speaker 1: Frankfort? Speaker 2: Frankfort, I would be hazarding to guess, but for some reason that name sticks out. Speaker 1: Okay, it could be. Story_ID: 23510 Speaker 1: Okay, let's see now, is there--so your dad [William C. Handy, Jr.], now, did he go to high school or go to college? Speaker 2: I know I saw books. I think my father, I know he did not get, I'm almost sure he did not get an undergraduate degree. But I know he attended undergraduate classes, some courses 'cause he had books that I think were from City College of New York, but he did not, as far as I know, he did not complete any, any undergraduate training, anything like that. Speaker 1: And you said he was in the music business? Speaker 2: He was in the music business. He was very, I mean he was very, you know, it's funny because the, the father I knew is not the same father my half brother knew, okay. And, because my father, the, the father I knew was very polite, very gentlemanly, well-dressed, liked good things, did not, did not seem to be an antagonistic kind of character. But, yet, when I ask my half-brother, Bill [William C. Handy III], he tells me something, you know, he says, well, he once got in a cab, and he told the taxi driver, if he didn't go the way he wanted, he was gonna hit him with a two by four (laughter). And I, and that's, that kind of image, I never (laughter) expected from my father. So, I guess when his father [Handy's grandfather, W.C. Handy; "Father of the Blues"] died, and he took over, I guess something changed in him. He was mellowed and stuff. So he was, you know, so he was a very different person. Speaker 1: So he was wilder, earlier. Speaker 2: Probably, something (laughter), I don't know what happened. Speaker 1: Now, what exactly did he do in the music business? He was a-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, the company really was, I think their, the things about the business is it seemed like every time they were in court because one member of the family wanted the company going one direction. The other one wanted to go in another direction. I think the big fight was whether to continue with sheet music or to go into recording, okay. And I think my father was more on the recording side. He was a little bit more progressive, but that never developed. So the company really didn't, they could have done more, but it, it wasn't-- Speaker 1: So was it music publishing under-- Speaker 2: Well, basically, all it was, was, it was just a vehicle to collect the royalties and distribute the royalties. So I think they, they basically were in the business of managing the royalties that they were getting from my grandfather's music and promoting the legacy of, of their father, my grandfather [W.C. Handy], 'cause in, when I was a kid, I would visit--and that's, now, that's another interesting question, 'cause the business used to be on the corner of 51st Street and Broadway [New York City]. And it was a great location because when the Thanksgiving Day Parade would come by, we'd go there, and you could almost touch out and the balloons and stuff. And I don't, well, my father, my grandfather would have been too old to be in the show. My father was running a show there at that time. So, you know, so I tend to be a little absent minded at times, so you have to help me out. So, 'cause there're all these connections and why did I get there. So, we were saying-- Speaker 1: I was just--I was asking about the business. What kind of business was actually-- Speaker 2: Oh, what kind of, yeah, so the business, yeah, so when, when you would walk into that office, that, that office building, the walls were just covered with all the different arrangements by all these famous, Bing Crosby, Nat King Cole, all the famous arrangements, rearrangements they made of the famous compositions, 'St. Louis Blues', 'Memphis Blues'. So I guess in, in the more active periods, you know, they were in the business of publishing sheet music in terms of different arrangements of my grandfather's compositions. But then when my grandfather passed away, I don't, the little that I know, they weren't, they were just more caretakers of the legacy and collecting the royalties and stuff like that than really promoting any, any real music in terms of publishing and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay, just for the record-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't, it wasn't a big, I think, I think their activities were concentrated more in terms of making sure that more groups would play his music so they can enhance the royalties and stuff like that. So it's a more, promotion kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and I was never, no one ever encouraged me to consider going into the business per se. And so I, in that regard, I think my father would always--I mean I think he recognized that I liked science and, and they knew it was a tough life. I think, I do know that my--I think, without verbalizing it, my father, my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] was trying to push me more into music which I liked, but my father wasn't all that encouraging. I think he had a concern with drugs in the music industry and stuff like that. I mean I think those were things that did not make him too, what's the right word, enthusiastic about my pursuing, you know, some kind of profession in that direction. So. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23511 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how they [Handy's parents, Leonor Maria Cartaya and William Christopher Handy, Jr.] met? How did they meet? Speaker 2: Well, earlier I said that my mother did an academic excursion, came to the United States, toured Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] and New York City, fell in love, stayed behind. The group went back to Cuba. She stayed, got a job in that building. My father, who was a widower with four kids, so they were, they were probably in their teens. She met him and then I guess, someone told her, oh, you know, he's the son of a famous person. And, my mother got interested and, and liked his mannerisms and stuff like that. And so that's how they met, and then I think, and then the, the thing that's funny, she went back to, at some point she went back to Cuba. And they continued the correspondence by mail, and I wanna say something. I'm not sure it sound kind of silly, but I think he proposed to her by, by mail, if that's the right way of saying it. I have that impression. I didn't, never went into it. So she got married, had us, and then they lived in Mount Vernon, New York in a house, but it was a little bit rough for her because she, he had four kids from his first marriage. And I think there was a little bit of tension there. And so, you know, but eventually, I guess when they got a little older, we, we moved out and lived on 103rd Street and Broadway. And I went to public school. There's an elementary school in that area. So we lived, we lived on 108th Street and Broadway, 255 West 108th Street and Broadway from 19--probably, I would say from around 19--, early 1960s to '68 [1968], something like that. And then before that, we lived on 103rd Street and Broadway in a hotel. There was this hotel that I guess you could stuff for, only a weekly to monthly basis. That's where we lived. Story_ID: 23512 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you consider your parents' [Handy's parents, Leonor Maria Cartaya and William Christopher Handy, Jr.] personalities and mannerisms, their looks, their habits, hobbies, talents, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Well, I think I have a little bit of both. I think, I think on the introspective side, I think I take more after my father, you know, and grandfather [W.C. Handy, "Father of the Blues"]. I had, I had, that's, that's my romantic view of it. On the more explosive side, (laughter) I take after my mother. In terms of education, schooling, I mean my mother, valued education. It's not like she had to force on it, on us, but I valued it. And I, I think I lived in a home where there was a lot of quiet time so there's time for thinking and stuff like that. So, you know, my, my--the impression I have of my father, my father was not a, was very, what's the word, laid, laid back. So, you know, we seldom did anything. So, and it's not like there was any--it's just I--well, part of the problem was that my mother was very controlling, okay. She was gonna determine what activities I would do even with my own father. I mean that was her style. So I think that he had, he had us when he was forty-six, and I tell people when I turned forty-six, I told people, now, I can understand why my father was so tired. So, given that he was older when he had us, and given my mother's personality, I think my father's instinct was not to really push the buttons on my mother's side and just have a father-son kind of experience. So, so, you know, so I grew up in an environment where, it was sort of understood that education was important. There were manifestations of that on both, from both sides, from both parents. I, I have been known to have my crazy moments, but, but when I'm into my more sedate moments, I think, I believe I take more after my father, okay. He had a very gentlemanly way of talking and stuff like that, but, you know so--. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23513 Speaker 1: Now, do you have--oh, can you tell us about your siblings? Now, you've got four, there were four-- Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: Four, and from the other one. Speaker 2: And I have a twin sister. Speaker 1: And then you have a twin sister, so-- Speaker 2: And then-- Speaker 1: So name 'em all, and go from the oldest and tell us where you fit in? Speaker 2: Okay, the oldest who passed away in November last year [2011] was Minnie Handy Hansen. Hansen was her married name. She was in her eighties. Then after her I think comes Ruthie. They all live in, they all lived in the New York City area. Ruthie, then comes Wilamenia, well, Wilamenia would be--Wilamenia is the next one, and then Bill, William C. Handy III, William C Handy. He lived in California for a long time. They, of the four, Bill was more, he was in the military, but then went into construction. The other two, except for Minnie were homemakers. Minnie, from a very early age, worked in her grandfather's business. So she knew the business. So after, you know, after, you know, my grandfather was the president. And then he passed on. My father [William C. Handy, Jr.] became the president. Then my aunt became the president, and then Uncle Wire became the president. And then after he passed on, Minnie became the president. So it's like this family succession of presidents. So, you know, and then I have my twin sister who has some personal challenges she's facing in Atlanta [Georgia]. But, but she was, she is, I mean extremely smart, but, you know, but smart, you know, you can have people that are very smart and they can read a book, and they know everything in it. But are they creative. So I think, I'm not that kind of smart, but I'm more, I try to be more creative smart. And so I'll, I'll read something or whatever, and instinctively, I wanna do it a different way, okay. So that, that's how I am. Now, what's interesting in the early years, she was always in the Gifted Program if you talked about the better classes and stuff. And, you know, I wasn't. But as we got older, I, I began to beat her academically. And so, so I got to go to--well, she could have gone to Barnard [College, New York City] but she didn't want to. She went to City College of New York, which was a, which was a very good school, graduated cum laude there. And I went to Columbia University [New York City] and graduated (unclear) laude there. So, of course, I've always, I've been ambitious. She's, she tends to put herself down a little bit too much, but she, she's very, she's very smart, tremendous memory. I mean scholastically, very, very, very good. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Irene, Irene Handy. Speaker 1: Okay. Irene, okay. And she's in Atlanta, you say? Speaker 2: She's in Atlanta. Speaker 1: And, well, so in your household growing up, I guess, was it just you and your sister and your mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] and father [William C. Handy, Jr.] or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, just the four of us. And, and my father would, you know, get up late, come back late. So, I wouldn't really interact that much with him during the day. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23514 Speaker 1: A question we always ask, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: An earliest? Yeah, punching a guy in the eye. That's one (laughter). A good earliest childhood memory, you know, in Cuba being with my cousin, my birthday. I had a, yeah, actually, now that I think about it, I had a beautiful birthday in Cuba. Actually, now, that I think about it, it's amazing. There's this photograph and everybody was there, so that, yeah, that's, so--. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23515 Speaker 1: Let's see, well, so can you describe like, now, you grew up in New York City, three different places, I guess. But-- Speaker 2: Yeah, all in the same, you know, area. Speaker 1: But we always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: In, in New York City? Speaker 1: Or just growing up? It's that the criteria, just growing up, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, you know, and growing up in New York City wasn't that eventful. Speaker 1: Well, both, well, I don't wanna limit you to New York City, just growing up. Speaker 2: I know, I know, I know. Sights and sounds, you know, it, I guess you would say well, living in New York City was a very perfunctory kind of existence. You know, you got up, went to school, studied, came back. Maybe you might be on some team because I belonged to the handball team. You know, I, I love New York, you know, I, you know, more so now that I've left. But, and I always swore that I would never be in a landlocked environment. So, so we lived in Atlanta for 22 years which is kind of, a little landlocked. But I guess it, living in New York City, you know, certain--because my family was in the music business, when you go to Times Square and you see all the lights and glitter and all that stuff, that's pretty impressive. And I guess my father [William C. Handy, Jr.] loved New York City. I mean his favorite phrase was "There's no city like New York City." So you get caught up with all the opportunities, all the stores being open any time of day in New York City, that kind of thing. In Cuba, it was the fam--I mean I really didn't grow up that close to my American family in my younger years, and, and so I, I, I grew up closer to my Latin family, my Cuban family. And so when I was in Cuba, you know, we lived, I lived with my grandma. It's amazing how you open up, with my grandma. She was into Santeria [religious customs]. You know what Santeria is, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, now, tell the audience, I mean the-- Speaker 2: Right, so I had a, so, what the Santeria part? Speaker 1: Yeah, tell the people 'cause other people are gonna be watching this, not just me. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know that, okay, so I grew up, so when we were in Cuba, we, we would live with my grandma, and I guess my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] would always sort of complain that when her father got older, he, he got more involved with Santeria, and, and I guess her mother too, to some extent, although not as much. And I had a, but my, yeah, my grandma was a very strong proponent of the Santeria. So, so there, she had a small house that my, her son, the, the, what is it, Guantanamo Bay carpenter had built, Juan. And there were like three rooms. We slept in one, and the second is just decked out with all these Santeria items. So you would see, you know, you have all these African gods, Chango, (ph.), Yemalyao (ph.), Obatala (ph.) Ochung (ph.), and, you know, I grew up with all these names. And I remember there was a PBS [public broadcasting service] documentary from Central Africa, and you hear some of these guys talking about those same gods, those deities and it's wow (unclear), and it's like goose bumps, you know, like 'Roots' [Alex Hailey's book]. And, you know, and the practice, you know, for instance, they would have, and I hope I'm not jinxing myself from (laughter) divulging some of the rituals. But, for instance, they would have these--and for instance, there were the African twins, and I know that was a big thing 'cause my sister and I were twins. I think it was, something Sancome and Santamia (ph.), I think those were the twins. But anyway, there were these, these rocks, and the rocks had like these little conch shells, outlining faces, right. And, and I swear that they would kill a chicken and spill the blood over the, the rocks and stuff. But, you know, you know, and, and, you accept that, and it wasn't, it wasn't, you know, it was just, you know, I never think of Santeria as, as voodoo kind of thing, although you can, (laughter) you can try to jinx somebody if you wanted. Story_ID: 23516 Speaker 1: Yeah, now, I was asking you off camera about Ricky Ricardo. Do you remember, now, that, 'I Love Lucy' show was on-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: -- at the time you were growing up as a kid. Speaker 2: Well, I hated, I didn't like, 'I Love'--my sister [Irene Handy] and mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] were crazy about 'I Love Lucy'. I couldn't stand that program (laughter), okay. But-- Speaker 1: Well, his 'Babaloo' was reference to Babalawo-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a priest of Santeria. Speaker 2: That's right, Babalawo, Hyyai (ph.). Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right. Speaker 2: But, anyway, so I grew up with all these, I guess pagan African, Christian religions, Santeria [practiced by Handy's maternal grandparents in Cuba], and, you know, just accepted it. But, you know, there are, you know, because you don't have air conditioning and stuff. So there are candles and all that stuff, you--there's that smell of being in that kind of, I mean it's not a bad smell, but it's just the religious smell, if you wanna call it that. And so they, yeah, that's a pretty strong part of my memory. You know, another point I was making was that, you know, the bad thing about my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] was she never--and it was bad for my sister and I, she never realized that you cannot import the cultural traditions of Cuba to America because it creates stress for the kids, right. We're not living in her culture. We're living in an American culture. And the standards and stuff like that are a little different. So she was very, she was very hardnosed about dating and all that kind of stuff. And it basically drove me crazy, but it wasn't until there was a program called 'Que Pasa, USA' which was a sitcom out of Miami [Florida] or at least it depicted a Cuban family in Miami. And you could see the, you know, you could see where these (laughter) attitudes were coming from because, you know, until that time I thought there was something a little bit unusual with my mother. But anyway, you know, I tell people, Cuban mothers are like Jewish mothers, very strong willed. You know, you're gonna do it this way, and there's no other way, and that's--whether I should be thankful of that, I don't know. I, I think, I've always told people I've never, you know, I, in my--and now, I have a theory because I have in my department here some really, really outstanding faculty. And I asked them a question. Did you ever cheat? And they all said, yes. I've never cheated. And then, and then the Frenchman looks at me and he says, I'm too proud to cheat. I mean cheating is not, is not in my instinct. I wanna show that I can do it myself. So, so as a kid I never played hooky. I was, I mean I always prided myself in being a dutiful son. I never lied. You know, I did what they expected me to do, and sometimes I, I compliment myself but then sometimes saying you idiot. You should have snuck out and done some other things (laughter). So, anyway, so, yeah. Story_ID: 23517 Speaker 1: Okay, so, in your neighborhoods in New York, did you live mostly around other Cuban Americans or African Americans? Speaker 2: No, in the neighborhood we were, as far as I could tell, it was mixed. I mean that was on the fringes of--, you know, the other part that's funny and answering is, Columbia University [New York City] is 116th and Broadway. And you know anything about New Yorkers, they're really territorial. It's like they have a little area, and anything outside their area, they basically don't need to know. So in my case, we lived, I lived on 108th Street and Broadway. The IRT [Interborough Rapid Transit Company; operator of New York City's subway] was 110th Street and Broadway. I would walk there, take the train and go wherever I have to go. I never walked beyond 110th Street until a month or two before entering Columbia University, which is, which sounds crazy. So, so, basically, so looking back, I say, okay, it's a university kind of neighborhood. It was a mixture. There was no, like, well, you would say, okay, maybe it's strongly Puerto Rican. You would say it's strongly Puerto Rican, that environment (unclear). It wasn't strongly black, but it was strongly Hispanic, I would say. But, you know, but there were, you know, our friend from school, Japanese, another one from Syria, Korean, who became a, one of the members of the New York Philharmonic. So it was pretty mixed, but I guess, if you walked this way more towards the East part from Broadway, it became more Hispanic. If you went more towards Riverside, it becomes a little bit more, you know uppity, you know, upper-middle class that you can, Riverside Drive. So, it was kind of a mixed neighborhood, yeah, yeah, so. Speaker 1: Okay, so you never went up into Harlem when you were-- Speaker 2: Growing up I didn't, I didn't go to Harlem. There, there was no, you know, there were no friends or family or anybody there to go, I mean unless there was some store that you'd have to go there, but not, I mean the place I would go to more often because we had a friend that lived on that side was Spanish Harlem, I think. They had this--you don't know New York City, do you? Speaker 1: Not very well. But where would Spanish Harlem be? Speaker 2: Well, and now, you're making me, putting me on the spot (laughter), but I call it on the other side of the island. But they used to have this fish market that was under, you know, there was the elevated subway tracks. And underneath they would have this mall-type set up. And it was the fish market. So, we, we would go there a lot. And I think that, that kind of bordered a little bit of Harlem, but it was more on the Hispanic, Spanish side of, of Harlem. But, so, you know, I basically would accompany my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] where she had to go. And so if she had to buy something or meet a friend, that's where we'd go, but never, you know, there were a few student activities in Harlem that we would go to, but not, not on a very frequent basis, not on a regular basis, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23518 Speaker 1: Well, where did you start school? What was your first school? Speaker 2: Well, you mean at the elementary schools I went to? Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hum. Speaker 2: I don't know the name of the school, but it was the elementary school, there's an elementary school close to 103rd Street and Broadway [New York City], and I think I, up to about the second grade I was there. I, I forget the name of the school. But that's where I punched the kid in the eye (laughter). It's like-- Speaker 1: What did he do? What happened? Speaker 2: I don't know. I mean it's like, and, and I have, it's like, I don't know. I have this personality sometimes where everything is cool, and then something happens, and I snap and I just punched him in the eye. So I was in, in line behind him or whatever or he was behind me. And he pushed me or something, and I hit him in the eye. And I, you know, and I, I only remark on that because it was so spontaneous, which is not my nature, you know. And (laughter), and so, I don't know. And then from there we, we then moved up to--so around the third grade, which would be like, what eight or nine, so around '58 [1958] or something, that's right, actually, it'd be around '58 [1958], we moved up to 108th Street and Broadway. And then I think there was Public School 165. I think that's the number, Public School 165 is right there on 103rd Street between Amsterdam and Broadway. We, we went there or I went there with my sister [Irene Handy] up to the sixth grade. And then the next block over is Booker T. Washington Junior High School, which is I think PS-54. And that's where I, I became a member of the orchestra and stuff, and, and then eventually became a first chair at the, I mean I had a good trumpet. My father [William C. Handy, Jr.] hardly ever said anything about my trumpet play, but the one thing he always said was I had good, very beautiful tone. And so I made it to the, became first chair with the Manhattan borough-wide orchestra. Speaker 1: Now, is this middle school or-- Speaker 2: Well, it's a different structure. It's elementary school, which is kindergarten to sixth grade and then junior high school would be seventh through ninth. And then high school would be tenth through twelfth. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is junior high school at Booker T. Washington [Junior High School]? Speaker 2: This is junior high school, Booker T. Washington Junior High School. And, and what happened was, my sister [Irene Handy] qualified to go into the--they had, they had a two and three-year competitive, higher-level academic classes. My sister went from the sixth grade to, to the three-year, more competitive class. I think it was called SP-3 or something like that. But my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] wanted me in it. And so, because both of us were not accepted, in her mind she preferred--I don't know why she did it. She, she--I don't understand her logic. My sister, basically missed the opportunity to go into SP-3, and I went into--over there they had, they had 7-1, 7-2, 7-10, 7-11 and then the SP-sequence. And so, now, either you would think that 7-10 and 7-11 are higher, are slightly lower academic capacity than the SP-sequence. So she went to 7-11. I went to 7-10. And then after some name dropping around the middle of the eighth grade, they put us in the SP-class, okay. And so, and she, she won the--I almost won the French Gold Medal too. She won the French Gold Medal, you know, in a year and a half in terms of (unclear), and I almost scared the French teacher because the French teacher said (laughter), "Well, whoever scores the highest on the final exam gets the Gold Medal." Well, I scored a 91 (laughter), okay, and the teacher was sweating. So my sister won the gold medal, and she got a high score. But, and it's then that I remember, well, you know, you asked me about childhood experiences, I do remember. I have vivid memories of bristling with excitement knowing that I was gonna go from, I think his name was Mr. Button, Butler. He was a black teacher and his favorite phrase was, "Your butt is mine." And he would always be teaching about fractions and stuff. I don't know if I knew fractions, but I knew that the people in the SP-class were doing algebra. And I do remember when I realized that I was gonna go to the SP-class, since I already wanted to be a scientist, I, the thrill of, wow, I'm gonna be learning algebra, okay. And I do have memories of, of that. And so, so I got into, you know, so we got in, you know. We're okay. The only gripe I have is that, the--there is something that sort of bugs me, and that is my sister and I, my twin sister, we don't really get along too well. So after my mother died, my sister said a few things that I swear I feel like trying to locate Ms. Prince (laughter) who was my science teacher. And she tells, my sister tells me that, yeah, Ms. Prince would say that Carlos talked so much, you know, about, you know, I guess science and stuff like that. And she said, well, the danger with someone that talks so much is, you know, they, they don't achieve. And when my sister, you know, out of the blue told me this--and this was like seven years ago, man, I wanted to find Ms. Prince and tell her that she didn't know what she was talking about, okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 23519 Speaker 1: So, and the only reason, the gripe I have with her, with Prince [Handy's science teacher at Booker T. Washington Junior High School, new York City] was that I didn't make Bronx High School of Science, and I cried, okay. So, because I'm not sure, in New York City, they have like these very special high schools basically for science and technology. And when I was there, you had Bronx High School of Science and Stuyvesant High School. And they were both, basically, the high schools--and then you had Music and Art [The High School of Music and Art], and you had High School for Performing Arts. So the last two are for music people. The first two are for people interested in the sciences. And I remember, I remember the day that the mon--some student messengers came and it was clear that they were communicating those students in my class who had been accepted at Bronx High School of Science. And, and I still remember their names. And I, I cried, I literally cried, okay. I was so, I, I cried because I felt for a brief moment that I could never become a scientist, that that opportunity had been taken away from me. Now,-- Speaker 2: Now, this is eighth grade, right? Speaker 1: This is, well, this is, this ninth grade going into tenth grade. Speaker 2: Ninth, okay. Speaker 1: And so, and, now, I didn't make it in music, I mean I didn't make in Music and Art High School either, which was music. My sister did, and that's where she went. But, now, the reason I think I didn't make it in Music and Art is basically, you don't need as many--she was a violinist. You don't need as many trumpet players in a, you know, in that environment. And, and I remember that they have some pretty good music-trumpet players coming out of Queens [new York] and Long Island [New York] and stuff like that. And despite my musical legacy, I never had a trumpet teacher, and I don't know if you wanna call that, negligence or lack of interest on my father's part or whatever. So I didn't, as much as I liked music, I never really was given the opportunity to learn it better. And I'm not sure if finances was another factor. But, anyway, but going back to the Bronx High School of Science and not making it, I, I cried. I kid you not. And, and then, finally I resolved, I remember I--I don't know if I was walking home or something. I said, okay, I'm going to George Washington High School, okay, which was the northern tip. And then I said to myself, I made a pact with myself. I said, everything they learn at Bronx High School of Science, I'm gonna learn it at George Washington High School, okay. So when I hit the tenth grade at George Washington High School, and at the time there, it is, the sequence, I mean--first of all, my science--and this is the beef I have with Ms. Prince--I hope she sees this, she did not recommend me to honors science at the high school, all right. I got recommended to honors history--I'm still trying to figure that one out. And that was it. I was only recommended to honors history, but not honors science or honors math or anything like that. So I remember going, entering the first, first term at George Washington High School, and I had Mr. Wagner. And he was the geometry teacher. And I looked at these stupid triangles and stuff, and I said, you know, and I had made a pact with myself that I was gonna learn everything the people at Bronx High School of Science was learning. So I see these stupid triangles, and I say to him, I know about triangles. I don't need this. And his words were, relax, you're gonna learn geometry like you've never learned it before. And he was right because the beauty about that course which is now, unfortunately, not as prevalent, is that that course was geometrical proofs. It taught you how to think, okay. You lay out a theorem, and you have to prove it, okay. And I honestly believe, because when I entered the tenth grade, I knew algebra, but I really didn't know it, that is, I hadn't really bonded with it. But I swear, after that first semester, term of geometry, my, my mathematical maturity got jacked up, that--I mean I got a 99 in the, in class. And he, and he said, well, I won't give you a hundred because I always want you to strive for more. And, and so, and so what happened then, I think at that time, I learned that there was the advanced placement [AP], like you would take calculus in the twelfth grade. I mean there was this advanced, this more competitive math track that naturally, I wanted to do, but I had to be in the honors math. So he recommended me to honors math, which is what I did beginning the second term of the tenth grade. And so, I got into honors math, tenth grade, and, you know, I knew my geometry so well that I remember being in this class and--what happens at George Washington [High School], there was, at that time, it was strongly a Jewish-Greek kind of neighborhood. So my, the honors program was basically populated by lots of Jewish students. So I go to this class, and they're basically, all Jewish--I don't remember another black person. I remember a Chinese fellow. And so the teacher says, okay, there's this problem. The first person to work it out can go to the board and discuss it. I looked at the problem, and in my head, I figure it out and went up to the board without writing anything. I mean it was obviously right. So I did pretty well, became a member of the Math Club in the eleventh grade. And so I, at that time, I was the only, I was not in the Honors Society. I was in, just in two honors classes, math and history. And so I, in the eleventh grade, I'm in the Math Club, and everybody has to give a report. And, and when it came my turn, I said, I don't know what I'm gonna talk about, what if--so I said, okay. What is, so I asked myself, what is all this calculus stuff about? So I took out a book, the book by Smale [ph.] on calculus, read it. And I remember saying, is that all there is? Is that it? Okay, so I got up, and I gave a lecture to the Math Club, and the instructor who was from the Yeshiva University [New York City], his jaw dropped, 'cause I explained to them differentiation, integration, the basic rules on that stuff. And I didn't think it was a big deal. And so I taught myself calculus, and basically, what, a year or so before I had to officially take the course. So in the eleventh grade, you take trigonometry and, and that's it. Story_ID: 23520 Speaker 1: But then my best achievement, and I kid you this, I always--you know, sometimes I question myself whether I have the chutzpah to really take charge of my life. And I remember, Steve Herman, who's a very nice guy, Jewish fellow, hardly ever wore a suit and tie, this is one day he wore a suit and tie. And so I said, well, where are you going? He says, well, the honors society has been invited to NBC Studios to see, you know, they're gonna ask questions, and they're gonna pick the people that will represent the high school on TV, NBC, the 'It's Academic' program on TV. Man, was I mad. I felt, why didn't, why (laughter) didn't they invite me? So all I remember is I went home, put on a suit and tie--and that's the thing I'm trying to remember. I, I don't remember asking for permission. I just, I'm sure I must have asked for permission, and they probably said, yeah, but I don't remember asking for it. I just went home, put on a suit and tie, came back, went with the group down to NBC Studios where they do the 'Today Show'. This big room, there were like thirty of us. I beat 'em all, okay. And so, when, when it was through, I was on the, on the team. And or on the team or pulled to be on TV representing the high school on this academic competition. Speaker 2: Okay, so they didn't, they didn't have the high school choose its team representative-- Speaker 1: No, no. It was-- Speaker 2: They chose like the students in an audition-- Speaker 1: A group of students and then they would go down. They would audition for, well, they would ask questions and-- Speaker 2: And so the school would draft who they thought were the best ones and send them to NBC to be-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and so-- Speaker 2: --auditioned? Speaker 1: Right, so their instinct is to the ask the honor society 'cause those represent the strongest students, right. Speaker 2: So you went down there on your own? Speaker 1: I went, I went there anyway, right, and I beat 'em all. And then six months later, which would have been September of sixty--the fall of '67 [1967], the school does a second, in-house test. I still beat 'em. So I went on TV as the captain of George Washington High School Academic Team, had Steve Herman on one side and, and I forget, Steve something or other. These, these, one was like the valedictorian, became the valedictorian for high school, and the other one was the math whiz for the, for the high school. And I was the captain, you know. So I'm extremely proud of that. And then, another thing I've very proud of is, by that time, you know, after I got on TV, I was sort of like a small, what's the right word, celebrity, small-time celebrity. And so I remember in, you know, in New York State, you have to do these New York Regions exams, you know. I guess it's, I'm not sure every year or every, or to graduate from one--well, to graduate from high school you had to take the New York State Regions exam. And I remember the vice principal seeing me, and he, he, you know, he was, he was being friendly. He said, hey, Carlos, you gonna bust out the test. I was gonna take the English test, right. And, and two years earlier, I had written an essay, and Poe had said, I can see that English is not your native language, right. So I take the New York, I take the English New York Regents exam. Two days later, he calls me and apologizes. He said, he was just jiving, he was just joking. He didn't think I'd be the second highest in the whole school. So I got, a girl got a 99 and I got a 97, okay. And so, so the story of my life is like, people will tend to dismiss me because somehow, the way I engage with them may not be what they might consider suggestive of someone who's super smart. But I think, okay, and I know what I can do, and I'm very proud. And I regard learning as a competitive endeavor, and I want to achieve. And so I'm, I'm very, you don't know how proud I am of those moments. It's like a validation of myself and how I see myself, and how, even though the external society may wanna put me down or dismiss me, I will not take that, okay. And so, as a confirmation of that, you know, I went to Columbia [University, New York City], got accepted to Columbia University. I did pretty well on the SATs [Scholastic Aptitude Test] and stuff like that. In tenth grade or something like that, I did a PSAT [Preliminary SAT], and I scored 1,100, which may not be a--I mean it's a good score. It's not a great score, but it's a good score. But certainly, relative to those students, it was good enough that I think Columbia, Columbia University had a summer program, and I don't know why it was in English. So, Columbia had a--and I wanna say one more thing before I finish that, 'cause I still remember when Poe wrote, and she says, "English is not your native language," but then when I got to the twelfth grade, I wrote another essay and, and what was funny is the instructor was returning it, and he was a very learned person. So he says, in all my years of being here, I've never seen such a well-crafted essay, blah, blah, blah, blah. And I'm looking at him. He gives it to me, and so, and one of the things which is, which is true, I, I like to write. And even as a kid, I went through the mock thing of trying to write a book. So I have this fantasy of being a writer, okay. And so, anyway, the point is, in two years, my English skills improved. And so--now, I've forgot what the other story was. But anyway, oh, so when I went to Columbia, and I got accepted. And, you know, I'm sure we'll go into that in a minute. It wasn't, it was, the first year was a rocky start. Story_ID: 23521 Speaker 1: Now, well, what year is this? Now, you graduated [from George Washington High School, New York City] at what-- Speaker 2: I graduated in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: So '65 [1965] to '68 [1968] would have been my high school experience. In '68 [1968], I got accepted, and went to Columbia University or Columbia College [New York City], and what's interesting is, when I applied for graduate school, my advisor in physics, Friedberg, Richard Friedberg, who's really brilliant, he wrote the following. And I say this because what he, what he said was the following. He said, Carlos is a strange guy. When you interact with him, you think that he's confused. You think that, you know, he has no idea of what's going on. But then, he said, but actually what's going on is Carlos likes to, likes to take something and, and break it up into component parts and then reassemble it. And then what he says, in the process of reassembling it, he understands it better than anybody else. And, and I always, you know, I took pride in that because that's really me. I mean, if you say something, I might seem lost or something, but I'm trying to juxtapose what you're saying to how I see things, and how I understand things. So, my instinct is always analytical. So my reaction may be slow, but it's just that I'm thinking. And I'm not, and I admit, I'm not a fast thinker, okay. So I'm just thinking. So, so high school I, I--you know, and another nice thing about high school was here I got lucky because George Washington was just a regular high school. It wasn't one of the specialized high schools. But because of where it was and the community it served, and these guys were really linked. So one of the girls at, in the Math Club, her uncle was a very famous IBM [International Business Machines] researcher, Manny Lehman. And I believe it's through him that George Washington [High School] got a computer, right, one of the, the old-- Speaker 1: Mainframe? Speaker 2: --ticket, what do you call it? Well, the card reader and punch holed, tape reader and all that kind of stuff. And so we learned, we learned-- Speaker 1: Cobalt or Fortran [computer programming languages]? Speaker 2: No, no, we didn't learn Cobalt. We learned, well, Fortran definitely, but what's the other one before that which is the numerical program. I forget now what it's called, but we learned that. Then we learned Fortran. So when I got to college, I already knew calculus, and I knew how to program, okay. And the importance of that is that, even though my first year at Columbia [University] was a little rough, okay, I got lucky. And in that sense, God has always protected me 'cause at the last moment, at the moment of (laughter), just falling off the cliff, He comes and rescues me. You know, at that time, my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] and father [William C. Handy, Jr.] had, had they separated? Yeah, they had separated by then. So my mother and father had separated by the summer of '68 [1968], and I'll tell you why in a minute. So, they had separated, and I needed a job. I needed some income to help 'em. And so, IBM had a small research center, the Thomas J. Watson Research Center right there across from Columbia campus. And there was a fellow, Swiss scientist, by the name of Martin Gutzwiller who later on became the father of quantum chaos, a very, I mean a tremendous--and I've actually invited him to Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas]. And he needed someone to do, to numerically program his, his, his equations. Either he did not know how to program or whatever, which is possible. So I said, well, you know, I'd been reading 'Calculus on Manifolds' by [Michael] Spivak. And I know how to program. I mean I learned programming, and so, and I always remember, he gave me, he gave me thirty pages of mathematical formulations that you'd only see at a graduate level, either at--really at a graduate level, the Hamilton-Jacobi formulations, stuff like that, I mean really complicated stuff. And then he pointed out to one equation that he wanted me to, to numerically approximate on the computer. I hadn't taken a course on differential equations. I hadn't taken a course in numerical analysis. I'd done calculus. However, the, the year, the, my first year in physics, we, we read out of the Feynman lecture series is sort of elite, the elite, maybe too elite, first-year calculus-based physics book. Then there was one paragraph there by Feynman, where he said, "If you want a numerically integrated differential equation, this is how you visualize it." And that's all I remember, and so I said, well, let's just do that on these equations this guy gave me. And I gave, I had nice results and stuff like that. So, so I'm very proud of that because, because it was a chutzpah kind of moment in that I, and I did it, okay. Story_ID: 23522 Speaker 1: Okay, you're at Columbia [University, New York City], 1968? Speaker 2: Right, so, and, and then what's nice is--and I'll go back in a minute to the first year at Columbia, but that summer, and I was still eighteen, so I did the calculations [at IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center] for [Martin] Gutzwiller [physicist known for his work on quantum chaos]. And, and then when I had a spare moment, I would read books, and I read two, all the--there's a mathematical, there's a certain type of mathematics called complex analysis which is very important. And I taught it all myself, and that's something that's, that's basically, a junior-level course that you, that you normally take, so I-- Speaker 1: Called complex analysis? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I learned my, I taught myself complex analysis out of a book by Churchill and then there was another book by Hurwitz which was on the theory of linear, partial differential equations. And I read that. I mean that was a little bit looser, but I, at least I studied all that by myself. And so when I went back to Columbia as a sophomore, you know, I was, I was more mature. What happened was, I, well, going back to the beginning of starting at Columbia, one big mistake, I should have lived on campus. Instead, I was commuting. And-- Speaker 1: From home? Speaker 2: From home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at the time, it made sense because I was only like ten blocks away from the campus. So if I remember right, classes at Columbia would start like towards the end of September. So here I am, I started classes in October. We were dispossessed. I don't know what happened. My father [William C. Handy, Jr.] was late in paying the rent, and so at that time, I think New York City was going through a transition where they were trying to, you know, they had rent control or something like that. They were trying to jack up the rents. So they used, we had lived there for ten years, and they used the excuse of my father paying late to, to kick us out. So we were dispossessed, and we had to go and live in a hotel, the same hotel we had lived in before moving to that 103rd Street. So I'd just started Columbia, we're dispossessed. There was a lot of stress in my family, stuff like that. And on top of that, even, you know, I, you know, I did very well in high school, but I didn't, I can't say that I had excellent study habits. And so, you know, at Columbia, you know they, you have like 10,000 applicants from all over the world. They only accept 700 or 800. And unless you're Bush [President George W. Bush] (laughter), even though he went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], unless you're that type, everybody else is a serious student. And so you really, really, really, really need to get into it. And I remember as an example, like I took a humanities course, and the very first day ever we set foot in that class, the very first day of our university existence, we have a test. Why? Because we should have read on the bulletin board that there was a reading assignment on the 'Iliad' [by Homer] and there was gonna be a test. So it just goes to show you the, the whole attitude there. So, my first year at Columbia, and then what happened was, since I never wanted to, I always want to be running with the pack, at Columbia, even though--and I should have said something else. I always wanted to do astronomy 'cause I loved astron--I mean, but the summer before I entered Columbia, someone whispered in my ear that I should become a physicist, and I thought that made sense. So I said, okay, I switched my major to physics. So, so I guess at Columbia, there was the elite first-year physics course which was calculus based, and it was studying out of this series of books by [Richard] Feynman who was a Nobel Prize [in physics] winner [1965] and very famous. And you can go to any bookstore and see the Feynman lecture series and so it's a standard thing. Or you can do the, the less elite, more nuts and bolts of calculus-based physics, I guess at the time was Halliday and Resnick or something like that. And naturally, I wanted to be with the superstars, okay. So I, I applied and got a, they made an interview so I got accepted. But the class, you know, I was competing with students coming out of Bronx High School of Science, Stuyvesant [High School], out of prep school, students that had already had a more, what's the right word, a more specialized training in high school and a little bit more sophistication. So that, plus my, maybe not having the best study skills, and plus my personal problems of being dispossessed, my first year was really rocky. And, you know, I, I got a New York Regents Scholarship and stuff. So, so I, I was admitted to Columbia because of the strength of my academic performance. It's just that mentally, I wasn't there. So my first year, it was like, I got one D that got me sent down to the dean's office. I got Cs, C-pluses, maybe a B-minus and stuff like that. And then the other thing that was funny was, you know--and this shows more my ignorance, I had no idea on the difference between a liberal arts education and like a science education, engineering. The last thing I expected was to go to Columbia, and have to take these liberal arts courses. So I'm there, like humanities, and (unclear) contemporary civilization. I'm saying, why am I taking these courses? I don't want, I don't want these courses. I want the math and the physics and the science courses. So, anyway, so I go there and so it was a rocky performance. I got called to the dean's office, I guess, and he asked, you know, you had a stellar academic high school experience. Why are you struggling? And at least to Columbia's credit, I did tell 'em that we had been dispossessed and I, and I will say--and, and it's only recently that I, that I've ever thought--I never thought about this until, I swear it, maybe a year ago. I don't ever remember having a problem paying for Columbia. So, after that first--'cause the first semester at Columbia, my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] paid a thousand dollars, and in that sense, she was smart because what she would do, my father who had expensive taste. So my father would give her money to buy some expensive dress or something to go to some event. She would turn around, take that money, buy a cheaper dress and save the rest. And so my mother had a savings which allowed me, at least to start Columbia. So she, she paid--and I think that I, she could have paid all my Columbia tuition. I think Columbia tuition in those days was like $2,000 a semester, which doesn't sound like much although, when you think back, you know, $4,000 for an, just tuition, you know, the typical salary in those days was probably $8,000, $9,000. So you could say that was still a high tuition. But I don't remember it being a burden. So, so after, so, so the first semester, the State of New York paid half my, my tuition. My mother paid the other half. And then after I got called to the dean's office, I swear, I, I don't ever remember paying anymore. They covered the rest. So, at least, so in that sense, you know, I'm grateful to Columbia because at the administrative side, they actually stepped in and, and helped me. Story_ID: 23523 Speaker 1: But anyway, so, so after my summer and the experience at IBM [International Business Machines; Thomas J. Watson Research Center] and all that stuff, the, it turned out that my physics advisor [at Columbia University, New York City] was the same, was the instructor for my physics class in the freshman year, Richard Friedberg. So after my IBM experience, I took another course with Richard Friedberg. I took a third-year course as a second-year student. And it was a mechanics course, and he taught, he taught Green's functions and all that kind of stuff. And I remember doing the mid-term. And, now, this guy had given me like a C-plus the first year. I had an A the second semester, and he wrote, I still remember, he says, "I can't believe you're the same student I had last year" because, because the mathematical maturity, the maturity had really advanced. And so I, you know, the second year I took my linear algebra and my differential equation. I mean I did, I always did well on the math courses. The physics courses were the ones that were more challenging, and, but, you know, but I stayed at it and stuff. The third year came, and I took--I always made it a habit at Columbia to take every semester, one math course. So I took a, a year's worth of analysis, intermediate analysis, fell in love with it. I forget the teacher's name, but I would have switched my major to math because this guy taught math in such a tremendous manner. And so I aced it. Actually, I aced the first semester, got a B the second semester. And then when my senior year came, I took a graduate-level analysis course, got bored to tears. I only, I aced it both semesters on the strength of the math that physics gave you 'cause that's the beauty about physics. Physics is very intuitive, you know, you require advanced notions in math, and you see relations. And sometimes the math, sometimes a typical math course can be stale, whereas the physics version of it can be more dynamic, more engaging, more intuitive. And so, by that time, I'd had enough math, so, so anyway, so I took the GRE Exam in physics, which was the Graduate Record Exam in physics. And most days, most days, say our students when they graduate here, they take their Graduate Record Exam, not in the discipline. They take it in basic analytical and reading skills and stuff like that. So I took it in physics, and I think Columbia had a minimum score of 720. I got a, I remember getting a 770, and jumping for joy because when I took, after I took that exam, all I could remember were all the wrong answers (laughter) I had put, and I was freaking out. So, so, you know, I took that, right, cold turkey, I didn't study or prepare for it, so I got a 770. And I think they penalize you for wrong answers, so, so I was happy. So I got admitted to Columbia, and the only thing that I regret is that I didn't, you know, it was clear, if you look back you could say two things, A, Carlos is not an experimentalist, that is, Carlos has no, no business being in a lab. B, Carlos likes mathematics, okay. It's obvious from all the semesters I took that I did very well in the math courses, and my instincts were more towards the analytical side. Story_ID: 23524 Speaker 1: Just before I get you to graduate school. Can you say a little bit about Dr. Martin Gutzwiller [Swiss-American physicist well known for his work on quantum chaos; Handy worked under his tutelage at International Business Machines' (IBM) Thomas J. Watson Research Center]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And quantum chaos? Speaker 2: Quantum chaos, so he's considered the father of quantum chaos. Well, there's classical chaos, like turbulence and stuff like that, and then there are, what do you call it, sort of corresponding phenomena in quantum physics. And so he developed the mathematics, he developed some mathematical tools for, for being able to handle that kind of phenomena in quantum physics. So, that's not really my area, so I can't say too much. But he's a tremendous figure, and, and, and I--now, he's from the old school. So when he came back here, he couldn't really remember 'cause, you know, this was, I was eighteen--this guy is now, this is 1968. And I was trying to remind him, you know, I worked with him, and I actually--and he was not famous. He was not established when I knew him. He's a very, very gentle person, very tall. And I'm not sure if he even cites me in the paper in any way. I was just a technician, technical help. But, but it was a tremendous, it was really a tremendous opportunity for me, and, but, you know, he's won awards and stuff like that, Gutzwiller, his name is G-U-T-Z-W-I-L-L-E-R, Gutzwiller. Speaker 1: And he went on to work for IBM? Speaker 2: Well, he, he was at IBM already. In fact, he, he worked, he--I think from Switzerland, he came to Houston [Texas] and worked for an oil company and then transferred to IBM. So he was working at IBM when I had--and he, he retired from IBM. Story_ID: 23525 Speaker 1: Now, when did you graduate from Columbia [University, New York City] with a bachelors [degree](unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, in '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972]? Speaker 2: Yeah, a B.A., Bachelor of Arts. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so, we're saying then that you, let's see, okay, I guess that's about right, yeah, okay, '68 [1968] to, yeah-- Speaker 2: '68 [1968], four years, yeah, that's four years. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: (Unclear) (Laughter) told me there's four years. So, and, and actually, my style was, I was actually, I was always taking courses one year before I should have taken 'em, and maybe that was a mistake. I don't know, but I was like ambitious, you know, in a hurry. So I got accepted to graduate school at Columbia. And the problem with Columbia-- Speaker 1: Nineteen? Speaker 2: In '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: '72 [1972], okay. Speaker 2: Oh, I know what I wanna say in terms of, well, no, I already said it, yeah, okay. Well, I'll say it, I'll say it and if the federal government wants to come after me, so be it. In '68 [1968], when we were dispossessed, you know, the Vietnam War was going on. And what happened, my father [William C. Handy, Jr.] was a little slow in reacting to things. So after we were dispossessed, we got to go and rent this apartment hotel or whatever you wanna call it. And my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] didn't like it because it was not a very good clientele they had. And she was afraid that my sister might be assaulted. And my father wasn't moving fast enough. So since my mother had some savings, she went off and rented an apartment after a few months. And, and, and they split. I don't know what the primary, but I know the Vietnam War had something to do with it 'cause I think my mother wanted to put me in a position where I could basically claim to be the sole supporter and get out of the Vietnam War, okay. I think that was part of it. I know my mother was very much concerned about it. Obviously, I got a draft deferment and stuff like that. But in terms of the Vietnam War, it turns out that I didn't, even though Nixon [President Richard Nixon] put the lottery in, and my number was three (3)--are you a Vietnam vet? Speaker 1: No, I-- Speaker 2: Well, my number was three (3) so the goose was almost cooked. But what happened was, at the age of thirteen, they discovered I had a heart murmur, and so even though it's not a consequential heart murmur, I kept, at the physical, I kept reminding the doctor, old Jewish doctor, about my heart murmur. And he said, finally, yeah, it's okay, okay. I give you the 4F (laughter), you know, rejection. And, and actually, I qualified on both because by that time, for four years I basically had managed to find odd jobs and stuff. So I managed to--and then I guess, my mother and father actually, they just drifted into their own different directions. And so-- Speaker 1: You think it was just the life of a musician being tough or the kind of hours he kept? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know, that was the unfortunate side about my father. He'd, sometimes he, he didn't react quickly to things. So, so I think, I think what happened was my mother wanted him to move quicker to find a better place for us. He didn't. So she went out on her own and did and found it. And then as things developed, I guess in her mind, she realized that it might be an opportunity for me to get out of serving [in Vietnam] by claiming that I was like a sole breadwinner and stuff like that. In any case, it worked, both my heart murmur and my sole support status actually got me out of the war 'cause I, you know, I qualified. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, you know, so, so I got to graduate school. And I only, and I had to stay in the area because I, I was, mentally, I was like the support of my mother and sister [Irene Handy], okay. And I wish I had gone somewhere else. I wish I had left Columbia and gone to another school. And I say that not, not to deride in any way Columbia, but it's, what happens is, when the professors know you as an undergrad, they already form an idea of who you are. And so, so if they're not too impressed, and remember, Columbia was an elitist, snobby kind of place. If they're not too impressed, because even, because in their eyes, if you're not an A student, you're basically nothing, okay. And so, in physics, I was like a B, B-plus student. In math, I was an A-minus student. And so, and even though I did okay on the GRE [graduate record exam], I was not, it was clear that I was not perceived as a superstar. So had I gone to another university, I wouldn't be carrying this baggage of their impressions of me as an undergraduate. But I, but I, but psychologically, I couldn't because I felt obligated to be in New York City 'cause that's where my mother and sister were. And I had this, this sense of commitment toward them. I mean I, I felt like my presence was important. Story_ID: 23526 Speaker 1: So I got to Columbia [University, New York City] and, well, and having said that, at that time, in 1972, Bell Labs [New Jersey] started a, really a very, one of their first successful minority scholarships programs at the graduate level. At that time it was called the Cooperative Research Fellowship Program. And whereas Columbia, their regular stipend was like 320 dollars a month, these guys were paying like 650 [dollars] a month. Now, the rent in New York City at that time was like short of 200 dollars, right? This is 1972. You could do a lot with 600 bucks a month, okay. And then later on, they actually raised it to 700 dollars a month. So it turns out that--and a fellow by the name of Hank Thomas, really--I was jealous of him, but he was a little older. I mean he just exuded, it was, he exuded a balance between a high intellect, a high drive in physics and just smart. And I was like, he was the like the man I wanted to be, right, independent, knew what he wanted, you know, could just talk, you know, could talk in a way that I wish I could talk (laughter). And so he and I were the first to be accepted by the Bell Labs Cooperative Research Fellowship Program. And since the program--he was on his way, I think, to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] 'cause he had just graduated, I think out of Drexel [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or some place like that. But because the program had just started, Bell Labs wanted to make sure that they could keep control on the two of us. So the only school they would accept would be like in the Columbia area. So since I was going to Columbia, I wanted to go. So I was okay. And then, so he, he went to Columbia as well. And I remember Henry Foley, who was very famous, I mean a very distinguished physicist. And I would say of all the faculty at Columbia, Henry Foley, to a lesser extent, Richard Friedberg [Handy's undergraduate physics advisor], but Henry Foley were like really, really, really tremendous people, you know. There were others that I felt like, I don't know. There were others I had issues with, I didn't really care for. I mean by and large, what happens is, in typical physics departments, you have theorists and you have experimentalists. The experimentalists are very, are basically nice guys for the most part. That's because they're constantly dealing with people. They need people to help 'em. So they can't be too--theorists can be a real pain in the you know where because they tend to be smug. They think of themselves as superior and all that kind of stuff. So, of the theory people, Henry Foley and Richard Friedberg, Friedberg to a lesser extent, even though he was my advisor, were really, really nice people. At least Friedberg wrote a letter of support for me to go to graduate school. And so I go to, I go to graduate school. And, and I remember Henry Foley asking me, and he was like embarrassed. He says, did I feel comfortable with accepting 650 bucks for a program designed for black students, essentially. I looked at him, and said, of course. I don't feel embarrassed. I mean this pays twice what you guys pay. Of course, I'm gonna accept it (laughter). So, so I accepted, so I became their, he--Hank and I became the first two Cooperate Research Fellowship participants. And looking back, that is one of the most successful industrial fellowship programs around. They have produced really, really, very good people, and with a high completion rate. I don't know how high it is, but it's--I'll take a guess of the order of 80 percent. That is, most of the people that enter their graduate fellowship, graduate. And I actually turned out to be the first graduate of that effort. So, I'm not sure if it's known, I don't think it's known by that name. It's probably now, well, Lucent, I'm not sure, you know, became AT and T, (unclear) Lucent, I forget. So it's evolved. Some aspects of that fellowship program still continue. Anyway, so I started Columbia, did, did fine in the first-year classes. Story_ID: 23527 Speaker 1: And then the second summer [of Handy's doctoral studies at Columbia University, New York City], I had the opportunity of working at Bell Labs [New Jersey], but I decided not to do that because the beginning of my second year of graduate school, I would have these qualifying exams. And the way it works at Columbia was, when you have coursework, and then at the beginning of the second year, you take a week-long exam. You take like five or six, three-hour exams in each of the basic physics disciplines. You go in front of a three-judge panel, and they ask you a question, and you're supposed to answer on your feet. And then at the end, you know, they decide. And so, and only some small percentage of those, the people that do well, are allowed to do theory, okay. And theory is the area that presents, you know, for me, who, even though I didn't, I was not too self conscious, but, you know, here I am liking math, liking analysis, theory would be the obvious thing for me to do. So I'm sure they all looked at me and thought, well, Carlos has the makings, I mean well, Carlos belongs in a lab like--and it's unfortunate that they make that, the separation because, because it's too artificial, okay. But that was the culture at Columbia. The implication was, if you scored high on the qualifying exam, you were allowed to do theory. If you don't, you go to the mills (laughter), which is the lab, okay. And so, to their surprise, I think I was like the second highest on the qualifying exam, okay. So here's another instance where people are expecting me not to amount to much, and I show 'em differently, okay. And, but then after passing the qualifying exams, and this is where the baggage of them knowing me as an undergrad, it was hard for me to find an advisor in the area that I want, wanted. I would go to one guy. He says, no, I don't wanna work, you know, basically, I have too many students or some other excuse. And so what they did, they pushed me onto a junior faculty and assistant professor. And he was doing theory, but I didn't really care for the kind of theory he was doing because there're different mathematical formulations of the theory. Some are, are more, I consider them more beautiful than others, but I didn't really care for what he was doing. But, anyway, I agreed to it because I, I was led to believe that I could start off with him and then migrate to the one I really wanted to work with. Well, sure enough, none of that ever happened. After two years I became frustrated. I told, finally told this guy that I wasn't interested in working with him, and I wasn't gonna continue working with him, okay. And then, then by that time, I had been branded a black sheep, you know, as a troublemaker. And to make a long story short, after maybe four or five years of that stuff, actually, let's say, maybe three, four years, I finally wrote to the chair of the department, Henry Foley, and I said, and what I told him, I told him something, I said, you know, I said, you know, I went to so and so when I was looking. And basically, the guy gave me a racist remark. And what he said was--and this is the guy who, yeah, he's smart, but it's not necessarily of under (unclear). This guy says, "Well, Carlos, you're just an average student, and if I take you on as my graduate, you know, as my graduate research assistant, whatever, it's an unfair, it's an unfair advantage you would have over other students." And, and I was so shy that I didn't really question, but I guess what he's saying is that he's so great, that if he works with you, it gives you an unfair advantage over another student that might be better than you. That's, that's basically what he's saying. And so, you know, I asked, I mean I mentioned that to Luddinger (ph.), I asked Luddinger, and Luddinger had issues. He was a little bit, he was very smart, but there was something artificial about Luddinger. He didn't wanna work with me or, no, even better. Hart, Hart, I forget his name, Hartman or Hart--there was an experimentalist with whom he worked. And so this professor who's still, Sven Hartman, who may be retired, he said, Luddinger says not to go to him to ask to work. I went to Norman Christ, and Norman Christ is the one that made that remark. And I say that because I did visit Norman Christ about ten years ago, and I, and I asked him that. And obviously, he says he can't remember. There was T. D. [Tsung-Dao] Lee, who, the Nobel Prize winner [1957], but, you know, he had a different way of, of selecting people. So you didn't waste your time with him. I didn't wanna work with Richard Friedberg 'cause he was my advisor. I felt like going back to my father when I'd go back to work for my father (laughter). So, so they put me on working with the junior faculty and Jeremy Finkelstein. And the guy was very smart, but I did not like the kind of math he was working on. It's as simple as that. Now, so I started working with Jeremy Finkelstein, thinking I can evolve to someone else. Now, there was one nice thing about it, apparently--I'm sure you've heard about string theory, okay. Well, it turns out that string theory originated or at least my perception of history, within S-matrix theory. There was something called the Veneziano, the dual resonance, Veneziano model--I hope I'm doing justice to it. And it was an offshoot of the kind of math that I didn't like, but what it was, it was, they brought in this string-like, field theory, kind of formulation that tried to do things. And I fell in love with it. That I liked. And so I remember saying to Mueller, Al Mueller, that I wanted to do string theory, that I really liked that math. And his words were, well, nobody at Columbia is doing string theory. And if I wanted to do string theory, I would have to go to City College of New York, where Saketa Caco, Keycawa (ph.) and Saketa were or, Caco and Keycawa, I can't remember if Saketa was the other one, were doing that. And I thought that meant starting all over again, okay. No, what it really meant, which he didn't clarify was, I could go to these guys and ask if I could do a thesis under him, although, they would be basically--I, I think they would be accepted at adjuncts to Columbia. In other words, you, even though I'm at Columbia, if, if there's a respected researcher somewhere else--and after all, I was bringing in my own money, right. The money I was getting was not from Columbia. I could have gone to City College and said, can I work for you, and their stature is high enough that I think Columbia would have accepted a thesis from that. So I could have done that, but then that was never clarified. Story_ID: 23528 Speaker 1: Anyway, [Alfred] Mueller, who's at Columbia [University, New York City], and I asked, he goes to the Institute for Advanced Studies, writes a paper on string theory. And I felt, what the, you know, bleep, is going on here? I tell this guy I'm interested in string theory. He could have at least said to me, well, Carlos, if you work hard enough, you know, I'm willing to work with you, but you really have to come up to my speed and do this, right. But it's like, it was like, they weren't interested in it. And so, finally, I wrote to the head of the department. I said, you know, I'm really tired of this racist running around. I want a problem in the area I like so I can get the hell out of Columbia (laughter), 'cause I'm sick and tired of it. So then, and I mention all these experiences, and Henry Foley cautioned me that I shouldn't make it too public 'cause these guys could destroy me. But at least to their credit, they, they--I'll say one thing. There was a very famous, but very senior Italian, John Carlo Wick, who at least agreed to be my nominal advisor 'cause I needed an advisor when it came to registration. But he was too old. He said, you know, he's too old. He can't really advise me, but I needed him. So at least he was gracious enough and stepped in.But anyway, eventually, after I wrote this letter to the chair, three of these guys got together, the one that I had thought made that racist remark, which is Norman Christ, Eric Weinberg and Alfred Mueller, they're all at Columbia. They got together and they said, okay, Carlos, you know, you're like a troublemaker, you know. You wanna do things your way, blah, blah, blah, blah. You don't like to follow orders. We're gonna give you this problem. It's a problem that Claude Bernard, who's now a professor I think at somewhere like St. Louis, somewhere it is, either doesn't wanna deal with or whatever. And we have some ideas on how you can solve it, okay. And so, since it was the kind of problem I like, I said, great. Okay, I'll kiss--I'll do whatever you want because you gave me a problem in the area I want. So I looked at the problem, and sure enough (laughter), when I looked at the problem I realized, no, no, no, there's a better way to solve this problem, okay. And so, of the three, Alfred Mueller was the one I always wanted to work with and the one I respect the most. So I, I didn't wanna waste his time until I really had an idea how to solve the problem, even though they said they had some ideas. And of the remaining two, Norman Christ was the one that had made this arrogant remark that he was so great that it would give me an unfair advantage over the other students if I were to work with him. So I said, well, he's ruled out. So I pick on Eric Weinberg 'cause he was just, he was a junior faculty. He just came out of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. He had worked with Sidney Coleman, and of all the people, in terms of the math sensitivities that they had, you know, he was working with symmetry breaking. He was working with path integral formulas, I mean he--so, when I looked at the problem they gave me, I saw a way to solve the problem. And the way to solve the problem involved these path integral formulations, which I, which I had studied. And, and so I realized that there were two parts to solving this problem they had given me. The first part, I actually solved on my own. The second part was the one that I wasn't too keen on. So I remember visiting him on a cold winter's day in New York City. I go to Eric Weinberg's office, and I said, the problem you guys gave me, I have, more or less, I have a strategy. And there're two parts. I've already solved the first part. But the second part is the one that I need some guidance on. And this guy, I don't know how to characterize it, but he, the way he behaved, it was like, like people had already poisoned his brain as to, against me, as to who I was and what I could do. The fact that I was coming to him with a proposed solution, he couldn't believe it. And I looked at him, and I said, this is the way it should go, and I bet you I'm right. I used that word. I said, "I bet you I'm right." And then his words were, because I'll never forget. He said, "I will not accept your bet because it will encourage you down the wrong path." I left his office on a cold winter's day scared, because I said, oh, shit, he's gonna go back to the other guys and tell 'em Carlos is back to his old tricks of wanting to do things his way, and all that kind of stuff. So I decided I wouldn't talk to anybody until I had completely solved the problem. So I worked on it for another three, four months or something and came up with up this, this thing, this grand scheme. By that time I realized that Eric Weinberg was not the person I thought. I said, forget him. I wasn't going to Norman Christ. So I go to Alfred Mueller who's the, the main person, and I said, I've solved the problem. He said, "What do you mean, you've solved the problem?" "Yeah, I've solved the problem." Then he's like defiant, "No, you couldn't have solved the problem." You, no, then he says, "Well, you know, this Austrian guy came with an interpretation of doing something and can you give me an answer?" Story_ID: 23529 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: All right, so, so I tell Alfred Mueller that I had solved the problem. He was in disbelief. And then he, he says, well, this Austrian guy--my, my thesis was essentially, the title I think was 'The Diagrammatics of Gauge Transformations for Non-(unclear) Gauge Theories'. And so what happens is, when you're discussing, we've all heard about God's particle, right, the Higgs boson, right. In physics, there's this notion of gauges. What it is, it's different representations for the same thing, and the way this got manifested in the beginning was, in like electricity and magnetism, there are gauges. That is, there are electric fields and magnetic fields, but you can write electric and magnetic fields in terms of different things, and they can take on different forms, and each one alone is called a gauge. In, when you're studying sub-atomic particles and how they interact, Abdus Salaam and Steven Weinberg [theoretical physicists; winners of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1979], who's at UT-Austin [University of Texas, Austin, texas] in the '60s [1960s], they sent, well, they, they came up with a unified scheme for weak electromagnetic forces. And it involved basically a gauge type of representation for, for those kinds of theories. And these concepts and gauges have evolved and become more sophisticated. So, so there was a, there was a formulation of quantum-field theory that involved these so-called (unclear) have different gauge representations. And the question was, in, in principle, it didn't matter what gauge you pick. It should lead to the same result. But there was no way to understand how to transform from one gauge to another in a clear mapping kind of way. And that was the basic problem. And when I looked at the problem, I looked at it as infinite dimensional, integral representation which is essentially what path integrals are. And it was clear what you needed to do. It was clear that you needed to implement what's called a, if you study calculus, simple one-dimensional calculus, there are what's called changes of variables, and they involved a, they involved a determinant relationship. And so you have the same kind of Jacobi--determinant relationship. And so then these things sort of reappear even in the infinite dimensional studies. So, for me, it was clear that what these guys wanted me to do was somehow understand in the context of path integrals, how to do these, these mappings and how to introduce the, the determinant, the Jacobian and the transformation and stuff like that. And so that was a simple idea, but it was how to implement it in a reasonably rigorous manner in the context of the infinite dimensional integrals. So that's, that was, and then what happens is, it's standard stuff to then take this thing and to interpret it diagrammatically. So that was the road I was on, and I was interested because that was the kind of stuff I liked. So when Mueller asked me, well, which of the two possible prescriptions is right compared to the Austrian guy? I said, well, I have to go home and think about it. So I came back, and I said, well, it's the, I think it was called the "principle of valley prescription", and it turned out to be in agreement with the Austrian guy. But the guy still, Mueller still could not believe that I had solved the problem. And then I remember, Mueller was leaving for lunch with the normal group of faculty. And at Columbia [University, New York City], at the Pupin Hall, the building of physics at Columbia has two stairwells. So I remember doing this u-turn, I went up and then down the other side so I could overhear the conversation. And so I remember Mueller telling the other guys, ah, you know, he's at it again, words to that effect. And I was really upset. I was really upset because this guy was making statements without any basis, right, without giving me the opportunity to fully explain what I did. And what really ticked me off, you know, Mueller took on this girl, I mean she was bright, but I never thought of her as a genius. But he preferred her over me, and he took her on as a student. So, Sally Cummings, so I, when I go down and overhear the conversation, he's saying, well, you know, Carlos is up to it again, blah, blah, blah. So the next day I see Mueller in his office. It's a Friday. The door is open. And I said, you know, I need thirty minutes. I actually said, I need five minutes so I can lay down the logic of what I'm trying to do. It took me thirty minutes. So I laid it out. I left his office, and that's it. Then the next Monday, I come back and Sally Cummings is telling me, you know what happened, you know what happened [excitedly]. I said, no. She said, well, we were all sitting at the colloquium, Alfred Mueller looks at Eric Weinberg, the guy from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and says, I think Carlos is right. And it was like, I swear, it was like a different--I mean it, from that point on--and this was like a year before graduating, they looked at me like some, some genius that they had failed to discover. And they were introducing me to this Nobel Prize winner and that Nobel Prize winner. And I was just overwhelmed by the attention, and then they started dumping problems on me (laughter), that I was not prepared to solve, thinking, oh, crap, now, we're losing an opportunity here. (Laughter) This guy can solve our problems. Story_ID: 23530 Speaker 1: By that time, I was so sick and tired--I hate to say this, of Columbia [University, New York City, where Handy had completed his B.A. degree in physics from 1968-1972, and was pursuing his doctoral degree in physics] because the sad thing about Columbia was, if you were gonna be successful in any discipline and more so in science and research, it's not just the knowledge. You have to learn or have the confidence to interact with people on your feet and exchange an idea. And the sad thing about Columbia was they never nurtured that in me. They always put me in this position of me trying to defend myself against the rest of the world, running home to, to work things out so I can then respond. Instead of believing that I wasn't stupid, it's like for six years, five, six years, they kept relegating me, even, even after doing very well in my math classes as an undergraduate, even after doing well on the qualifying exam, they kept like dismissing me. And so when the time came, and, and, you know--now, to their credit, they obviously recommended me to Los Alamos [National] Lab [Los Alamos, New Mexico]. But when I got to Los Alamos as a post-doc, I was so scared because I knew that even though I knew I had the smarts, I did not have the confidence to inter--I wasn't, I wasn't nurtured to engage people in terms of conversations. Speaker 2: Okay, now, you earned your Ph.D. in theoretical physics in 19-- Speaker 1: Right, theoretical physics. Speaker 2: 1978. Speaker 1: '78 [1978]. Okay. Speaker 2: So, did you feel like that, you really didn't fit into the world of, as a proper physicist even though you're like some sort of adjunct genius or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, it's just that Columbia physics, and I have to separate the physics department from the rest of the university, is--and then what's, you see, Columbia--and then after you get out you learn all these horror stories. You don't see it, you know, Columbia was very famous for destroying people, okay, keeping students for a long time. And, and it's true. When I remember, when I graduated, there was a guy there who was a graduate when I got in and was still a graduate student when I left. He had been there for ten years, okay, and there were others like that. So Columbia was famous in those years for destroying people. Story_ID: 23531 Speaker 1: And when I got here to TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], there was an article in the magazine 'Physics Today', and they were lamenting why it is that per capita, there are not as many Einsteins [Albert Einstein] now as there used to be, okay. And, and I looked at that article, and I got upset because my attitude is like, part of the problem is a lot of people who are smart get shot down at the knees for petty reasons by a lot of these academic programs. Speaker 2: So you think this is a cultural phenomenon? Speaker 1: Well, it, you know, more from the older generation, okay. And I wrote, I wrote to the editor, I wrote to the editor of 'Physics Today', and it, and I wrote to them, and I basically summarized everything I'm telling you in writing. And I wrote it, and then I called the provost at Columbia, and I said, you know, I've written this article, you know, it might go public. I just wanna give you a heads up. And so the provost said, well, I'm sure it's not this way now. And then when I said, and I felt really stupid because I said, what an idiot? You know, they're not gonna accept the article. Now, I've embarrassed myself. Well, guess what? Six months later, 'Physics Today' calls, we liked your article, we wanna publish it. And it got published, and I got not a massive outpouring, but my, my remark was, and I still believe this way, the problem at Columbia and to some extent, I mean the problem with physics, and, and that's why physics has the problems it's facing in terms of students going into it. The problem with physics in terms of a graduate program, Ph.D., is sometimes they take their selves too seriously. So at Columbia, this, the, the elite area was high energy, particle physics. So their mindset is we're gonna take on students who we believe can continue in this, in this area. That's the wrong mindset because what physics is, is problem solving. What you do is not as important as the skills that you learn, and so, so their attitude should be, we're taking on this student, and he's gonna be taught how to, how to, how to set up and solve a problem. And he's gonna learn a bunch of skills, and after he graduates, if he decides he doesn't wanna continue in physics, but wants to go into transportation modeling, economics or, or genetics, whatever, he should not think of himself as a failure because that's what happens. And what happens is many of these students, they get their Ph.D.s. They can't get a job in particle physics, so they see themselves as a failure. Instead they either stumble, if they're lucky, into different areas and find a whole new awakening, a whole new, a whole new discipline where they can apply the intellectual skills, not the specific skills, not the actual, necessarily knowledge--they may not be doing particle physics. But they may be doing some other kind of thing and, and so what's important about--what should be important about the Ph.D. is the problem solving experience, how to take something that's not understood, read about it, learn about it, come up with a solution and solve it. Instead, at Columbia--and I, I still don't, I mean I don't know why they thought I couldn't be a good physicist. I, I still don't understand why. But that's why when I tell you that my favorite phrase is "Greatness comes from within," and I said this to someone, and I hope it doesn't sound silly. You know, you know, everybody's obsessed with role models, role models. I'm not obsessed with role models because who was the role model for the first role model? It had to come from within. There had to be something within that person that said, this is what I'm gonna do despite all the difficulties. And I believe in that kind of thing. Now, role models are important to suggest possibilities, but if it's not within you, it's not gonna happen, okay. Story_ID: 23532 Speaker 1: And so in myself, my whole history, I've always, you know, I've, I've recognized, I'm not the fastest thinker in the world. I'm not the smartest, but I am creative, and I like math. And, and, and I'm not stupid, and if I say something stupid, it's because obviously, I didn't understand something, okay, (laughter) but I'm not, I'm not, by nature, stupid. So I cannot understand why the people at Columbia [University, New York City, where Handy received his B.A. and Ph.D. degrees in physics] behave the way they behave. And then, and then you realize that Columbia stagnated. During the time I was there, they really stagnated. Now, they're stronger. They have, more diversified, but there were issues there about Columbia. So in other words, it was a--and in some sense it was too incestuous. You got T. D. [Tsung-Dao] Lee, the Nobel Prize winner [in physics; 1957]. Three of his Ph.D.s were in the department, Eric, Richard Friedberg, the guy for tachyons [hypothetical particle that moves faster than light; term coined by Gerald Feinberg], [Gerald] Feinberg, and Norman Christ. And that, so you got a theory group, maybe with eight people, half of them come from the same intellectual, genetic pool. And that's too incestuous. That's too, you know, convoluted if you wanna call it that. It's amazing to me that at Columbia at that time, methods such as path integrals which are very famous, nobody there was doing that. But anyway, the bottom line is, you know, there's something, at the time I was going to Columbia that, and then what I laugh about it is, for a long time after I graduated from Columbia, and then when I became a professor in Atlanta [Georgia], I would never recommend (laughter) anybody to go to Columbia. And sure enough, I would get this feedback from people. I got a, there's a professor who said, well, I sent one of my, an African female, African American female to Columbia. She came back crying, and their remark to her was, "Why can't you be like Carlos?" Right, you know, so it's like, at least that generation relished pain and suffering, and I just hated it because there's so much I could have learned because it, it's clear that I can do the--I mean I knew how to program before I set foot on college. I knew my calculus. I, I was smart enough to deal with advanced stuff because you have students now who you gotta baby. You know, they can only take baby steps, but I was, I had the mindset where you show me something, and I can right away push it to a higher level. But what, what I needed was a mentor. I needed someone to say, this is, these are the important problems. And these are the kinds of things you need to be thinking about. It's that guidance through the mind field of different, of the discipline that I needed that nobody really wanted to offer. And that's the thing I can't understand. You know, fine, you know, I don't--it's not that I was looking for a job at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but, you know, maybe I was looking for a job at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] or some place like that. And they didn't take the time. And that's why, so when I went to Los Alamos [National Lab, Los Alamos, New Mexico], going back-- Speaker 2: This is 1980-- Speaker 1: 1978. Speaker 2: '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, fine. You know, yeah, Columbia [University, New York City; Handy received his B.A. and Ph.D. degrees from the physics department] sold me as the next best thing, I guess, they ever produced. And a friend of mine said that he, he happened to see a letter of recommendation from Norman Christ, of all the people, that said that Carlos was one of the most creative students I've ever had. But all that didn't benefit me because I missed six years of, of nurturing. I mean it's, to do, to be a good physicist, you need to develop. You know, you really need to relate to that discipline at a much higher level than I was. I was basically always put in this combat mentality of dodging bullets. I could never really relish, if you will, the whole experience of being a physicist. Story_ID: 23533 Speaker 1: So when I got to Los Alamos [National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico], there they were interested in a different problem. And-- Speaker 2: Now, is this the moment problem? Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm getting there now. So, at that time, again, now they're working in terms of path integrals, but they wanted to develop--in physics you have different kinds of approximation schemes for different kinds of forces. So, so in the case of quantum electro-dynamics, which is the quantum physics of how particles interact via electrical magnetic forces, there's a procedure that's perturbation analysis and stuff like that. And it works and stuff like that. But when you get to nuclear force, what you call strong forces, those methods don't work. And so the idea was, we need to find a different kind of perturbative scheme, a different kind of way of developing the perturbation, perturbative analysis, so we can deal with these strong forces. So at the time, in fluid dynamics, there are--you've heard of boundary layer, you know what a boundary layer is? You know, when you have a vehicle going through a fluid, for instance, a ship moving through a channel, the, the region between the outer surface of the ship and the main body of the water, as you move closer to the surface of the ship, the, there's a quick transition in how the fluid moves with the ship. So it's like stuck, it's like almost stationary, I believe close to the surface. Then there's a region of rapid transition, and then it, it sort of levels out. So that's called a boundary layer effect. And, and in math these are called like, these are like singular kinds of, of configurations. But I'll get into it, specific into it. So there's a whole method of perturbative analysis related to that. And so one of the things about strong forces is that, that at least the kinds of problems we're looking at, is that they're suggestive that maybe you wanna development this singular perturbation, boundary-layer kind of computational approach. And so the guys at Los Alamos were interested in that, but they, they were interested in, in doing it in the context of what's called a lattice, a lattice field theory approximation. And I didn't like that. And the thing that I didn't like was, they were trying to make an approximation on top of an approximation. And I thought that was too confusing. So then what I told them, well, I didn't really tell 'em because what happened was, because of the mindset that Columbia [University, New York City, where Handy had received his B.A. and Ph.D. degrees in physics] had instilled, I remember walking in on a conversation between David Sharp and somebody else. And I made a stupid remark, and he, the way he replied was to say, don't you know that? So I felt like really coward. I said, I'd better not open my mouth and just shut up, okay. So I decided just to do my thing on the side. So, so what I did was, I, I realized that what they, the kinds of questions they were asking were better to be asked not in configuration space--configuration space is normally called, you know, position space, right. You know, you're at that position, I'm at this position. So that's configuration space. Instead it was better to ask it in momentum space, for mathematical reasons that are kind of particular to the kinds of problems we're working on. So, to make a long story short, I wrote a paper, well, what--I wrote this, I wrote this formulism and it introduced, it actually introduced what's now called a--it's a simple idea, but it introduced a scaling function. But because I was interested in perturbative analysis with the lattice spacing, when I did that, it suggested that I should look at what's called "power moments", that I should do quantum mechanics in terms of something called power moments. And so, I remember that Clauder, John Clauder, who was my--he was the guy at Bell Labs [New Jersey] who was my mentor. We never really interacted on research, but he was the one that oversaw my development because they, Bell Labs was paying for my scholarship or fellowship [Handy was the first participant and graduate of the AT&T Cooperative Research Fellowship]. He visited Los Alamos, and I said to him that the, what I was pursuing really tied in with moments, these power moments. And then he said the remark, "Oh, the moment problem is a very famous problem in mathematics." So when he said that, I felt like I was on the right track. And so then I stayed pursuing this moment formulation, but the part that's interesting is, in--so this is 1978, around 1989, I have a friend in the military. And he saw this paper that I wrote, and then he says, you're doing wavelet analysis. And what happens is, there's a method called, I mean it's, it has many aspects. And so wavelet analysis, and, but it starts off from the same kind of scaling transformed representations, but it's just that if I hadn't done the perturbative thing which led me to moments, I would have done the more conventional thing which leads you to wavelet analysis, and it's just, it's just, it's just there for the picking. But it's just that you have to, it's a mind of, it's a problem of a, it's the mathematical culture of your discipline. So in physics, we do perturbation analysis. In engineering, they don't do perturbation analysis. They do computation, and if you do the, the kind of thing that normally they do, you would have been led to, to wavelet. So I always regret the fact that I missed out, I mean, I mean I kid you not. I could have been the, follow with it (unclear) because I was, I had the right idea. I was on a safe, on the, on the right tree trunk. It's just that one branch went this way, the other branch went this way. And because of the, the cultural, the mathematical culture in physics, I went in this direction, whereas the engineers sort of went in the other direction. But I'm not, I'm not too upset because what happened was, I left Los Alamos in '81 [1981], got married. I met my wife, she's from Costa Rica. And then I moved to a black firm in Columbia, Maryland called AMAF, A-M-A-F. Story_ID: 23534 Speaker 1: Now, where did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: Well, I met her in, in Santa Fe, New Mexico. She's from Costa Rica, but she was just vacationing, and so I met her, and we got married and all that kind of stuff. And so, so I left Los Alamos [National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico]-- Speaker 1: How-- Speaker 2: Um? Speaker 1: Yeah, how did you like Los Alamos otherwise? Speaker 2: It was too dead. It was kind of desolate, I mean, they had, I think--I mean there was, well, I mean intellectually, obviously, it was a great place. But socially, I felt a little isolated. I mean what's interesting about Los Alamos and Santa Fe was there weren't too many blacks. And the first time in my life I ever was called the "n" word was in Santa Fe (laughter). Now, someone would say they probably had justifiable cause (laughter), 'cause you have a lot of dysfunctional marriages there. So it turns out that I was sort of going out with this lady who was on the end, the end side of, the down side of her marriage relationship. So her, her, what do you call it, her, what's the right word when you're separated? They were sort of separated, estranged husband called me the "n" word (laughter). And so, because the thing about the, that whole part of New Mexico, you know, and there was this massive prison riot in the late '70s [1970s]-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, right. Speaker 2: --where the Hispanics killed off a lot of blacks. The race relationship between the blacks, the Hispanics and the whites is very--at least, historically--it wasn't all that great. And so, so, I mean that part didn't bother me so much because, you know, I get caught, you know, I get caught up while they're looking, are they seeing me as Hispanic or are they seeing me as black. I didn't know which one, but I guess, and I remember--I mean the social scene wasn't that great in terms of my ethnic group, if you wanna call it that. Speaker 1: Did you, were people surprised that you understood Spanish? Speaker 2: That I what? Speaker 1: Were people surprised that you understood Spanish in certain situations, being a New York guy-- Speaker 2: No, but what's interesting is, you know, I dated, you know, 'cause that, and after I left New York City, I did have a field day dating, and I made up for all the lost opportunities in New York City 'cause my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] (laughter) was too damn close. So in Santa Fe, I dated a lot. But just to go, I remember dating this Argentinean girl and I remember going to a Hispanic restaurant. And the owner, manager of that place who was, then, and they're not--this is the thing. In, in that part of New Mexico, you're looking for a fight if you call them Hispanic. They are Spanish. I think that's the lingo. [Brief interruption]. And, okay, so, so you have to be very careful because the tendency, because they're, the way they behave is like Chicanos. So if you say Chicano, man, you're inviting for a fight. They are Spanish. So even though they talk like Chicanos, they eat like Chicanos, they, whatever, they're not. They're Spanish. Speaker 1: But they don't like that word-- Speaker 2: They don't like, you cannot, because they, they actually traced their origins from the Spaniards that colonized that part of New Mexico. You have to be very careful. And, and I could sense that, from the Hispanic side, that there were racial problems, even though I'm not that dark complexioned, I think, you could tell that there was a--not every time, but there were elements of the Hispanic, of that Spanish community, to not call 'em Hispanic, you could tell that they were hostile, okay. They just didn't like blacks. And so, you know, so that, that aspect, and I was happy to, to move on. Story_ID: 23535 Speaker 1: So you got married in (simultaneous), what year was it? Speaker 2: In 19--oh, now, you're embarrassing me, 1981, March 21, 1981, okay. And then went and worked for a, a small black company in, in Maryland, and it was Baltimore, Maryland. At least it was a nice experience, but then the research part of it. Speaker 1: So this AMAF end? Speaker 2: AMAF, A-M-A-F. Speaker 1: AMAF, okay. Speaker 2: It doesn't have a meaning, it doesn't stand for anything, it's just AMAF. Speaker 1: AMAF, okay. (Unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was, I mean it was an ambitious small company, and they did avionics and other stuff. But the nice thing, the head of the research group there let me do whatever I wanted. And I wish I had only developed a wavelet 'cause that would have brought in a lot of money for them, but anyway, so much for that. But, so after that, about a year and a half of that, I then was offered a position at Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1983 which is just a graduate school. And I accepted it, I mean I actually, I went there as assistant professor, I think--did I go there as an assistant. I think I went there as an assistant--a non-tenured associated professor. And I will say the following. Clark--, Atlanta University, which then became Clark-Atlanta University, it, it, what's the right word, it rescued my professional life. Story_ID: 23536 Speaker 1: Okay, Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] 1983-- Speaker 2: '83 [1983]. Yes, so I went to Atlanta University in 1983, and what happened was, which is just a graduate school. So it gave me the opportunity to basically resume my research. I did that a little bit. I researched--I resurrected a proposal I had written while I was at AMAF [small firm in Baltimore, Maryland, where Handy worked before coming to Atlanta University] and wrote to, and sent it to NSF, National Science Foundation. And it was basically along the same themes of what I had, was doing [phone ringing], was doing at Los Alamos [National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico], at Los Alamos. And--that's my wife. And, and what's interesting, I got a visit from the program manager at NSF, and what they said was, well, we sent out this proposal to seven people. We only got three responses, but one of the responses was from a guy that they valued very highly, and he said that that was the best proposal of that competition. So I got funded. I got 180,000 dollars for three years. And, and so what happened was, that proposal was essentially along the lines of what I was doing at Los Alamos, a different way of looking at these equations and stuff. Speaker 1: Now, did you wanna stop and talk to her for a second? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: So, and then what happened was, while I was at AMAF I did fool around a little bit better with these moment representations [moment problem in mathematics] that I made reference to. So, so this is 1983. I got funded around 1984, and then what happened was, I actually crystallized--there was a problem I was really interested in because remember the whole "moment" stuff is, the whole moment formulation was tied into these, trying to find alternative computational schemes for strong-coupled systems. And, and so there was a very simple problem that I'd never seen before, and that's one thing I'm very good at. I, not that I've done it that many times, but I've done it three or four times during my life, where I could look at a mathematical equation, a mathematical expression and I can tell that it's something I hadn't seen before. And it, it, you know, it makes me curious. And so there was this very simple equation, and all it is, is simply, I mean the simplest equation. You take the Schrodinger equation which is the basic quantum equation, the basic equation for quantum mechanics and depending upon the potential, you can, if it's a harmonic oscillator, quantum, harmonic oscillator, you can transform it into a moment equation. And it's, you know, it looks like a fascinating equation. And I said, well, how do you solve this? You know, I've never seen this before in college. Story_ID: 23537 Speaker 1: So, and this is the greatest irony. It's just ironic. While I was at Los Alamos [National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico], I met this, I briefly met this Frenchman--at Los Alamos, I was interested in the moment problem, but I was getting to know the moment problem. And I remember this very famous Frenchman, a very noteworthy Frenchman, [Daniel] Bessis visited, but I was too shy to interact with him. And I remember passing him by. So now, I go to Atlanta, right, this is like four years later or something like that, Atlanta. And I've gotten this money from NSF, and I'm looking at this equation. It turns out that this same guy Bessis [ph.] is visiting Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] because Michael Barnsley who's in, who's well known because he developed a different kind of fractal, you've heard of fractals? Okay, so [Benoit] Mandelbrot [mathematician] from IBM [International Business Machines] invented these, like polynomial-related type fractals, non-linear, mapping-type fractals. But Barnsley invented what are called a fine-mapped fractals which are a little user friendly. They're, they're easier to, to deal with. And Barnsley had been Bessis's post-doc or whatever research associate in France. So Barnsley was getting all famous at Georgia Tech and invited Bessis, the same Frenchman I had met at Los Alamos to visit him for a sabbatical. Well, it turns out that this same Frenchman had been the teacher on one of the graduate courses of my colleague at Atlanta University, who had, who's South African [HistoryMaker Alfred Msezane], but had studied in Canada. And so Thanksgiving dinner of November, of the fall of 1984, we all get invited to my colleague's house for Thanksgiving dinner. I meet Bessis for the first time, and I say to Bessis, I said, there's this very simple problem that I'd like to be able to solve because Bessis had some reputation in terms of moment-problem related stuff. I mean he was both a physicist, a very high-level mathematician and, and stuff. So he, you know, in a very polite way, he said, well, that's a very interesting problem. Why don't you come, you know, the next day or next week to Georgia Tech, and I'll have you--I'd like you to present your problem to me, Jeff Geronimo and Evans Harrell were all at Georgia Tech in the math department. So sure enough, you know, so this is a formal thing. So I go to Georgia Tech and I pose my very simple problem, and--to the three of them. And so Bessis has an uncanny, Bessis did not know how to solve the problem. But he said one thing which was important, and it's, and that one thing is a theorem that's very well known but it all depends on the quantum class you take. It's not taken. It has to do with Sturm-Liouville type solutions, and there a very basic theorem that says that the ground state, the lowest energy state, has to correspond to a positive solution. And it's a theorem I, I never studied. I, I didn't know, okay, even though, you know, it's a very basic theorem, but it wasn't taught at Columbia [University, New York City, where Handy receives his B.A. and Ph.D. degrees in physics]. So it stuck in my brain. And so I remember going back to the apartment and telling my wife, I'm so excited. This really big shot thinks I have a nice problem here, you know, an interesting problem. And I told her, I'm gonna solve this problem before the year is out. And, you know, (unclear) Thanksgiving, the year is out. Man, I hit on that problem with everything I, I could think of. Finally, a thought occurred. And the thought occurred was the following, Bessis says, at least the ground state is a positive configuration. I know the moments of this thing, I know that the moments have to satisfy an equation of their own where the energy appears as a perimeter. You don't know the energy. So what you're trying to do is, is vary the energy to see, try to define a selection process that would determine the energy. So, anyway, so I know that the ground state must be positive. I know that I have a moment equation where the energy is a parameter, and I also know these famous theorems from the moment problem in mathematics that tells you how the moments must behave if the underlying function is positive. So I said, could it be that by combining all these three, I can determine the energy? And boom, I got it. Story_ID: 23538 Speaker 1: So, [Daniel] Bessis [physicist], this is now January of '85 [1985], comes back from his Christmas break. And he says, he says, you know, I tried to, I tried to solve this problem, but I, I couldn't come up with a solution. I said, well, I solved it. He says, what do you mean you solved it? Yeah, I solved it. So I showed him what I did. And his jaw dropped because not only had I solved the problem, I did something else. It turns out--and this is the other irony, it turns that he and Barnsley, a few years before, had tried it--because the method I came up, not just gave you an answer. It gave you an answer in a very special way. I could tell you, I could tell you that the true answer had to be between this number and that number. And depending upon how much I wanted to go, I can make those two shrink, and those are called lower and upper bounds. So I can tell you that the true answer must be between this and this, and I can make this arbitrary type. And they had been looking for a method like that. And, in fact, Barnsley came up with something called the "bathtub," "Barnsley's bathtub theorem" which is really a variation of something called the Barta's Bounds for ener--, for, you know, for eigenvalues, well, it's really for the ground state, the Barta Bounds. But that method can give you estimates, but there's no way to shrink 'em down. I could shrink 'em down, and so Bessis gets very excited because even though that's not what I was looking for, that's what I discovered. And then he says that there's a very famous problem, called the Quadratic Zeeman Effect for super strong magnetic fields. What is means is basically, you know, the earth's, the magnetic field of the earth is like, you know, one gauss or .4 gauss [unit of measurement of a magnetic field]. It's very, very small. But if you go on the neutron star, the magnetic field can be a billion, I mean huge, (unclear) billion gauss, very strong. And so what astronomers wanna do is, they'll measure the energy emitted by these hydrogen-looking atoms, and by doing the spectro-analysis, they can actually measure in magnetic fields. So it's a, you know, it's an involved, it's an inverse process. So if you have, if you have good--if you can accurately measure the energy levels from a hydrogen atom, you can then determine what the strength and magnetic field (unclear) neutron star. So it's an important pract--theoretical and practical problem. But the problem is that, this quadratic Zeeman effect is a strong coupling problem, all right. The boundary layer I think I told you, it's a strong coupling problem. And when people try to solve that problem, they, because the methods are not, they're not robust, they're not accurate enough, they can give answers that vary all over the place. But here I am coming with a solution that can tell you that the, what the true (unclear). There's no uncertainty. So, I remember in '85 [1985] Bessis looking at me, and, and you have to understand Bessis is the first collaboration I ever had in my life, okay, not at Columbia, not at Los Alamos, the first collaboration I ever had in my life. So I remember in '85 [1985] Bessis saying, we wrote a paper, a 'Physics Review Letters'[journal] paper which is the top publication still [C. R. Handy and D. Bessis, `Rapidly Convergent Lower Bounds for the Schrodinger Equation Ground State Energy', 1985]. Story_ID: 23539 Speaker 1: And he [Daniel Bessie; physicist; Handy's research collaborator] said, it's gonna take us three years to solve the hydrogen problem from the, the exercise problems we were working on. And by a strange, it was not, 1988, we solved, we actually learned how to extend the method to the, the, this, the neutron star problem. And what happened was that there was an, the point is, I made this discovery, but on simple systems. But if you wanted to do more complicated systems, you had to introduce something called linear programming, which are methods, not normally found in physics. They were methods normally found in, in industrial engineering, in optimization, you know, industrial-type problems where you're trying to optimize solutions, trying to, you know, make things more efficient, make the power plant or whatever it is, the, the, you know, manufacturing process more efficient. These are methods more traditional there. So, so we, you know, I discovered, I mean, yeah, perhaps if you talk to people in that community, you know, these techniques are known. But in physics, they'd never been used before. So, so in that stretch of time, so we developed this technique we called the 'Eigenvalue Moment Method', and it turns out now that, that starting in the '90s [1990s], people working in commentarial analysis and even in quantum chemistry, this guy [David] Mazziotti out of University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], they're using--I'm gonna say this, and I'm gonna say it very carefully, they're using exactly the same philosophies, mathematical philosophies, computational philosophies that we developed a year or ten years, essentially ten years earlier. And so it's called, well, I'm not sure if I said this, it's called Semi-definite programming, and what it is, is exactly that. It's a whole class of problems that relate to the, they're called convex, the convex optimization problems that have to do with the moment problem, positivity con--(unclear) and stuff like that. So the nice thing is that, that at least now, we're recognized as the pioneers in that, and not to the diminish Bessis because, you know, the original problem, the original discovery of this, of the solution, the getting of the bounds of the energy, the development of the linear program techniques, I did all that by myself, okay. But, what you need is, you know, like I say, you need a mentor. You need someone to tell you, this is the important problem. Speaker 2: How do you spell Dr. Bessis? Speaker 1: Bessis is B-E-S-S-I-S. Speaker 2: B-E-S-S-I-- Speaker 1: Daniel Bessis. Speaker 2: -S, Daniel-- Speaker 1: Daniel Bessis. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he, you know, is, is a very smart person, tremendous listener. Being French sometimes, he is a little bit overbearing (laughter), okay. But, you know, he's a, he's now close eighty years old. I actually, he's here in the department because he, his mind is tremendous. But, so the work that we did, and I'll--and this is important because I, I, as you, by now, I think can understand, I take tremendous pride on what I know I've achieved. All that I did myself. I needed him because I did not know, you know, the neutron star problem, I did not know that that was an important problem, okay. And, and, and the, the validation from talking to someone that you know is accomplished, that you know is a heavyweight, who, who can appreciate the problems you're working on. To a younger person, that's invaluable. It gives you tremendous energy. I could not have done it without him. But, I do take pride that, that, you know 95, 96 percent of what we did is all my doing. And, and there's no, you know, there's no misrepresentation in that. Story_ID: 23540 Speaker 1: And so, you know, and so now, and then what happened was, there were problems where we applied the technique. And, in fact, there's another important problem where, this was now in 2001, what happens is in physics, in quantum physics, in mathematics there's something called Hermitian operators, okay. And they're like the staple, and whenever you wanna talk about a quantum system, you want to work with Hermitian Operators. And the reason is, because if you take a simple course in linear algebra, you learn that Hermitian operators have what's called real eigenvalues. So when you do a measurement of a system in quantum mechanics, measurements correspond to eigenvalues, essentially. And since you're doing, you're doing measurements of real things, you want mathematical operators whose eigenvalues are real. Well, if the, if the operator underlying that is, Hermitian, then mathematically, you'd know you're just gonna get real eigenvalues. But what happened was, and now we come back to [Daniel] Bessis, in around the mid, early '90s [1990s] Bessis was working with another one of this students, a very famous, Zaing Gusted (ph.) out of France. And I forget what the context was, but they came up with a new kind of operator that was not Hermitian, but it emitted real, real eigenvalues. And I only hit myself because Bessis came to me, and asked me if I could use my method on it. And I said, no, because the potential associate is complex. You heard, remember when I said, complex analysis. It's one of the, I couldn't see how to do it. So, so then he talked to Bender, who's very famous out of St. Louis, and Bender who's very good at asymptotic analysis, he and Baucher (ph.) using estimation method which is assemtonic analysis, they actually showed that there was strong evidence that, indeed, these eigenvalues were real. And the importance of all this is, this is called PT, well, they call it pseudo Hermiticity--the reason this is important is because, because it seems like you don't have to restrict yourself just to Hermitian operators. You can now broaden the class of mathematical operators that you can use to represent quantum physics, quantum systems. And what that means is that now, maybe there's a little more flexibility, that you can actually now begin to describe phenomena that you couldn't describe before. So it's actually an important and has become an industry. But it was, it was Bessis' conjecture that these kinds of operators emitted real eigenvalues. Story_ID: 23541 Speaker 1: So anyway, so what happened was in 2001, I got into a little bit of a testy situation with another colleague where he, where I thought that he thought that everything I did was just theoretical, had no real practical usefulness. So to prove it to him, I said, well, I'm gonna look at your problem and I'm gonna solve it. He was doing quantum scattering, and I, I don't know what possessed me. I just got angry-- Speaker 2: A colleague-- Speaker 1: At Clark Atlanta [University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Clark Atlanta, okay. Speaker 1: So I got angry-- Speaker 2: And maybe I should point out that by this time, you had founded the Center for Theoretical Studies-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --for Physical Systems then. Speaker 1: Good point, he, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It links to that because what happened, in 1991, because we, while at Clark Atlanta, we, you know, I was funded by NSF [National Science Foundation]. And then when I discovered this method in '85 [1985], I got a two-year extension on my 180,000 dollar grant from the National Science Foundation. And I was awarded a creativity extension for 120,000 dollars. So all together, I got like 300,000 [dollars] for five years which is not chump change. And then, actually, I got, then after that five year, I got a regular NSF grant in physics, where were gonna apply the same methods to the three bott--the quantum three-body problem, the (unclear) three-body problem. But that was a hard problem, and it's just that the mathematical machinery required to do everything that we could do, even for the (unclear) was, was a lot more complicated. So I was looking for different formulations to do more or less what we had done. And we actually made some very nice progress under (unclear), but I was never, was never able to tackle the three-body problem. And then what happened in '91 [1991] based upon all the money we generated through smaller grants from NSF, National Science Foundation funded, established the Center for Theoretical Studies of Physical Systems at Clark Atlanta [University] where I was, even though nominally, Alfred Msezane [also a HistoryMaker] whom you may have already interviewed, he was the director. And I guess I was the associate director. But we really operated more as co-directors. And so there was a division of labor where he just focused on the financial aspects of the, of the center, and his atomic physics research. I basically focused on my own area of research and also growing new areas of research, hiring young people to come and all that stuff. And I was pretty successful at that. You know, I got lucky, found the right people, generated a fair amount of money, got a, and so it was a really successful enterprise. But after ten years of that stuff, and looking back, I wish I hadn't been so, too much invested on the management side of the center 'cause it took up a lot of energy, I sort of, a little bit diminished my own research. But in 2001, I was like upset with Alfred 'cause I got this feeling that he thought that what I did was too, of an academic exercise. So he was interested in calculating--he's very big now on these (unclear) calculations for atomic scattering. So I said, well, I bet you I can calculate this. And I don't know why I said that. So, I just, I remember one Sunday night, looking at these equations, and I worked out these equations that left me staggered because it turns out that I could apply my method to these kinds of problems. And so, I remember trying--so I came up with this new formulation, tried to apply it to Alfred's problem, and it wasn't working out. And I wasn't sure if I had the wrong equations or I just didn't understand Alfred's problem, Alfred Msezane, the other co-director of the Center at Clark Atlanta, so then I asked [Daniel] Bessis [physicist; Handy's research collaborator]--well, then I knew that the problem Bender had worked on was a lot simpler to formulate. So I did it on that problem and boof (ph.), it came out like greased lightning. I mean I got the reality of the eigenvalues and stuff like that. And then, and then, then what happened was, I tried to get that paper published, and they wouldn't publish it. And, and the reviewer dismissed it. And so I wrote back and I wrote back in a very testy way. What I said was that, in my method, what's important is to ask questions in this particular order, not in the other order. But by that time--what had happened was that by the time that I was, during this whole process, another researcher had communi--had contacted me and said that there was a very important problem people had not been able to solve. And if my method could work on it, it would really, really be great. So he gave me this, he told me this problem. And I applied the method and got really nice results. And I'd never seen a paper published--I sent the paper for publication. It got published in two weeks (laughter), okay. So I wrote one paper that was turned down. And in my rebuttal to that paper, I said, in my rebuttal to the reviewer who turned down that first paper, I said, "By the way, we've also solved this other problem," okay. So the first paper that got turned down, the editorial board said that they concurred with the--and this is in the British tradition, and said, "We concur with the, the remarks of the author," blah, blah, blah. So they published that first paper, but the second paper that really contained the new stuff, okay, I mean that paper got accepted in two weeks, and I got invited to Prague [Czech Republic] for the first conference on the pseudo-Hermitian systems, and stuff like that. And then I went back to Alfred's problem and actually understood better the, the structure and everything worked. So, so these methods can be applied there, and, and now, you know, I became--so that, you know, I published a lot that--I almost got sick because I was wanting to publish so much. Story_ID: 23542 Speaker 1: And then around that time, my mother [Leonor Maria Cartaya] passed away in 2005, and I felt less obligated to stay in Atlanta [Georgia, at Clark Atlanta University]. And I always wanted to be the chair of a physics department, but in Atlanta, they didn't wanna let me be the chair. And so they offered me here the opportunity. And, and the thing you have to understand was, when I left Clark Atlanta, Clark Atlanta, you know, certainly with the help of the National Science Foundation [NSF], they had produced a lot of Ph.D.-type students. I've been here, and I've gotten three or four emails from so and so who used to be my student and just got my Ph.D. in physics out of Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley], just got my Ph.D. out of God knows where, some really good schools. And all I can say is because of the center [Center for Theoretical Studies of Physical Systems at Clark Atlanta University] we got and the ripple effects of that center, Clark Atlanta, at least for the space of time it was funded, I think did a, had to, must have done a splendid job because we produced, I mean, for instance, we, Monica Jackson, who's a mathematician, and I think she was tenured at American University [Washington, District of Columbia] in the area of statistical math, she gave a talk here. And she was supported by us through this center. So a lot of very good minority Americans were impacted by this center we started at Clark Atlanta. Now, I come to TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], and I'll, you know, I'll--you know, in 2005, TSU was really lagging behind the leading black schools in research, and certainly in the physical sciences. I mean I could not understand why, why things were so delayed. So I was hired to try to stimulate the research environment 'cause I was very good at that-(simultaneous). Story_ID: 23543 Speaker 1: Had there been a turnover in staff? Had people retired or something like that? Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: Here [at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]? Speaker 2: Before you showed up. Speaker 1: No, it's just that, I mean I think, I mean there's this, now that I understand it better, I think in Texas--you have to understand one thing. In, it's clear that the state government has been a little bit severe on black schools in Texas, okay. And, and it's been almost, and my--I mean I don't really know the history. But the little that know of it, is it's clear, I've been told that the state of Texas, basically, wants to abolish the black schools in Texas. And so I think they have taken every opportunity to diminish that support. And it certainly doesn't help when, and certainly in the past, when you may have some questionable administrators that did something to give the state reason for doing that, okay, because when I first came here to interview, you know, I said, Houston, oil, money. And yet, I saw some of the buildings they had, and I was in a state of shock, and I told 'em, no, I'm not coming here. But then some back at Atlanta said, well, you know, there were possibilities. So I came back here and said, all right, actually, it's not too bad. What I can say is TSU now is not what it was in 2005. They have a new administration, (unclear) at the helm from three, four years, President [John] Rudley. They're, they're competitive, they're aggressive. They, they wanna be, they wanna be--they wanna make TSU a top-tier competitive institution. And what's even nicer is sometimes, you know, some university will hire some president who's a business type. And their idea of progress is to cut, cut this, cut that. And at least that has not been the mentality. Dr. Rudley is an accountant so he's in that general business area, but his vision is, his idea of success is not cutting. It's trying to have a systemic or systematic growth and getting good people to come. So I'm really excited for TSU you in terms of the future offers. Speaker 2: Now, having been here though like about five years ago, I noticed that the, there's a new science building where we interviewed Dr. [Nancy] Glenn yesterday and-- Speaker 1: Oh, Nancy Glenn [also a HistoryMaker; statistician], okay. Speaker 2: -brand (unclear) [new] building. Speaker 1: Right, but-- Speaker 2: --and even though we're sitting in a trailer now for physics, you know. But-- Speaker 1: Right, no, but you have to understand is, and this is, this goes to--when I came here, that new science building, I said, "Oh, TSU must be doing really great because the state has invested $32 million to build that building." Nah. That's money gotten from a civil rights lawsuit. So it, I think what happened was, the little that I know of the history is some time in the '80s [1980s], I think the way it got started was, the, there's the, the part of Texas, I figured it was the, how the, is it the valley or something? The lower part of Texas, like Brownsville, if you go below Corpus Christi, that whole area did not have or if you go the Brownsville--you know where Brownsville is, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, down on the Gulf [of Mexico] almost. Speaker 1: Down in south (unclear), that whole area of Texas had no universities. And I think some Hispanic guy, and I don't remember his name, sued the state of Texas in the, alleging that, you know, either discrimination or there was benign neglect in developing that part of Texas. He sued and apparently won. And I think that motivated the black schools in Texas to sue, and they also won. It's OCR, Office of Civil Rights. So they won "x" amount of money and on TSU's part, that money they won went to building that building. And it went to building some other buildings as well. And so, so for TSU, it's been challenging, I think. And I think that's part of the problem. Now, for instance, the, the part of the complaint you hear a lot is TSU is actually older than the University of Houston [Houston, Texas] as a state school. But yet all the resources went to the University of Houston, okay. And in their mind, TSU should be, in terms of state funding, being a state school in the city, should be well endowed, but it's not, okay. And so, so, you know, I guess when I didn't know enough, I said, well, someone here at TSU didn't do right because this school, as large as it is should--I mean because, when I started at Atlanta University, Clark Atlanta, in the '90s [1990s] Clark Atlanta was a powerhouse among black schools. Then the other black schools started getting jealous and competitive, and then you have Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], Florida A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Greensboro, North Carolina], they started really competing, okay. But TSU sort of, the impression I have is, it didn't, it lagged, okay. And I don't know, and I know Prairie View [A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] had problems as well, even though it's now part of a Texas A and M system. But, but, you know, it's been challenging. But at least now, they, they, you know, you can, you can, you know, TSU is now more competitive, has really aggressive people, is bringing in money in terms of research and stuff like that. So in physics, when I became the chair in 2005, they gave me the opportunity to bring in people. And my desire was to, you know, my attitude is like, and I'll be blunt, you know, U of H [University of Houston] is right across the street. I have no interest in being the depository of people that U of H doesn't wanna keep, right. And I, I want our own identity, our own culture, intellectual culture. So I went out and tried to recruit people that, A, could function in an environment that is developing like ours, that I knew were strong researchers and could help us, and Bessis is one of them, okay, as mature as he is. But I brought in other people, Tim Shack, who actually did a post-doc [postdoctoral work] at Clark-Atlanta as well, [Daniel] Vrinceanu, who's very smart. I mean these guys are really very good. And at least, I think we're acknowledged now as being one of the strongest, research-wise, departments on the campus, right. Story_ID: 23544 Speaker 1: Yeah, talk about the demographics of TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]. Speaker 2: Right, TSU is about 10,000 student population. They're trying to improve the admissions standards and stuff like that to get a more competitive group of students. There are good, I mean there are excellent students, and I've taught at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Clark-Atlanta [University, Atlanta, Georgia] and you certainly see students of that caliber here. They, TSU boasts that one third of all African American pharmacists in the United States were produced from TSU. They have a School of Pharmacy. Their business school is, I think, touted as one of the most diverse in the nation. Overall, the, obviously, the demographics is, you know, 90-plus African American, about 10 percent, something of that order, you know, 8 percent something Hispanic. I'm, now, I don't know the numbers exactly. And the rest are, you know, others. And, you know, so--oh, and so, just recently I noticed on the web, on the home page for the university, I think TSU is now the fourth largest producer of undergraduate and graduate degrees by African Americans in the nation behind Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia]. And I think it's something on the order of tenth in terms of Hispanics, okay, which is interesting, especially, more, probably more because of the number of Hispanics on the graduate school side. I, I don't know, but it's up there. It's, these are respectable numbers and so--and this just came out. So that's, that's pretty impressive. I know that under Rudley [TSU, President Rudley], there has been a broadening of, of trying to broaden the ethnic demographics of the campus. And so, obviously, we welcome, and there's a sig--I mean I'm not sure if significant is the right word, but, you know, one thing about Houston is it's, I mean you have Vietnamese, Nigerians, what else, what other groups, Vietnamese, Nigerians, are, I mean I guess the Asian population is predominantly (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: There're Indians now. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I forget the Indians, Koreans. You have, even though you may not necessarily have, what do you call it, Little Koreas, Little Chinatowns and stuff like that, but in terms of the demographics, these groups are, it's a very multicultural, multiethnic metropolitan area, you know, third or fourth largest in the nation. And, obviously, that impacts TSU. And then the other exciting thing is, Rice [University, Houston, Texas] is a tier-one research institution. U of H [University of Houston, Houston, Texas] is now, I think a tier-one research institution. So TSU is positioning itself, I believe, to be the repository of, you know, students that may not necessarily go to these tier-one schools, but are the next tier below. And that's, that's a pretty competitive group because essentially, you know, we're the three--of the ones I mentioned, these are the top three institutions in the city. So that's--now, Houston, University of Houston has different campuses, but, you know, in terms of the stronger campuses are the three that I mentioned. Story_ID: 23545 Speaker 1: So as I was saying, in 2005 I came here [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], and hired a strong bunch of researchers. It hasn't been easy. You know, there's been departmental strife and stuff like that, but all these personality differences iron themselves out. And so this past year, I mean--now, the state is, the state here is a little bit difficult, but despite that, we produced six undergraduate majors this past year which is a tremendous amount and first time ever for the physics department. The nice thing is that we have a significant component in what's called health physics. Health physics refers to professionals that monitor radiation levels, either in an environment, in a lab, in a company and stuff like that or a hospital, medical facility. And we are producing students, undergraduate students with degrees in physics, but specializing in health physics. And that's nice because of the large medical complex, the Texas Medical Center, which has like 47, 48 medical, you know, hospitals, research, medical research institutions and stuff. It's one of the largest such, you know, conglomerates anywhere in the world. And so we see the health physics as a way to tie into that and produce students, because with a bachelors [degree] in health physics, if you're certified or manage to land the right job, you're making six figures already with a bachelors, okay. So that's a very lucrative area. And we've already produced students who, you know, we just graduated a student, Michael Smith, who got a graduate, went into the graduate program at Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas] in health physics, John Medeco (ph.), who just got a job in the Anderson, and is basically, is doing graduate work as well at U-T Austin [University of Texas, Austin], their online master's [degree] program in health physics. So, you know, once we get out of these trailers and have really dedicated space, I think we can attract more students who can exploit the opportunities that we have here. So, you know, I tell people, you know, you know, I haven't really, now, you know, whether they chastise me or not, it's like, you know, any student that says they wanna do physics, I tell them they're either one of two, they're either crazy (laughter), don't have an idea what they're talking about or they're actually, that have good potential. And so, and if a student has good potential, then chances are, that student also has other options, doesn't have to come here. So, if we don't offer him or her an enticing environment, the chances of us getting strong students diminishes. So, so for us, the new facilities that will be completed a year from now, when the new Science and Technology Building gets constructed right next to the new Science Building, that will be a major thing because we'll have dedicated labs and for health physics activities, nuclear physics activities and stuff like that. So that, that will be a major--and I'll be very happy because, you know, when I came here some people were predicting I wouldn't last a year. And we had an incident where I almost thought that that would be true (laughter). I had some difficulty with some of the former--but they're no longer here, but some of the former faculty in my department. But I've been here now, entering, knock on wood, remind me to knock on wood, this is my eighth year as chair. And I think people appreciate, I think they, they respect that, that I have a good sense of, you know, competitive people, you know, and I have a good sense of, you know, where the department should be progressing and stuff like that. And, and, and I've been able to recruit and attract some good students. So, overall, I think that we're doing fine, and there're some hurdles before us, but I think we'll overcome them. Story_ID: 23546 Speaker 1: You, you may be aware that the state [of Texas], because when I got here [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] in 2005, I thought that the state would give us a certain amount of time to get--because you have to understand, when I came in 2005, there were no physics students, okay. And I thought the state would give me a certain number of years to start graduating five a year, right. Well, we graduated six this past year. No, no, no, no. The state--and it's just mind boggling, the state expected that from 2005 to 2010, and nobody told me this, and they caught everybody else in the university off guard, I would have produced twenty-five students, all right. And this is, this is mind blowing. And so I remember, well, I don't wanna give into too many details or the provost gets on my neck, but I was giving, I was given the strong, I was given a response or I got a response from the Coordinating Board that, the Texas Coordinating [Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board], that in, roughly about 2009--and that was already four years into the five-year cycle, and they, I was told that they were happy, that they knew we were a new program and stuff like that. And everything was cool. No, what they really meant was, we don't care if you don't graduate anybody for the first four years, as long as by the fifth year you graduate twenty-five so that you can graduate on average five. So what happened was, a year ago they cut our program. We, we appealed, and what happened was, the physics community got very, very vocal, and there were like eight other programs in the state that got cut. So what will probably happen is the state will allow all these eight schools to get together and offer one degree amongst them. So what that means is that the first two-year courses will be taught here. But third and fourth-year courses will be taught--I don't say, online. There's a system called TTVN, which is like an interactive TV. So it's a little bit more dynamic. And so one instructor from all these eight campuses will offer a course and all the students from all the campuses will take it. So that will be a way for us to still offer a BS [Bachelors of Science] in physics. Now, in some ways I actually welcome that because, because A, it now exposes TSU physics to almost all of Texas, B, it, it is a way to, for us to, to--what's the right word, to affirm the high level of physics training that we offer here because, because now we are responsible for the type, physics evolution of students in these other seven campuses. And the other one is, and, and this goes with my master scheme. They're almost all part of the Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University] system. And so, in Texas, you have, Texas Tech has its own system. U-T [University of Texas] Austin has its own system. University of Houston has its own system. Texas Southern [University] has its own system, and I'm sure I left somebody else out. So these are all university systems with different campuses. So here we are, well, the Texas A and M system, I think I may have left out. So if all these eight schools for the most part are part of the Texas A and M system, what it means is that the students we produced, if we're, if this consortium goes through, may be more inclined towards going to graduate school in the Texas A and M system. So I am, I am committed, if everything goes through to producing ten, hopefully, African--I mean I can, I know I can get to ten and chances are most of them will be African Americans. If I can produce ten African Americans per year, undergraduate physics to feed into the Texas A and M system, that's gonna make the other systems a little jealous, especially U of H across the street. And so at some point, they will, assuming that my fantasy bears out, they will say, no, no, no, that's too--we want some of those students too. Fine, so then let us have our own physics program back. So, so it blindsided, what happened, it blindsided us, and, and it's something that we're dealing with. And I believe that, that this consortium will form, and at least, it'll put us in a holding pattern. But independent of that, I think we also are gonna push to have our own degree in health physics, and that technically, should be a little easier to achieve. So, you know, just when you think things are going well, you know, the state, in its wisdom, blindsides you. Story_ID: 23547 Speaker 1: And then, you know, and when you think about it, it's, it's, you know, on average, Texas only produces four or five blacks with B.S. [bachelor of science] degrees in physics every year. So at U-T [University of Texas system], you take U-T San Antonio, U-T Austin, Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University], you measure all the state schools. They only produce four or five blacks a year-- Speaker 2: And you produced six last year. Speaker 1: And so, and so in 2010, we produced two, even though the state, the numbers got mixed up. We produced two, so I said, we produced 40 percent of the African Americans out of Texas in 2010 (laughter), okay. And, and this year, it'll be interesting to see. So the point is, we are making an impact. And that, plus these rankings in terms of where Texas Southern University is in terms of the production of, of blacks in under--with undergraduate degrees, resonates what I, what I just said. So, you know, and then, when I came here, you know, you know, my impression was, well, you know, Texas doesn't have too many black folks, you know, 'cause you think it's all basically Mexican American. And then is say, well, is it possible that Texas has one of the largest black populations in the United States? Bingo, in 20--in the 2000 census, I believe Texas had the largest black population of any Southern state. And now, I think it's like third in the nation, third in the nation. So, even though it has a high black representation, if you look-NSF [National Science Foundation] had these statistics, and when you looked at it, I remember in 2001, 2005, Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] produced more black, produced one, produced like sixteen African American Ph.D.s in the science and STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics] areas. U-T Austin and Texas A and M only produced like, either one more or whatever. So Jackson State by itself. Now, you could say, well, U-T Austin and Texas A and M are maybe more competitive, so, you know, not that many students get accepted. But I, my attitude is like, I, I don't believe that, okay, because if--they're, they're certainly visible. And you would think that there must be enough very competitive African Americans that would wanna go to U-T Austin. So something in the, the way they recruit is not very appealing to African Americans at the national level, and it reflects on really poor statistics. And, and, you know, if you look at all, looked at all three statistics in terms of blacks that graduate from Texas and get their Ph.D.s outside of Texas, blacks that just graduated at the undergraduate level, I mean there were like three different levels of, of minority production of STEM graduates, Texas was pitiful, I mean really pitiful. They lagged. You know, like Georgia, Louisiana, Florida A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], all these places beat Texas in terms of the numbers--I mean the numbers weren't all that great, but they certainly beat Texas. And the only thing I can think of is, certainly, in the case of Georgia, knowing the, Atlanta University Center over there, is that these other states have, what's the right word, certainly now, robust HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] that feed, you know, like in the case of Atlanta University Center, they feed Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia]. So Georgia Tech at one time was boasting that they were the number one producer of black engineers. Yeah, because they're getting all these good students from the Atlanta University Center. But here, in Texas, the mindset is, they clearly have a problem with diversity issues at the graduate level. But somehow, it's clear that, at least to me, it seems like there's really no motivation to say, okay, let's strengthen the STEM areas in the two, you know, the two major HBCUs here so that things change at the higher level in the other systems. And that, that's the thing I don't understand. And then when you look at the coordinating board, you know, and the head of the coordinating board, a Ph.D. in English, the guy under him is a Ph.D. in public administration. The next guy under him is a Ph.D. in French, and, and there's no one that I can see that, that is, that understands the challenges of, you know, getting a bachelors [degree] in the STEM area, especially, in physics, right, which is a mainstay of many different areas, engineering and whatever, I don't understand that. And it's like they, it's like they're intentionally dismissing what we've accomplished and that's the challenge we face. But I hope that we will succeed in, in staying things and then evolving from that. So. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 23548 Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: What today would be my legacy? Oh, boy (laughter). My legacy is, on the research side, the work that I'm doing and now after a six-year hiatus, I'm actually, we've sort of stumbled onto some really nice things. And so the, you know, I can honestly say that I invented a new method for solving a large class quantum problems. They may not be the, the hardest problems, but in their own right, they're challenging problems within the area that these methods impacted, and I'm very proud of that. On the other side, I can honestly say I have, I have produced, impacted twenty black Ph.D.s, either directly or indirectly. Even though you don't think about it, when the time comes and these people visit you and you see who they are and what they've accomplished, it humbles you because you know that if you didn't contribute, at least you didn't mess 'em up, okay (laughter), okay, which is a big, big accomplishment. But I, I think Kojo Lender, very right, I mean I think he's up at Texas Instruments, I believe, up there. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that's Don Lender's son from Chicago [Illinois], yeah-- Speaker 2: Excuse me? Speaker 1: Don Lender's son from Chicago. Speaker 2: Oh, really. Speaker 1: I know Don, yeah, go ahead. Speaker 2: Very, very-- Speaker 1: Kojo Lender, yeah-- Speaker 2: What's the right word, what's the word, "brainy" kind of, yeah. Then there's a girl, I remember her. Oh, God, I remember her because she majored in physics, and she asked me a question in the freshman physics class, and at that time, well, you know, remember Atlanta University was a graduate school. And we had just merged with an undergraduate. So I was like getting used to the undergraduate mindset. She asked me a question which at the time I thought was interesting. And I made a, a grimace and she got very scared. But, but she did finish with a master's [degree] in physics out of, not out of--I don't think out of, anyway, she became a patent attorney. And she's up in, either Texas Instruments or one of the major companies up in Dallas [Texas]. This fellow that called, sent me an email and says, "Hey, Dr. Handy, so and so. You know, I wanna say thanks, you know, blah, blah, blah." And so I'm saying, well, can you send me a photo 'cause I can't remember you (laughter). So he sends me a photo, and he says, oh, yeah, I got my Ph.D. out of Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley]. And, and you look at the kid and you say, you know, the little you remember doesn't seem to correlate with him getting a Ph.D. out of Berkeley, but you're excited as (unclear) that he got a Ph.D. out of Berkeley. While I was at Clark Atlanta [University, Atlanta, Georgia], I remember, I sat next to this young lady, and, and I felt like, you know, she wanted to say something. And then she said, yeah, you know, she had taken me in a class. And so I said, oh, that's great. So I said, well, what did you do? You know, what did you do? Oh, I got my Ph.D. Oh, okay, where'd you get your Ph.D, in what area? She said, oh, in applied mathematics. I said, oh, that's very nice. Where did you get your applied mathematics (laughter) Ph.D.? She said Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island]. And I said, oh, crap, because I know one thing about Brown, they're very good in applied math. I looked at the girl, and I said, I asked her, was I nice to you? (laughter). I was concerned that this would be pay-back situation. So, so there're students that I've produced and students that just now and then say thank you. And that, and that, you know, without getting too mushy, it's a lovely, that's the most, that's a lovely sentiment, that you did something to, to make these young people professionals. There's nothing nicer than that, so I really love it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23549 Speaker 1: Now, if you look back at everything you've done to this point, again, would you do anything differently if you could go back and change something? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I, I think--the thing that has hurt me is that--and I don't know if it's just my personality and stuff, I wish, because there is, it is clear, I can't stress how, yeah, you need to, you need to know your material. You need to be on the ball, but personality and social skills are extremely important. And if I had to do anything, I would have paid just as much attention to my social skills as to my learning skills because, because it's how you interact with people that you may get a quicker line on where to go, what to do, what to study, where, where--and you need those kind of, sort of--you're not gonna learn everything. I mean unless you're a really avid reader, which unfortunately, my weak eyes don't allow me to be, you derive a lot from social interactions. And, and there is a socialization for doing, there's a socialization in the doing of science, for doing science. And that's one thing that, that I didn't appreciate, and, and I guess, if I had to look back, possibly, that's what limited me at Columbia [University, New York City], that somehow 'cause I tend to be a little bit withdrawn, a little bit shy, and not outgoing. And I think what happened was people misread that as though, you know, something's wrong with this guy when in point of fact, it was an aspect of insecurity, an aspect--I mean I was insecure if I had to deal with you, you know, on the spot. But I was very secure if I could just go into my little rat hole and think about it, okay. So, that's, that's the big schism in my, in my case. So I wish I, I had paid more attention to my social skills, you know, over the-(unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23550 Speaker 1: Well, tell me this, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, my, my hope is, I mean my hope and concern in some sense is, is, what's the right word? I think I'll say it this way. I worry that, I mean obviously, I'm in a discipline that requires math, a lot of math. I think overall, in the United States, we're short changing our students in terms of the math preparation they receive before coming to college. And I think that that is further exacerbated in the African American community, okay. So, you know, nothing pleases me more than seeing an African American that can master a discipline that's competitive in a particular area, I mean it's just personal pride. But I think that, you know, because of the nature of the American educational system, you know, the economic leverage that most Americans, African American households have, I think the, the level of instruction is, is not where it should be. And we're gonna really lose, I mean we're gonna lose our edge as a country, relative to everybody else. And within that context, blacks will become even more marginalized because it's, you know, they're still at the tail end. So I think that my biggest concern is, there's nothing more important than education. It's as simple as that. And I think blacks have to realize that they have to seize every opportunity when they're young. Parents need to be--my mother [Leonor Maria Cartya], one of the dominant things about my parents [Leonor Maria Cartaya and William C. Handy, Jr.], my mother was a fighter. She would not take no from no teacher. She, she knew that she wanted her kids at a certain class and stuff like that. Parent, you know, in this case, African American parents need to be very proactive in terms of making sure they understand everything that's happening to your child in school. And they need to be strong advocates because sometimes the kids can't really represent themselves and, and, you know, finally, you need good communication skills, good English skills, but you need good math skills, and the thing is, you know, I have, I had a summer, sort of summer program. And I had this seven, eight year old--seventh, I'm not sure it was, no, actually, he was like a third, fourth grader. I mean he was some young kid, eight years old. And he showed me this test that the State of Texas requires. My jaw dropped. They had stuff on probability. They had stuff on sequence. The, the kinds of questions they were asking him because they were so rich, that I asked myself, well, if everybody has to take this test, why are they so weak when they come to us. You would think at the very level, just the, seeing all this stuff would already push 'em up. And it's clear, and this is the thing about my Geometry class, it's clear that we're not teaching our students how to think, okay. I would, I would sacrifice knowing lots of stuff for knowing how to think, okay, because, and especially in math. If the student, you know, I don't care that the student hasn't had physics in high school. That doesn't bother me. But I do believe that if they don't know calculus before setting foot on campus of the college, they're really, really, really--basically, the train has left the station because they're competing with students that already know that stuff. So, so education and my biggest concern is, you know, African Americans, all Americans, asserting themselves in education, really elevating their math preparedness and knowing--and the sad thing is, it's not that complicated, but you gotta like it. And so you need teachers that can really motivate their math more so, you know. That's, it's--learning how to think is the most important thing, and that's what I learned in, out of Wagner's [geometry class at George Washington High School, New York City] class in the tenth grade. And, and for better or for worst, I think it's served me well. Story_ID: 23551 Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you tell us something about your family. Now, you have children? Speaker 2: My, (unclear) (simultaneous), yeah, I've got, I've got a boy who's, Jack, who's thirty-two. And I got another boy, Jeffrey, who's like what, thirty-four, and I have grand, granddaughters, Illiana Christina and Annabella. So one is two, Annabella is two, and the other one is five, strong personalities (laughter). So, you know, and it's nice. You know, this, the cycle of life, you know, it's like, you know, life goes on, and it does its thing. And you're gonna sit back and marvel at it, and, you know, and do the best (laughter) you can with what you've got. Speaker 1: Do you have any musicians or any scientists? Speaker 2: Nah, well, I think my wife had a better impact because my wife is into computer science, and so our older son is a computer geek, working in Atlanta [Georgia]. And what's funny is, and you would have to--you know, growing up in New York City, and not doing all these manly things like mowing the lawn, putting a roof over your house and stuff. So when I moved to Georgia, the thought occurred that I would save money and do a, have a real manly experience by putting new shingles on the, on the roof. I ripped off those shingles, put in new, the new wood, you know, wooden panels and stuff. And I had my younger son up there (laughter), and those bags were heavy. So I said to my son, Jack, I said--he's a, he's a, he's like an auditor accountant type. So he knows a lot about HUD and its policies and stuff. So I said, don't you wanna do physics when you grow up? (Laughter) He looked at me, here we are, both sitting up on the roof. He says, I want a job that pays me enough money so I can hire someone (laughter) that can do this. So that's the kind of impact I had on him (laughter). So he's, he's very, I mean they're both very bright. But they, they're not into physics. They're not into science. And, and even if I made the slightest hint, oh, you know, you know, don't you wanna do, don't you wanna (laughter) they don't wanna touch it (laughter). So, anyway. Story_ID: 23552 Speaker 1: Well, now, is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I think, I think, you know, I've--you know, there used to be an old TV show, I think, 'This is Your Life' or something like that. So, you know, I'm, I'm gratified that all this is out there, but I hope I still have a lot more years (laughter). So in other words, I hope I haven't, that this is not (laughter) suggesting something, that you've done it all. I think, you know, there's a lot more I wanna do. I, the biggest, the number one thing I wanna do is, I want to put our physics program [at Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] on the map. If I can do that on the map, which to some extent I have, that'll be a major statement, and I'll be very, very happy with that. Speaker 1: Well, our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered? Jesus, (laughter). I'll phrase it this way, I mean I think, I have a--there's an assistant dean. She's from Jamaica, here [Texas Southern University]. And she's very proper and all that kind of stuff. And then, not too long ago I asked, I said to her, you know, I get the feeling that you don't like me or you didn't like me. And so she said, yeah, when I first met you, you know, you were like obnoxious, aggressive and stuff. But then she said, but you protect your students, okay. That is, I will fight, any student that I know has potential, I will fight for that student. And I've come across some students who, for crazy reasons, you know, they're going to school and have jobs and stuff, they're not doing as well as I know they can do. And I will fight for that student. So I'd like to be remembered as basically someone that made a difference in the lives of, hopefully, a lot, you know, or a reasonable representation of people. I mean, I pride myself, I like to help people, okay, and my nature is such that if I know something that can help you, I will share it with you, okay. That, that's my nature, and so I'd like to believe that I'll be remembered as someone that made an impact on people's lives, helped them, made 'em evolve and stuff. You know, I'd like to be remembered in terms of the, some of the research that I do, but, you know, I, I think that's clear 'cause you write papers and people refer to them, but in terms of how you touch people's lives, that's a little bit more personal. And, and I, you know, I think I take pride in that, I mean that I've helped people, that I've guided them, that I gave 'em new opportunities, that I've rescued them from a bad situation. That's, that's how I'd like to be remembered, okay. Speaker 1: Thank you so much. Speaker 2: All right, thank you (laughter)...