 Story_ID: 295800 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns and assisting is Iris Parker. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Leo Ellwood Holt, L-E-O, E-L-L-W-O-O D, H-O-L-T. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 2nd, 1927, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an attorney. Speaker 1: All right. And you're just retired as-- Speaker 2: I'm a retired judge of the Circuit Court of Cook County [Cook County, Illinois], retired as of December 5, 2004. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: February 21, 2005. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at The HistoryMakers' office at 1900 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 295801 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask and they only require a short answer basically. And the first one is, sir, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I don't think so. If it is--well, I like, I like buffalo. That's about it. That's--I have nothing else that I can think of that is more favorable to me than anything else. Speaker 1: Buffalo-- Speaker 2: Meat-- Speaker 1: --meat, okay. Speaker 2: --as opposed to beef. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No. Well, I'm color blind, so colors don't, don't mean a great deal to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer, summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Lake Tahoe. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so, I don't think so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --nothing that I say with frequency. Story_ID: 295802 Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side and your father's side [Miller A. Holt] and, but I'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Her name was Ethel, E-T-H-E-L, LaVerne, L-A-V-E-R-N-E, Hamilton, maiden name, H-A-M-I-L-T-O-N, Holt, H-O-L-T. Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: October 20th, 1899, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family? I mean, how far back can you trace that side first? Speaker 2: I knew my mother's mother, my grandmother. She was Fannie King Hamilton. She was born in Kentucky--what year I'm not, I'm not certain. I believe that she was born a slave-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I'm not, I'm not positive of that. Speaker 1: What part of Kentucky, do you know? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Are there any stories that are associated with her that are passed down through the family? Speaker 2: Not particularly. She had a number of children. Those that survived, about half a dozen of them that survived to adulthood, those would be my aunts and uncles, and that's, that's about it. I knew her--she died--I guess I must have been ten, ten or eleven years old at the time of her death. And that's, that's about as much as I know about her really. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. But no--they didn't tell any stories about Kentucky or what was going, what happened there? Speaker 2: No, none, none that I recall. Speaker 1: Do you have any idea when her side of the family came to Chicago? Speaker 2: She left Kentucky, and they must have lived in Evansville, Indiana for a while because some of my aunts and uncles were born in Evansville, Indiana. That would have been in the early 1890s more, more probable than not, or late 1880s or early 1890s. And so, they came to Chicago. My mother was born in Chicago in 1899, so they, they came to Chicago somewhere between 1890 and 1899. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That makes sense. Yeah, the area around Western Kentucky and Evansville, Indiana, and that part of Indiana and Illinois real close, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, well, do you know about any of the other relatives on your mother's side? Speaker 2: I knew three of her siblings, three of her, her sisters and her brother, those four I knew, you know, quite intimately. The others either predeceased me or were estranged from the, from the family. I didn't know them at all. Speaker 1: Okay. What did they do for a living? Speaker 2: My mother's siblings, my--her sisters, for the most part, were housewives except one, who lived most of her adult life in New York City [New York, New York] and taught school. I didn't know her very well because she lived in New York City, but the other, other sisters were housewives. My mother's brother that I knew was, he was born with a birth defect, and he was a midget. And he spent his life underemployed as a shoeshine boy, shined shoes at, at the Illinois Central Railroad Station [Central Station, Chicago, Illinois] at 12th [Street; Roosevelt Road] and Michigan [Avenue] for many, many years. And he had his own shoeshine parlor at 35th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue] for many years. And that's about--my mother worked as a domestic most of her life until the war [World War II, WWII] began in 1941. And then she started working in one of the defense plants--doing what, I'm not, I'm not sure. Story_ID: 295803 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] talk about growing up at the turn of the century, you know, and what life was like in Chicago [Illinois] in those days? Speaker 2: She talked fondly of, of her school situation. She want to Ferron Elementary School [ph.]. She did not finish high school, and I'm not certain I ever heard her mention what high school, if any, she went to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I know, I know she is--was not a high school graduate. If she had any high school training, I don't know where that would have been. Seems to me that from where I know that they lived, it would have to had been probably more, probably more than not, Wendell Phillips [High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Right, right. She lived, I guess, in what people would call, they call it Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] now, but they would have called the Black Belt [Chicago, Illinois] back in those days? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, where all the products that are coming down now, up and down State Street, were housing at the time, really, for black people. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Did she have any stories about growing up in those days and what, at all? Speaker 2: No, mother didn't talk about, you know, her background growing up as nearly as I can recall. I don't know very much about what her life was like as a child. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she talk about--did she have to go far away to work, you know, when she was working? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she--given transportation in the 1930s and '40s [1940s], it was con- considerable distance. She worked in--for five people who lived on the North Side of the city. And so, the transportation was by street car from the South Side to the North Side, which was quite, quite a trip every day, so that-- Speaker 1: That's pretty--yeah, the street cars moved kind of slow, didn't they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --over the surface? They didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Through rush hour traffic, from one end of the city to the other, it was quite a trip. Story_ID: 295804 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His name was Miller, M-I-L-L-E-R, Ashley, A-S-H-L-E-Y, Holt, H-O-L-T. Speaker 1: All right. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born March 17th, I believe, eighteen-, 1890, 1892, I believe-- Speaker 1: Okay. And where was he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he was born in, in Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think, Athens, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: Not much. My father had seven siblings. I knew, I think, six of them, six of them. Well, it was one of--his older sister predeceased me. I did not know her. There was one other sister. And the remaining were, were brothers, and I knew all of them. They grew up, their background--and, and when they lived in Alabama, I know almost nothing about. But they moved to Rockford, Illinois after, after the, after World War I [WWI]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they maintained that residence in Rockford until my aunt died, and she was the last of the siblings to die. She died in, in the 1960s, and the home was still there at the time of her death. So, I had occasion to, you know, be in Rockford with some degree of frequency, and know all of my uncles and most of their offsprings, which would have been my first cousins. I know most of them, like I think I know all of them on some level. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your father talk about growing up in Alabama or-- Speaker 2: My father and mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] divorced when I was very, very young. My father and I had the strangest kind of relationship that you could have, I think. I knew him and, yet, I don't know what kind of person he was. My father was a Pullman porter, and he was out of the city [Chicago, Illinois] seven days, and in the city seven days. He was also an alcoholic, and the seven days that he was in the city, he was largely intoxicated. So, the relationship that I had with him was pretty, pretty poor. I don't recall any conversations of substance about him, his family, or, or me, or anybody else. He was just a man that I understood was my father. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you find out anything about the family from the other relatives or about him? Speaker 2: Well, all I know is that they lived in Rockford. Most of my father's brothers were also alcoholics. Only one of my father's brother was--maintained the marriage. The, the others either never married and, and procreated, or married, and those marriages went, went bad, but all of them produced children. And that's, you know, that's pretty much what I know about them. I don't--didn't have a kind of relationship with them where we would sit down and talk about the past. The boys, for the most part, as I said, all of them were alcoholics. And they were, when I would be in Rockford for the most part, they would be into their alcohol, and pretty difficult to have a conversation when you're a child with, with, you know, that kind of situation. So, no, I didn't have any conversations with them in terms of background. Story_ID: 295805 Speaker 1: Do you know if your father [Miller A. Holt] went--had a chance to go to school here in Chicago [Illinois] or not? Did he go to school? Speaker 2: My father, I don't know what his educational background is. I think he had some high school maybe. He, he was literate, and that's all I know about his educational background. I know that he was literate. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story about how your parents met and do you know? Did they ever talk about that? Speaker 2: My mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] and some of her girlfriends went to a dance sponsored by--I believe a church organization in Rockford [Illinois]. They went to this dance in, in Rockford, and met--there they met. My father was living in Chicago, but he happened to be in Rockford visiting the family home. And so they met and that's how, you know, they got together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: How long after that meeting it was before they married, I'm not quite sure. My parents married in--I think in 1923. And my brother [Miller Holt] was born in 1925. That's about all I know about that. Speaker 1: Okay. How long was it before your father left or your-- Speaker 2: I have no recollection of my father ever living with us. I guess, I think my mother said I was about two years old when, when they separated. Story_ID: 295806 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about growing up? Do you have a first childhood memory? Speaker 2: First childhood memory--I think I have a--well, I have a clear memory of, of kindergarten [at Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois]. I remember and I can't go back much beyond that. But I remember that I was elated when I learned how to skip. And I had been trying to learn to skip, and the teacher taught me how to skip, and I couldn't stop skipping. I wouldn't sit down. I skipped all around the kindergarten room all day long. She had a very difficult time keeping me down. And that's a memory that I have of, and I guess I was, you know, I would have been about five years old. Beyond that, earlier than that, no, I don't have any clear memories that I can recall. Story_ID: 295807 Speaker 1: Can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in and-- Speaker 2: I grew up in--all over the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]. I guess the--I, I don't know what, what I would say. The neighborhood was not as bad as some that, you know. Obviously, in the 1930s and '40s [1940s], Chicago was, residentially, was racially segregated, so we lived in a solid black community. I, I started school at Willard, Willard School [Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois] at 49th [Street] and St. Lawrence [Avenue], so I must have lived in that vicinity at some point. Where it was we were living when I started school, I'm not, I'm not quite sure. I lived at--in West Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] for a while in the late 1930s. Speaker 1: So did you move, how often did the family move? Speaker 2: Frequently-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --frequently. Yeah, my mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] was, was the head of the household and poor. We were on welfare, and when we couldn't pay the rent, we got put out. Speaker 1: This is during the depression [Great Depression], too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was during the depression years, yeah. Speaker 1: --during the Great Depression. And people were, in those days--I mean, a good description is good for the folks to try to, you know, have an idea of what that was like. And from what I understand, and tell--correct if I'm wrong, or modify the way it fits your situation. But a lot of people--they was like roomed with people, right? Speaker 2: We did that. We roomed quite frequently. We had our own apartment or kitchenette apartment--that is, an apartment that had been divided into one or more, two or apartments. And we would, we lived in that kind of situation. And, you know, we, we moved around quite frequently, and we roomed in people's homes. Friends of my, my mother took us in when we had no place else to go. Speaker 1: Well, I think it's hard for people to imagine now. I know when I first came to Chicago--when you go down King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] and Wabash [Avenue], or some of these other streets in the--between the twenties and the forties [city blocks] and stuff, you look at these greystone buildings that were, at one time, they were townhouses. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, you know, more than one family would live in one of those, right? Speaker 2: It's a whole new world, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: There would be--they're crowded well-beyond their maximum ability--divided, subdivided, and divided again to house, to house these people-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --because that was the only way to really afford housing. Families lived in one room. I don't recall us ever being limited. Maybe that's not accurate. I think, early on, I do recall us being--living in one room. That's my brother [Miller Holt], my mother, and I sharing a common kitchen and bath with other families living in one or more other rooms in the house. That was a common situation in Chicago where bedrooms were rented, and people shared the kitchen and bath. How long we did that, I'm not quite certain, but, but I have a clear memory of doing that in the late 1930s. Story_ID: 295808 Speaker 1: That's a situation, I guess, would put you in contact with a lot of people that you may or may not have chosen to be around necessarily (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely-- Speaker 1: --'cause of their awful pay of renting, yeah. Speaker 2: --absolutely. We were not permitted, as I recall, to socialize with any of the people who lived in the house. We were--come home from school, go in our room, and, and wait the arrival of mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt]. And that was, that was our lifestyle. We were latch-, latch-key kids. And in today's world, I think they'd put mother in jail for leaving us home alone, but, you know, it was necessary to do in order to survive. Speaker 1: And she had to travel that long distance to the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] and back and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She-- Speaker 1: Did you ever live with any of the other relatives during those periods, or did anybody else live with you, you know? Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Fannie King Hamilton] lived with us and was living with us at the time of her death. And I don't recall any other relatives living with us, except one of my first cousins used to sleep on the floor in our house, in our house from time to time when he had no place else to live. And that might have gone on. He, he would have been maybe fifteen years older than I, and I'm at that, so he would have been a very young adult. And I would have been seven, eight, nine years old, something like that. And he used to sleep on the floor in the house with us from time to time. He was the only relative that lived with us as, as that I recall. Story_ID: 295809 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, Chicago [Illinois], the black community in Chicago, as, as all black communities, I guess, was neglected. The alleys were not paved, and so it was rat-infested and dirty, and garbage thrown every place. The vacant lots were filthy, overgrown, and trash. It was the sounds, the sights. And my younger years were, you know, just, particularly bad. It was like, it was a ghetto, it was a ghetto. And you, you have the sounds and sights of a ghetto, and the odors of a ghetto. Speaker 1: Okay. Now who--what was the economic layout of the neighborhood? I mean, who ran the businesses in the neighborhood for the most part? Speaker 2: There were mom-and-pop stores that were run by blacks. Obviously, the, the larger A&P [The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company], National Tea Foods [National Tea Company, Chicago, Illinois] and things like that were, were run by whites and employed--the, the employees were white for the most part. The service stations were owned, owned, and operated by whites. What I really remember is the jitney cabs and the mom-and-pop stores, the shoe stores, the shoe repair stores, cleaners, and those kind of businesses being operated by blacks, and all of the lucrative commercial aspects of the community being operated by whites. Story_ID: 295810 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little kid? I mean, what were you interested in and how did you make it? Speaker 2: As, as a young kid, I think I was fairly normal, maybe a little precocious, inquisitive about a lot of things. We were not allowed to go out after school until mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] arrived home from school, so I had a lot of time to sit around listening to radio and, and reading. And I did a fair amount of that. I don't know that I can recall any specific areas of interest that I had, but I know that I did spend a lot of time reading and listening to radio because there was nothing else to do. Speaker 1: Now, did your mother provide you with a lot of material to read or how did you get your reading material? Speaker 2: I, I got my materials from the school library primarily, and also reading comic books which my mother despised (laughter). I don't know why reading comic books was a no-no back in my era. Parents seem to think that reading comic, comic books would destroy your mind. And I--so consequently, kids read comic books on the sly. At least, I did, in my, my household. I had the comic books, but mom didn't know much about them. And the other books that I got, I got from the library at school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I also went to the public library from time to time and these--library at 49th [Street] and, and Michigan Avenue is, which is still there, I believe. Speaker 1: Is that the George Cleveland Hall [Branch, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Cleveland Hall. Speaker 1: --Library, yeah. Speaker 2: And that was not too far from where my dad [Miller A. Holt] lived. And when we would visit him, we'd also go to the library and get some books. Story_ID: 295811 Speaker 1: We were talking about some of the sights and sounds and smells in growing up, and what it was like growing up on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] back in the '30s [1930s]. And now, you said you went to Willard School [Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: Willard. Speaker 1: Willard, and did you go there very long or did you go the whole-- Speaker 2: I went to Willard for eight years. Speaker 1: Okay. So even though you moved, you stayed at Willard? Speaker 2: We stayed at Willard. My mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] thought that Willard School was the only school in Chicago [Illinois] that was suitable for a black kid. So, I--we lived in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], 65th [Street] and Eberhart [Avenue], and I went to Willard School. I walked to school every day, I walked to school every day to save three cents carfare. Speaker 1: So that's like a twenty block walk to-- Speaker 2: At least, at least. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Winter, summer, fall, spring, rain or fall, rain or shine, I walked to school and back. Speaker 1: Now, in--when you were growing up, did you, in addition to school, did you have any other activities that you were officially involved in--was a Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] or any centers or anything like that? Speaker 2: Oh, you mentioned the, the Y, the Wabash Avenue Y [Wabash Avenue YMCA, Chicago, Illinois]. And I don't know how we were able to afford a membership there but we, we had one. And on Saturdays, my brother [Miller Holt] and I would go to the Y and go swimming. I don't know how long. I learned to swim at the Wabash Y. I don't recall clearly how long we did that, but I know that that is one of the things that did happen. Other than that, I can't recall any, any specific things that we did. We--I don't recall ever going to a baseball game or, or have being involved in sports either as, as a participant or, or a spectator during the real extent. We were poor and, you know, our activities centered around playing in the street and, and that kind of thing with the kids on the block-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when we were permitted out of the house which was not rare--was not often. Speaker 1: Now, it sounds like your mother was a pretty tight disciplinarian? Speaker 2: She was--because she felt that unless she held the reins pretty close, you know, all sorts of dire things would, would befall her, her boys, and that was not going to happen if she could help. Speaker 1: Okay. So she had like high hopes for you, too, or-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Because, because of the situation that she was placed in of having to raise us by herself, she wanted, and us to, you know, both appreciate the, the sacrifice that she was making and to take the best--and make the best of it, you know. So, she, she had very high hopes for us--particularly, she had high hopes of us avoiding some of the pitfalls that could happen if you hung out on the streets, so yeah. Story_ID: 295812 Speaker 1: We were told that there was no reason for us to ever be in trouble with the law. And if we were, we were on our own, so to speak--don't call me, you know, I don't have money for bail, I don't have money for lawyers. If you get in trouble, you're out there on your own. I don't think she meant that, but that's what, that, that's what she said, and I believed her, I believed every bit of it. I don't think there was any specific persons that we talked about who we knew that, that got in trouble. I think I, I can recall mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] being very proud of the fact that no family member had ever been to prison. And she was not going to allow that to happen, you know, to her sons. I had no such conversations about how to live, how to grow, how to be a boy, how to be a man, how to do anything with my, with my dad [Miller A. Holt], or any member of his family. So, my, my instruction for how to grow up was to respect yourself, and obey the law, and go to church. My mother was a, a very religious person and, you know, we were required to attend church and Sunday school every Sunday. And if, for one reason or another, you could not make that obligation, then your, the balance of your Sunday was sitting at home. If you couldn't go to church, obviously, you couldn't go out, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. So, what was the name of your church? Speaker 1: We started at Metropolitan Community Church [Chicago, Illinois] at 41st [Street] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] which was then South Parkway. My grandfather, my mother's father, was a second, third, fourth, fifth pastor of that church in the early 1900s. Speaker 2: Okay. Your grandfather was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My grandfather, I didn't know him. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But he was, he was a pastor of the church--not, the, the pastor, but he was, yeah, he was affiliated with a church and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was an associate pastor, okay, yeah. Speaker 1: --and associate pastor in some, in some form. And my grandmother [Fannie King Hamilton], I remember her every Sunday in her white dress, white long dress that the women of the church wore form time to time. I remember grandmother in, in that outfit every Sunday. Story_ID: 295813 Speaker 1: Somewhere along the line, my mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] and, and her siblings chose to become Christian Scientists. And I don't know, I don't remember how old I was when we started going to Christian Science church. I believe maybe ten, eleven, twelve, somewhere around in there maybe. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, how was that different though? Speaker 1: You mean, from her religious point of view (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, what difference? Yeah, well, from your experience? Well, how did you--I mean, what--how is that different for you as a kid to go to Christian Science? Speaker 1: I don't know that it, I don't know that I had developed any religious understanding at the time that we made the switch. So, for me, it was, it was not a change that I can recall. As the years went on, I've gotten to raise some serious intellectual questions about Christian Science, but that had nothing to do with the fact that I had changed from one denomination to another. It had to do with my ability to accept the principles that Christian, Christian Science stood for. Speaker 2: Okay. Now what is the difference? I mean, is there--what do they stand for? And what did you-- Speaker 1: Well, I think-- Speaker 2: I'm asking 'cause I guess I--it just seem like it's just interesting (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, I think, I think there is a, a psychological base for believing that prayer can act as a healing process, that, that the psychic [sic. psyche] can control the well-, the physical well-being of the body to some extent. I doubt whether you can psychologically cure cancer. I doubt whether you can psychologically heal a broken arm. And to suggest to me that if I have a physical illness that my recourse should be prayer, I raise some serious questions about that, and started to, at that point, disassociate myself from, from the religion because I just could not intellectually put it together. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, how old were you when that happened? Speaker 1: I think I disassociated myself completely at--when I went in-, into [U.S. military] service. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you were basically a young adult, grown at that point? Speaker 1: I was a late teenager. Story_ID: 295814 Speaker 1: When you were in school at Willard [Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois], were there any particular teachers or mentors that, you know, appeared in your life? Speaker 2: You know, I, I was a fairly precocious kid, and I remember most of, my, most of my eighth grade teachers. None of them really particularly did more for me than, than they did for any of the other students. It just so happened that I was particularly--I think I was a better student than most of my class members. And I think the reason for that is that I had time at home alone to do things that they might not have had the opportunity to do. So, I remember being thought of by my fellow students somewhat as teacher's pet because I was able to, you know, be relied upon to respond correctly in more instances than not. I don't think this was a disdain for learning that they say that some black kids have today. I just think it was an opportunity to devote myself to the books 'cause I had nothing else to do. Speaker 1: That makes sense, I guess. Yeah, so, you all spent a lot of time at home indoors? Speaker 2: Well, I spent a lot of time in--at home. Mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] said, when I was in grade school, we went to school on half-day schedules because Willard School was overcrowded. One semester, I would go at 8:00 and out at 12:00. The other, next semester, I'd go at 12:00 and out at 4:00. To allow a kid to be out of school at noon with nothing to do and no place to go is a highly dangerous situation. Mother solved that problem by hanging a key around my neck and, and telling me to go home from school and to stay there until she got home. She threatened dire things if, if I, I disobeyed and I believed her (laughter), and so I went home. Story_ID: 295815 Speaker 1: Was music a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Did--okay. Speaker 2: There was a piano. Mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] played the piano. She was an untrained pianist--never had a piano lesson in her life, I don't think, and never knew how to read music, I don't think. But she was fairly good. And we had a piano in the house almost, al-, always. Where we got it from, I'm not quite sure. And I learned how to play the C scale when I was twenty-six, twenty-seven. I'm being a little bit facetious, but, basically, I learned nothing, nothing, zero, about music. And the only instrument that I can play is a CD player. Speaker 1: Okay. But did you play the radio a lot in those days? Speaker 2: Constantly-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --constantly-- Speaker 1: So, what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) from morning to night. Speaker 1: What were your favorite radio programs? Speaker 2: I listened to the '[National] Barn Dance', and I listened to 'Jack Benny' ['The Jack Benny Program'] and 'The Lone Ranger' and, and the serials that come on, some of the 'Flash Gordon' ['The Amazing Interplanetary Adventures of Flash Gordon'], those kinds of things. I had no particular interest in the intellectual aspects of radio. I'm not certain the radio had any intellectual aspects, but, you know, those, those were the--that's what, how people entertained themselves in the 1930s and '40s [1940s] pre-television. And we, we had a radio. And I guess later, when record players became, you know, available, and particularly when record, uh, radio/record player combinations became available, we got into records a little bit. But that was mostly after the war [World War II, WWII] started and money was a little more readily available to get. And we were beginning to come out of some of the dire depths of the poverty that we were in. Speaker 1: So, in those days, now, most people don't even talk about this in this kind of detail, but would you say that most people didn't have a record player in those days, or would you think that or-- Speaker 2: I think most people started acquiring record players after the war-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --around the same time we did for the most part. Now, there certainly were some black people that had them earlier than that, but these were the affluents. These were the, the better off black people but, you know, we, we got a record player--I think, the first I remember, maybe in 1941, somewhere around in there. Speaker 1: Okay, now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I may have bought it. Story_ID: 295816 Speaker 1: Now I know a lot of people say that Joe Louis fights were a big deal in those days. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Were they a big deal in your family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, not necessarily in my family, but in my community. When Joe Louis fought, the street would be full of people, kids, and adults after each one of his victories. Yeah, he was really, really an icon in the community. And his fights would be replayed in the theatres like the weekend after any fight, or second weekend after the fight, and you can hardly get in the theatre. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And no theatre in, in the community that had the, the fights--you couldn't get in it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you go to the theatre a lot--I mean, the movies a lot? Speaker 2: We went to the movies quite frequently. They had dime night, and adults could get in for a dime. And mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] and her aunts and I and my brother [Miller Holt], we'd go, we'd go to movies on, on Tuesday nights--I think it was. Speaker 1: Now, in those days, I've heard they, they like giveaways and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they had giveaways and, you know, if you made fifteen consecutive Tuesday nights, they'd give you a set of dishes. The dishes were worth about twenty-five cents, yeah, but all sorts of incentives to get you to come to the, come to the theatre. And the theatre--I think, regularly, on, on Saturday and Sunday for adults was fifteen cents. So, Tuesday night, ten cents night, dime night was a, you know, a concession to the fifteen cents price. And I don't remember--I think when I started going to the movies and, and started dating as a teenager, I could take a young lady to the movies for twenty-five cents which was a lot of money, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, it's good (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And if I had three or four dollars, we could go to the movies, stop at Mary Lee's Coffee Ice Cream Parlor [ph.], and have some ice cream. And I could make out the whole date with maybe a dollar--maybe (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, a dollar went a lot further than, I guess, than it does now, I guess, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 295817 Speaker 1: Did you have any personal heroes in those days? Did--were there any community people or people in the news that you wanted to be like or considered heroic? Speaker 2: Naw. I think I was probably too wrapped up in survival to concern myself with, with heroes. I don't recall aspiring to be, to emulate any-, any one particular human being. Speaker 1: Okay. Were any, do you remember--I know, was Two-Gun Pete [Sylvester Washington] around when you were coming up? Speaker 2: Two-Gun Pete was around. I, I knew his daughter slightly. I don't recall--can't think of her name now. Speaker 1: Now, he was a black police officer, right, on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] in that area? Speaker 2: Yeah, terrible reputation, terrible reputation. Speaker 1: That's nobody you want to be like, right? Speaker 2: Oh, no. He was--I think he was generally considered by us, whether true or not, to be a murderer and a very dangerous man, so no, no, no way to emulate him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As he, he was, he was the kind of person to be feared. And I don't think you would want to emulate someone, you know, that the community generally feared. He was, he was not respected in the community, he was feared by the community. And there are two different, two different levels, you know, involved in that. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any--I mean, some of these other person--now, there's a new book that's been written about the Jones brothers [Edward Jones and George Jones]. And there's been, you know, a lot of discussion about the black entertainers on the South Side in those days at the Regal [Theater, Chicago, Illinois] and the Metropolitan [Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], and the other places. Did, you know, who were some of the outstanding figures when you were growing up that you, you know? Speaker 2: Well, by the time I reached my teenager, teen years, we saw at the theatre some of the more, more famous musicians at that time--Lionel Hampton, Duke [Ellington], yeah, all of the big shots that, that came to the Regal. Maybe I saw them and certainly saw, saw some of them from time to time because the Regal Theater was--well, if you got a chance to go to the Regal Theater, you had had a great day. And, you know, that, that was part of it. I don't know that I, that I had any aspirations to be like any of them, or to emulate them. I enjoyed them. In, in my high school years, many of them would appear in the downtown theatres. And we'd, from time to time, go down, go down, go downtown to see [Nat] King Cole and the other famous musicians at that, at that particular time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you--were you aware of any of the black lawyers in town in those days, like Bob Ming [William Robert Ming, Jr.], or Harold Washington's father, Roy Washington or-- Speaker 2: I never saw or met a lawyer in my life until I finished law school [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois] that I'm aware of. Speaker 1: Okay. 'Cause in those days, you know, the black lawyers lived right in the black community with everybody else, but you, you didn't know any of them? Speaker 2: I did not know--I'd never met a lawyer in my, in my entire life until I finished law school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, were there any black professionals that you knew (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --that had any kind of contact with at all? Speaker 2: I knew no doctors, no lawyers, no teachers, no professional people at, at all. Although I've, you know, they--I knew that they were in the community because West Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] was a fairly good community in the 1930s and the early 1940s. And, you know, you had some of the more well-off blacks living in those communities, so I knew that they were there. Story_ID: 295818 Speaker 1: But in the early 1940s, we moved into the Ida B. Wells housing project [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] which disassociated us entirely from the more affluent black community. And I was living in a community surrounded by people who are basically, you know, at the level of poverty or just slightly above. So, there was no, no opportunity to meet professional people. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, Ida B. Wells in those days, was that, was it as bad as it became? I mean, it was a little bit better--well, wasn't it, or was it? I mean, you tell me. Speaker 1: It's, it's relative. When you put poor people together with all poor people, you, you have got a bad situation. It's a sociological, it's a sociologically dumb thing to do. And I think that everybody knew at the time that they build these housing projects and put poor people in them, and stack them upon top of each other, that they were headed for a social disaster. And that's exactly what happened. You, you destroyed the kind of homogenous community that the black community had where the professionals and otherwise were living together, and separated them to the point where you got the poor people here, and the more affluent people living alone a way, and never the twain shall meet. Speaker 2: Did-- Speaker 1: Very dumb. Speaker 2: Now, a lot of people who grew up, even some who grew up in the--I'm amazed, some, even people who grew up in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], let alone the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], talk about living in the community is like a village, or everybody's looking out for everybody else. Was that your experience growing up? Speaker 1: Naw. I think that's a fantasy, I think that's a real fantasy. And every time I hear people talk about that, I wonder where, where was I, you know (laughter), where was I when this was going on? It certainly wasn't my experience. I don't think it, it really is the experience of the people who grew up in that era. It is true, I think, that when you have the community mixed with all levels of your society living in proximity to each other, you get a different kind of thing. But there was no such thing as if I see your child doing something, I feel free to spank and chastise that child--no, no. That, that didn't--my mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] would have gone berserk, ballistics, if somebody had cho-, taken upon themselves to chastise me physically for doing anything. And I think that was, that was the case with most, with most families. So, I don't see this village that they're--people my age talk about and, and remind young kids of today what it was when I grew up, you know. That's, that's nonsense, at least from my perspective. Story_ID: 295819 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let's see, you're a good student in grade school [Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois], and what was your favorite subject? Speaker 2: Grade school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They teach everything in grade school. I was pretty good in reading, writing, arithmetic, and, and goofing off, you know. There's nothing particular--I, I had no particular bend for math as opposed to English. I was just, you know, a reasonably good student in all of the subjects that are taught in grade school. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you like an outgoing student? Speaker 2: I think I was fairly gregarious, yeah, I think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you went to high school--where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Well, after I graduated from grammar school, the school went down-, downhill rapidly for me. I started school, high school, at Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Well, what happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, my brother [Miller Holt], my brother graduated from Englewood in the, in the winter of '42 [1942], I think. The war [World War II, WWII] started in December of '41 [1941]. He graduated in January of '42 [1942], if I'm not mistaken. And in November of '42 [1942], he went in the [U.S.] Army--he volunteered. He wasn't old enough but he did. That left me and mama [Ethel Hamilton Holt] at home. And school went to pot for me. I could work, I did work, I lived in, at, at 37th [Street] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]. I'm going to Englewood High School on public transportation. I'm working until 12:00, 1:00 at night. I don't get up. Mama goes to work. I don't get up and go to school 'cause I'm tired, I'm sleepy, and the whole thing--it just went all to pot. They found out that I lived in, at, where I lived, and, and transferred me out of Englewood to Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Phillips was so overcrowded that the freshmen class started at, at noon, got out at six, get up. And now you, you wake up 8:00, 9:00 in the morning, and you got three or four hours before school starts. I went out to play. And now, I'm, I'm not bound as much by the constraints of mama because I'm fourteen, fifteen years old now. And I'm doing my own thing and I'm working, and I'm earning, earning money. And I cannot figure out why I'm in school when this woman is struggling, trying to support me when I can get a job. And so, I decided to go to work and-- Speaker 1: So, where did you work? Speaker 2: I got a job on the railroad. I was six feet tall and looked fifteen years old. The railroad didn't care. They hired me as a, as a fourth cook on Illinois Central Railroad, and I started making as much money as my mother. You know, I make twice as much as she was making and it just didn't make sense to go to school. Story_ID: 295820 Speaker 1: When we left, you're working for the railroad and-- Speaker 2: I don't remember when I last left high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I think I was either sixteen or seventeen. I know--I believe in 1940, I think in 1944, I was working for the Santa Fe Railroad [Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway] in Clovis, New Mexico. And my mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] demanded that I return to Chicago [Illinois] and, and go back to school, and I did. And I stayed in, in school maybe a month or two, and that was the last time that I attended high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think, I don't think I had enough credit, accumulated enough credits to be a sophomore (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --at the time that I left. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how did you--now, I know you went back at some point to get a GED [General Educational Development] or something, right? But-- Speaker 2: I didn't go back. I, I got a GED. I was being discharged from the [U.S.] Army up in, up in Fort Sheridan [Illinois]. And I was experiencing some difficulty with the Army, as I had the whole time I was in the Army. And I was walking around the base, and totally dejected, when I saw a sign that said, "Take the GED examination." Relieved from all military duty for--I think, two or three days, two and a half days, that would have gotten to me to a Friday, and I was being discharged that Saturday. So, I decided that this was a place to hide from the Army. And I went in and sat down and took the GED examination. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is, you took the examination without any formal training for it, right? Speaker 2: I just sat down and took it. I was amazed when I was notified that I had passed. I was absolutely amazed 'cause it was not my thought that I'm going to go ahead and pass this examination. My thought was I'm going to go in and hide from the Army for two and a half days, and get these people out of my hair once and for all. It was my plan to go back to school, when one's discharged because the Army, the Army showed me a whole lot of things that momma didn't. And I knew, you know, where, where my bread was buttered. And so, I was, you know, really planning on going back to school, but well, that would have happened just as long as you can only speculate about it now. But it wasn't my thought that I could go ahead and pass this GED, and bypass going back to high school, but it did, it did occur like that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you kind of like stumbled into it, sort of on the way? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Story_ID: 295821 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the [U.S.] Army experience. Now, when did you, when were you inducted into the Army? Speaker 2: I went, I joined in 1945. Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I joined the Army to--because I was beginning to do those things that mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] said, don't do. I was drinking, hanging out all, all night because I felt that I was working a man's job, and earning a man's wage, and doing men-like things. And so, I just thought, you know, if I stayed out till two, three, four o'clock in the morning and got drunk, that, you know, that's, was so. That's what I did. My mother would chop my head off. And so, eventually, I knew that, you know, that something had to change, and so, I joined, I joined the service because of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now you, yeah, you didn't have to join at that point. I mean, the war [World War II, WWII] was coming to a close, right? Speaker 2: I would probably likely than not have been drafted anyway, but I just decided to accelerate that process. It was the greatest mistake I ever made in my life. I considered one of the, I considered it a mixed blessing. It was one of the greatest mistakes I ever made in my life, but it was also the cruel awakening that I needed to turn my life back in the right direction. Speaker 1: What was your experience in the Army? I mean, what did they-- Speaker 2: It was a totally racial, racially segregated, degrading, demeaning, dehumanizing experience that had nothing to do with a fight for democracy or liberty or justice or anything at all. Black soldiers were used to do the crap work, and everything that, that you could think of that no one wanted else to do, that's what they asked us to do. I recognized that the Army didn't really care about me. And I thought--I came to the conclusion that they cared less about whether I lived or died. And it was--became my determination not to let them kill me. And it also became my determination to not, to let them work me to death. And so, I started doing things that would allow me to avoid the drudgery of the hard work that other members of my command in my company were called upon to do. I was in a company of--I was in the Army Air Force [U.S. Army Air Corps] when the [U.S.] Air Force was a part of the Army at the time. All of the officers were white. There were 110 of us--all black. All of the officers had flying status of one--and they resented being officers over, over our company. The average IQ of the company was about sixty-five. I happened to have been fortunate enough to be able to read, write, and type. When the officers of my company discovered that, I became a prize possession for them because now the administrative duties of the company found some place to be lodged. And I assumed those duties willingly, and I typed my way through the Army. Story_ID: 295822 Speaker 1: Also, it got me thinking about my future, and what was going to happen to me after the [U.S.] Army because I realized that I had made a serious mistake in dropping out of high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. You know, nothing could have been clearer to me. The officers of my company were young white men twenty, early twenties, who had one or two years of college. And it was clear to me that their life in the Army was better, and when they got out, it was going to be better. And mine was going to be tote that barge, lift that bale, unless I did something about it. And so, I decided I had to do something about it. Passing the GED [General Educational Development] test was a godsend for me because it alleviated the question of whether or not I could or would go back to high school. I know a number of my contemporaries that went back to grade school after the Army. And a number of them that went, went back to high, any number who went back to high school and went on to become professionals, but I didn't have to do that fortunately. I got out, I got out of the Army in April of '47 [1947], and I started Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] in June of '47 [1947]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --scared to death because I was now lacking in confidence. I'm not certain I can, I can go to college. Nothing--no one had ever suggested that I could go to college, you know. Nobody, nobody conduct--connected with academia had ever indicated that I had any potential for going to college because I never, I never exhibited it. Speaker 2: So, what, you were, you said you were a pretty good student in grade school [Frances E. Willard School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: That was grade school. That was grade school. But by the time you get to high school, you're beginning to, you know, demonstrate some of this college potential. I'm, I'm, you know, following that up as fast as I can. So, I had one, one instructor in, in high school that I think he saw some potential in me. I often wanted to go back and, and see if he was still at the school, and give him some indication of what I had done with my life post-, post-Army, but I never did. And he's long dead (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, what was his name? Speaker 1: His name was Walter White [ph.], white man--taught English IV. I took English IV three times, so we got to know each other pretty well. I never finished English IV, but I had it three times. When I, when I started at Wilson, I had in the back of my head that I would go to law school if I could cut it. And the brochures that I had read all indicated that a pre-law preparation would require a year, at least a year of accounting. And all of the students that I talked to dreaded accounting. And I said, I can either cut this or I can't. And so, I started my first entry into Wilson in June of '46 [1946]--'47 [1947] with an accounting course, and I fell in love with accounting. As I went along, I began to develop the kind of confidence that let me know that I could cut it although I--the students who had entered Wilson directly from high school knew so much more than I knew. But they were not any more intelligent than I, and they lacked the experiences that I had had. And so, where they had academic excellence, I had worldly experience, and a good mind, and willing to, to use it. That's how I got out, that's how I got over. Story_ID: 295823 Speaker 1: At what point, did you decide you wanted to become a lawyer, I mean, and why? Speaker 2: It's all, all, kind of, all kind of confusing now. As I look back, I think I had some romanticized notion of what lawyers do. I thought (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that-- Speaker 2: --that if I became a lawyer that I'd be able to en-, engage in the struggle for black folk because my, my experience in the [U.S.] Army told me that this country is deeply racist. And it also told me--for the first time, I began to understand something about the conditions of black people all over the country because I'd been around the country, as a consequence of my railroading and, and my Army service. And everywhere, where I had been, blacks were in the same condition. And I thought that becoming a lawyer might enable me to do something about that. And I saw myself in this romanticized role of in a courtroom articulating the, the rights of blacks. And I think, you know, I recognized that I did not have the skills, the academic skills, to become a doctor. I had no high school background in the, in the sciences. So, I had no--when I started college [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], I couldn't--I had, I had no idea what a fraction was--not, not fraction, I mean, an equation. Algebraic equation meant nothing to me. Geometric, uh, geometry was, you know, a, a foreign thing. So, I knew that the sciences was not some place where I should be. But the social sciences really was a matter of reading, interpreting, and, and the epitome of the social sciences is law, so I decided that that's where I would like to go (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) By this time, did you-- Speaker 2: Maybe, maybe by default (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, by this time, did you--well, as you, you said earlier, you still, you still didn't know any lawyers until you-- Speaker 2: I, I knew no lawyers, I knew no lawyers. So, I had no one to, to guide me, so to speak. Our first cousin, who became a lawyer, he was a little bit older than I. But by the time he, he was in law school, when he was in law school, I was almost ready to enter law school [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois] myself. So, the formation of my decisions about where I was going with my educational background was not influenced by him at all. Story_ID: 295824 Speaker 1: Okay. So, you went to Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] and-- Speaker 2: I left there in, I got an A.A. [Associate of Arts] degree from Wilson in, in '49 [1949], and went to Los Angeles [California] because my mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] had moved to Los Angeles. And she was having some economic problems and I thought I could be of some assistance, so I went to Los Angeles. And I did the, I did a year at Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California], and came back to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Los Angeles City College, I mean, what, what did you take there? Did you-- Speaker 2: Account-, more accounting courses. By this, pretty much at--when I was at Wilson, I did most of Wilson taking a full academic load, and working at the post office full time. When I went to Los Angeles, I started going to school part-time, and taking one or two courses here and there along way, and I did that, the balance of my college career. That's why it strung out so long. Because I could no longer--then the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] ran out, my G.I. Bill ran out. And I could no longer--now, I got to go to work to support myself, and I could no longer go to school full time. So, I was taking one or two courses here, and one or two courses there. I don't think, I don't think I ever missed a semester where I didn't take at least one course throughout the balance of my, my college career. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I came back to Chicago. I went to Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now when did you come back? Was it-- Speaker 2: I came back in '50 [1950] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, 1950? Speaker 2: --nineteen fifty [1950], I came back in '50 [1950], and went back again. And I returned to Chicago permanently in 1954. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did another year, another year at Roosevelt, and then I started law school [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois] in September of '55 [1955]. Story_ID: 295825 Speaker 1: Now, you were saying in those days, you could get into law school with an A.A. [Associate of Arts] degree, with a two-year degree? Speaker 2: When I received my A.A. degree, I could have gone directly to law school. But I made the decision to go to Los Angeles [California]. And by the time I came back from Los Angeles, the legislature had required three years of college. So, and the reason that I, I was going to stay, and get the accounting degree, but I needed a, an accounting course that was not available in the fall semester of 1955. And so, I decided to go to law school, and pick up the accounting degree whenever I could, which I never did. Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, was it hard to get into John Marshall [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No. It was hard to get out of John Marshall. John Marshall had that reputation, too, that John Marshall was very easy to get into. If you had ninety, ninety semester hours of C credit, John Marshall would, would admit you. Getting out is another, another thing. Speaker 1: Well, how did you--did you find the work difficult or-- Speaker 2: No. I found John Marshall, I found the law-because I loved the law. And I had, had four courses of business law in the undergraduate level. And the early part of the law school is a repeat, and more intensified repeat, of those early, those business law courses that I had. And I had the perfect job for a law student. I worked for the city doing nothing--I mean, literally, I worked for the City of Chicago [Illinois] doing nothing. Speaker 1: Now, now wait a minute. Now, tell us how you got this job-- Speaker 2: I took a civil service examination. They hired me as a timekeeper, which was--I'm under-employed for my education, but that's the only job that I could get with my accounting background. I worked at a, a water-pumping station as a timekeeper. And I sat there all day long doing nothing. And twice a month, I filled out a payroll, and sent it downtown. And the payroll was always the same. Nobody ever got sick. Nobody ever was late. Nobody ever took a vacation. The payroll was always the same. So, I sat there and read the law, eight hours a day--a perfect job for a law student. You couldn't have better than it. I had a law library out there, you know, all the books that I needed, and take them to work with me, and sit there and read them. And so, I, I enjoyed--and I did well, I did well in law school. I, I was in a four-year program. I completed it in three and a half years. Speaker 1: So, when did you come out--in '57 [1957]? Speaker 2: In, uh, came out in February of '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you had--you came out with what kind of--what do they call it, a Juris Doctorate or-- Speaker 2: No, I came out with a Bachelor of Law, in law, an LL.B. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At that time, John Marshall didn't offer students who did not have an undergraduate degree a Juris Doctorate degree. Five years after, after I finished John Marshall, John Marshall offered to confer upon me the J.D. degree for a fee. And I could not, couldn't fathom why I needed a J.D. degree when I had a law, a license to practice law, which was the ultimate of what I was going for, particularly, since they wanted to charge me for it. Speaker 1: So, no further instruction, they--you just pay the fee for it? Speaker 2: Just pay the fee. Speaker 1: That's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I--no. Story_ID: 295826 Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, how did you get into prac-, you know, was it hard to get into practice? Did you find the bar easy to pass or-- Speaker 2: I passed the bar for the first time around, thank God. And I passed the bar the first time around because I didn't have any alternative. I needed a job, I needed a job. I did not have--it cost one hundred fifty dollars to take the bar exam. I couldn't afford to take, to take it, but one time. And I had to borrow the one hundred fifty dollars, you know, to take it so. I had a friend, a high school friend, who had been admitted to the bar--the class before me. And he invited me to come into the office where he was associated. They provided me with a desk--oh, they provided me with a room, and I bought a desk, and that's how I started to practice law. Speaker 1: Now, who's this classmate? Speaker 2: His name is Earl Taylor [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, how did things go in private practice? I mean, what kind of cases did you take when you first started? Speaker 2: I took everything I could get. And, mostly, I, I was given cases by some of the other lawyers in the, in the office. And, of course, when you're being given cases by other lawyers there, they are the things that the other lawyers don't want to do. And that's what I did. I, I did everything that a lawyer--I did real estate, I did divorce, I did bankruptcies. I did some, some minor personal injuries. I did some criminals. Speaker 1: Were there, in those early days, were there any interesting cases that stick out that--would there be-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --writing a good story now? Speaker 2: --I don't remember. I think, in nineteen-, in 1960, I tried my first jury case. It was a murder case. There were two people in that courtroom that I, that I recall that were scared to death. One was the defendant, and the other one was me. The problem was how the defendant didn't know how scared I was--I knew how scared he was. I went to court to get a continuance for the defendant's lawyer. And the judge said to me, "You're on trial." And I explained to the judge that I was just there to get a continuance for my associate. And he said, "You're going to go to trial with this case." And I sat down and, and tried the case. It's not as bad as, as that because I had been assigned by my associate to try the case, and I had spent all summer trying it in my head. And so, I had some idea of what, you know, what I was supposed to do, and what I would do, but I had never done it before. And that was the problem that I was suffering with--stage fright. I hadn't--wasn't really sure that what I had learned in law school [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois], was going on in this courtroom. And after that, it was pretty much, you know, pretty much downhill from, from there. Once, you know, getting your feet wet, so to speak, after that, it was just a struggle to get, get cases--always a struggle to, to get cases. The competition for the better cases was severe, and severe. And the competition for the serious cases where the defendants could afford to pay you was even more severe. And there was a lot of racism that's involved in this competition also, including black racism, black people who believe that they would get a better shake with a white lawyer because the white lawyer can sit down with the judge, you know. They go to the same club, they speak the same language. I want me a real lawyer, so to speak. Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so, you'll find then, and today, that the more prominent, affluent, wealthy black defendants have white lawyers. I don't understand it, but it's--that's a fact. Story_ID: 295827 Speaker 1: Well, it's, it is a fact that the judicial system does discriminate against black people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --which includes lawyers, too. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, I guess it's--though it doesn't sound like a very positive statement from the black community but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the way in which black people acquire lawyers also was involved in it, too. There were problems--their boss tells them, well, why won't you use my lawyer, you know. Or somebody suggest to them, if a white person suggests to them a remedy or a solution or a possibility of having some, some, an approach to the problem, they're going to generally be referring these people to white people, meaning--well, meaning to, and intending to be of service to this black, black person. And the problem comes out, is that black lawyers are then left out there in the lurch, and that's not only true--that's true with all black officials. It's true of black doctors. One of the big complaints about many black specialist doctors who receive their patients from doctors is that black doctors refer their patients to white doctors. Story_ID: 295828 Speaker 1: You were just talking about some of the conundrums in terms of black folks in the legal profession, and how they choose lawyers. And some of the--typically, what kind of clients would you have? I mean, were the court--did the court in those days assign pro bono lawyers and that sort of thing? I mean, were there public defenders or did you ever (unclear)? Speaker 2: The public defender system in Cook County [Illinois] was in place when I started practicing. And shortly thereafter, the [U.S.] Supreme Court mandated that all felony trials in the United States, that the state provide lawyers. And so, public defender systems grew up in some of the other communities. Many communities--in fact, I would say most communities do not have an established public defender system. And they call upon the local bar to either volunteer their services, or the court will appoint counsel from within the membership of the bar. That system also existed here to some extent, where for one reason or another, the public defender was unavailable to a defendant because of conflicts of interest or other reasons. The court would reach out to the bar association or, in some instances, to the private bar for appointments. I've been appointed and throughout my career, to a number of cases by the court system. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was it--tell me now, was it difficult to you, for you, just, when you got started in law in Chicago [Illinois] 'cause, I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, tremendously. Speaker 1: --you're a person that comes just completely out of left field, sort of. You're not--your daddy [Miller A. Holt] wasn't a lawyer or your uncle, nobody related to you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, you got a cousin that's a lawyer now, but you're not really in the NACCP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you didn't grow up in a Jack and Jill Club [Jack and Jill of America], and none of that stuff. I mean-- Speaker 2: It was tremendously difficult. It was just hard. It was hard to make a living and, and stay ahead, ahead of the game. I don't know how I did it. I guess, if I hadn't had a working wife [Dorothy Holt], I wouldn't know how I'd been able to do it. I would have had to take a job. Fortunately, when I quit the job that I had when I was admitted to the bar, I never worked outside of the law again. So, and that's, that was fortunate for me. Story_ID: 295829 Speaker 1: When did you meet your wife [Dorothy Holt] and can you tell us about that? Speaker 2: I was working for the Cook County Department of Welfare while I was in the tail end of law school [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois]. My city job ran out--ironically because of racism. In my pumping station, a typewriter came up missing. And because I had a key to the shack where the typewriter was, I was told that I had the typewriter. Now, there are about six or seven other people who had keys to the typewriter--to the shack, but they were all white. And according to my boss, he knew them and he knew their character. Speaker 1: They were white (laughter). Speaker 2: I, I said to him, "You got to be crazy. I'm in my third year of law school. You think I want, want your, your typewriter? What do I need with your typewriter?" He said to me, "That when the typewriter comes back, you can come back." And I told him--well, I won't tell you on this tape what I told him, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We can imagine. Speaker 2: --my cousin was then practicing law, and I told him what the situation was. And he told me to make him fire me. And, and if that occurred that, you know, he would, he would take it to court. I decided that this was not in my best interest. I'm in the third year of law school. I don't need this hassle. I don't need to get hung up in, in this, so I quit, and got a job with the Cook County Department of Welfare as a legal consultant. And it was there that I met my wife in 1958. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we got married in 1960. Speaker 1: All right, okay. So, she's got, she's working while you're a fledgling attorney, and so you're able to keep (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's teaching school at that time. We, we both left the Department of Welfare at about the same time. And she started teaching school. Story_ID: 295830 Speaker 1: Any other cases from that time period that kind of stand out? I mean when you-- Speaker 2: Well, in 1961, I got indicted, and that stands out. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: I got indicted, along with T.R.M. Howard and two white lawyers, one named Kenneth Brundage, and one named Harry Huddle [ph.]. Kenneth Brundage and I were law school [The John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois]--in law school together all the way. And when we practiced together in this one office that I told you I went into, Kenneth came in-, into that office with me. We were going to, you know, establish a practice together because we were both pretty, pretty good law students. Kenneth worked for a casualty insurance company as a claims adjuster. And Kenneth met a, a black man that was setting up phony automobile accidents, and funneling them through, through him and Harry Huddle. And T.R.M. Howard, do you know Dr. Howard? Have you ever heard of that name? Speaker 1: Dr. Howard (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dr. Howard, yeah-- Speaker 1: --is a big hero from down south from Mississippi from-- Speaker 2: --from Mississippi, yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah. He, he was-- Speaker 2: He was, he was the physician that was said to be writing phony medical bills for them. So, all of us got indicted. Huddle, Brundage, Howard, and I went to trial simultaneously--the three of them before a jury, me in a bench trial. The jury acquitted all three of them. The judge convicted me of conspiracy to defraud. Speaker 1: Well, how did that, you know? Speaker 2: He backed away from it, he backed away from it, less--well, a month or so later. On a motion for a new trial, he backed away from it. But the damage had been done in terms of the publicity, the degradation, the heartbreak--it damn near killed my mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt]. And that case was dropped and there was, there were six indictments that were returned. That case was dropped, and the state elected to try me again because I refused to allow, I refused to accept a plea bargain for a misdemeanor theft, with a guarantee of no report to the bar association regarding it, so that my license would not be in jeopardy. And I decided that, that was not in my best interest. The first place, I didn't trust the state's attorney's office. Secondly, the bar association already knew about it. The world knew about it, so you're not reporting it with a bit of no advantage to me. And, secondly, I have not committed any crime, and I'm not going to stand before you and admit crime. So, I was retried again. This time, I changed lawyers, and my dear friend, James Montgomery [HistoryMaker James D. Montgomery], represented me. We tried the case to a--oh, he tried it to a jury. And I was acquitted, and the State backed away from the other four cases. I think that was the most meaningful criminal case that I, that I was ever involved in. Speaker 1: Now, this is in 1961, huh? Speaker 2: That was in 1961, '62 [1962]. They ended in nineteen-, 1963, 'cause my mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt] had died before it was all over with. She died in April of 1963--I think it was over in May or June of 1963--too late for her to know that her son was vindicated. Speaker 1: So, that must have been a very difficult period for you? Speaker 2: It was, it, it was tough. Speaker 1: So, you couldn't work during this period either, right, could you? Speaker 2: I worked to the extent that my psychic [sic. psyche] would allow me to work. It was very damaging to your psychic. Every, every, every month, this stupid case would come up on the call, and I'd have to start thinking about this thing all over again. I, I really did not want to deal with it, but there's no way to, to avoid, you know, thinking about it and dealing with it, and cooperating with my, my attorney to help him, you know, deal with it. And so, it was, it was very frustrating, and which allowed me, of course, throughout the balance of my career, and shaped me as a jurist to understand what the criminal defendant is faced with. Story_ID: 295831 Speaker 1: Kenneth Brundage, my then-partner, accepted the state's offer to plead guilty to a misdemeanor, and dropped the cases against him. The other, the other cases, he'd been acquitted in one, but that were others that he would, you know, they were going to try him on. So he dropped, he did that. Nothing ever occurred as a consequence of that to him but I, I couldn't take that chance. I had staked my whole life on this educational accomplishment, and I wasn't about to give it up, based upon something that I had not done. And so, I, I took the position that if, if I'm going to lose my license, I'm going to lose it fighting. Speaker 2: Now, [T.R.M.] Howard is an interesting figure. And we've--now that's somebody that we keep hearing about, you know. The general public knows--that doesn't know very much about him, but what are your remembrances of how (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't know him that well either. I got to know him primarily, as a consequence of this case, but you know, at, at the time he had his practice on 63rd Street. And I remember he had this storefront. And in the window, he had his menagerie of stuffed animals that he had killed over in Africa. And he had sorts of big game that he had shot in Africa and stuffed, and that's about much as I knew about him personally. His reputation was, you know, he comes out of the Delta of Mississippi [Mississippi River Delta], and was a self-made physician, and well-thought of in the medical profession as nearly as I can determine, but I didn't know him as a person. Speaker 2: Did you know anything about his civil rights activities? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a whole lot on him, and then in other places about all his civil rights activities in Mississippi, and so the real hair-raising stories. But, okay, but I just wanted to raise that in this interview so. Story_ID: 295832 Speaker 1: So, what did you--after '63 [1963], the things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. I just, I started trying cases, and staying in the courts and, you know, try a case here, try a case there, or somebody would see me, see my work, and send me a case. Other lawyers, brother lawyers, who did not do criminal work, started sending me cases. I, I met a woman who was the queen mother of the Latin Kings [Almighty Latin King Nation]. And I got her out of some criminal difficulties, and she started sending me her, her underlings so, at one time, I, I thought I was the lawyer for the Latin Kings. It was not the most lucrative work, but it was regular because they were always in trouble. And along by this time, also the Jeff Fort and his underlings were making the news and quite frequently. And I was involved with them in a number of high profile criminal cases. And one high profile criminal case leads to another, and to another, and to lesser high profiles, and pretty soon, you've got what looks like a practice going. And I, I did mostly criminal work from about nineteen-, about 1967 until the end of my practice. Until I went on the bench [Circuit Court of Cook County, Cook County, Illinois], I did almost all criminal. I had other kinds of matters pending in my, in my office, but I refer those to other lawyers, and I handle mostly the criminal cases. Speaker 1: Now, how did you--now, were you, being a criminal court attorney, I mean, a criminal attorney representing gangs, did--I mean, how did that--I mean, it's a lot of work 'cause they do a lot of, they get in a lot of trouble but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they do. Speaker 1: --how did you feel defending a lot of these guys and gangs (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I feel that they have constitutional rights. And I felt that they had a right to a fair trial. They had a right to a person who's going to vigorously try their case and make the court--and if there's no, no way out, then it's time for the person to be represented by a lawyer that's going to make them the very best deal who has the sophistication and know-how to work the system, to come out with the best kind of result. Oftentimes, that's not doable. Story_ID: 295833 Speaker 1: You know, I lost some real big cases and lost 'em real big, but if you practice in the criminal field, that will happen. But, on the whole, you can bring about a relatively positive result, and that is relative depending upon the circumstance. Many instances, people plead guilty to crimes because they are fearful of going to trial. And if you can convince a person that, and a person has confidence in you, that their case is defensible, and you do it, you become a hero. And in some instances, you have no choice. The state will not allow you an alternative. You charge a man with a capital murder case, there's no way to plea bargain from that until the state steps away from the death penalty. And in many instances, they, for whatever reasons, will not do that. That's a case you must try. And now the question is whether you are competent to try it, and I was. I tried, I tried four capital cases. And I was lead attorney in, in most cases where the lives of twenty-two men were at stake, and not a single one of them was convicted of any crime. So, it's a record that is unexcelled in Cook County [Illinois] because I think I, you know, I was able to do that because I was committed to giving the best representation that I was capable of, if not for the defendant, for me. My ego would not allow me to allow a person to be convicted of a crime because I had not done what I was supposed to do. And I did, you know, what I was supposed to in all those cases. Story_ID: 295834 Speaker 1: We see this all the time, that there are, you know, we hear stories all the time with lawyers that--the people are convicted of all kind of, or lose property or, because the lawyer didn't do everything he should have--he or she should have done. Speaker 2: It's a shame of our profession, it's a shame of our profession, particularly in, in death penalty cases, the wrath of reversals in death penalty cases because of the ineffective systems of counsel is, is appalling, so much so that the [Illinois] Supreme Court has now implemented something called the Capital Litigation [Trial] Bar where you must be admitted to the Capital Litigation Bar before you can try a capital case. Being admitted to the Capital Litigation Bar is meaningless. To me, in this function, if you try a number of cases, you've tried two or three jury cases, whatever the standard is, you get admitted. That's almost every defense lawyer. There's hardly a defense lawyer out there that could not, if he or she chose to, be admitted to the Capital Litigation Bar. So it's, you know, it's camouflaged. It's nothing. But I don't think, in my, in my view, of course, you're never going to be able to improve the quality of representation, so as to be able to justify the death penalty. It's just simply impossible to do that. Human beings are incapable of tinkering with the machinery of death as one of the [U.S.] Supreme Court justices [Justice Harry Blackmun] framed it, we just don't have the ability to do that. And death penalty cases bring out the very worst in everybody that's connected with it. That's a prosecutor, the defense lawyers, the judges, the witnesses, everybody. It brings out the very worst when it should be bringing out the very best, but it does not. Speaker 1: Now, we've, in Illinois, we've had, like, what--fifteen, twenty people pulled out of death, off of death row, who did not--not only are they on death row, but didn't commit the crime in the first place due to DNA evidence-- Speaker 2: We don't know how many we've killed already that are in the same category. And it's un-, it is undoubtedly--undoubted that we have killed people who did not commit the crimes, which they were killed for, and that we reenact the--not reenact because it's already enacted. But if we start enforcing the death penalty again, we are one hundred percent certain to kill innocent people. Our, our system is incapable of--determine with that degree of finality who is guilty or anything. We can't even tell whether or not a person is guilty of the lowest level of crime with a great degree of certainty. If you pick up our Supreme Court reports and read them, and you see the number of criminal cases that are reversed because of errors that have been made along the way, and you think in terms of whether or not this was a misdemeanor, or a minor felony case, what if it had been a death case? And the fact that it is reviewable by the Supreme Court does not in any way, in any way, ensure that an innocent person will not be put to death because the fifteen people that were released had had their cases reviewed by the Supreme Court, at least once. Story_ID: 295835 Speaker 1: Can you give me your assessment of the state's attorney's office [in Illinois]? I mean, and we know we have an adversarial system, you know, just that you need a strong defense, you need strong prosecution, I guess, too, but what's your impression of state's attorney's office in terms of what they-- Speaker 2: Well, my impression of the state's attorney's office really is that I think the biggest problem with the state's attorney's office is that the assistant state's attorneys are not given the latitude they need to make decisions. I thought that when, when I practiced, and I see that when I served on the bench. The decisions are not theirs to be made. They must follow the dictates of someone from above. Consequently, you have assistants who are reluctant to do anything without passing it by someone else. And that someone else may have a whole multitude of reasons for not wanting to do what the assistant might have done on, on his or her own. High profile cases exhibit this quite, quite readily. Sometimes a high profile case, as it begins to fall apart, an assistant might be willing to reduce it to something lesser than a lesser crime, but the hierarchy says no. And the hierarchy may be saying no because of victim impact, the media, the police department, a whole host of reasons that have nothing to do with the rights of the defendant. And those are the problems. The state's attorney's office and the state, the state's attorney is a political animal, and there's no way to take politics out of the system. People think that this is a system that operates in a pure vacuum of righteousness, but it's a political system, and it has all of the frailties that a political system can have, including patronage, nepotism. All of these things are, are racism. All, all these things are part of, part of the criminal justice system. And there's no way to eliminate racism from the system. Story_ID: 295836 Speaker 1: How do you eliminate racism from the court system and maintain it in the rest of your society? It doesn't--the courts assist the totality of the society in being racist because, you know, almost all of the things that are basically, fundamentally involved in racism are legal. Look at the way we fund schools in Illinois that clearly, clearly disadvantage minorities, and in my judgment, violate the Constitution of the State of Illinois. But it's legal and so, if you start talking about getting rid of racism, the courts are a very poor place to go and do that. Courts are a very poor place to go. In spite of the fact that you can look back at Brown v. the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and other major [U.S.] Supreme Court cases that have modified the society in a meaningful way. But you have to also consider that Plessy v. Ferguson [1896], Dred Scott [Dred Scott v. Sandford, 1857], these were the courts speaking to us. And our courts speak to us like that today in softer kind of terms than, than whoever to, to the same detrimental effect to the, to minority people. Speaker 2: Now, you were around when, I guess, one or the more egregious racist prosecutor was in, or at least he's been accused of it, now Edward Hanrahan was a state's attorney. And when Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were killed, do you have any thoughts about that? Speaker 1: It was murder, it's murder. There's no doubt about--it's difficult to say that, that it wasn't racist but whether, whether it was racist or not, it was certainly political. And they went after Fred Hampton in a way in which they would not have gone after a white defendant 'cause I don't, I couldn't think of a white defendant that might have been in the same kind of social political thing that, that Hampton was in that brought about a need for Hanrahan to take him out. But, you know, Edward Hanrahan is--represents the very worst in what a state's attorney could be. He should have been indicted--and he was indicted, was tried, had a bench trial to--forgot his judge's name now. He and a number of other prosecutors and they, they were acquitted in a bench trial. He was indicted, not for murder, but I forgot what exactly what the indictment was--conspiracy to do something or other, and tried as a bench trial and, and acquitted, and then defeated at the polls in the next election. Story_ID: 295837 Speaker 1: I have some questions. We started talking about them during the break and I was afraid we were getting too far so I had to pull the plug off (laughter). But what I was asking you--oh, the first question was about was state's attorney, former state's attorney, now Mayor Richard [M.] Daley. It seems that all people on the Illinois death row, they're exonerated, or most of them were prosecuted by the Daley regime during the--when he was state's attorney. His--do you have any--I mean, it seems to us a real, it's a politically loaded position. Usually most state's attorneys move on to some other office, and that's used to build a reputation. Do you have any thoughts on that? Speaker 2: It seems improbable to me that Daley does not, did not know the conduct of his assistants and his police department. It would be incredible to think that as a state's attorney of this county [Cook County, Illinois] prosecuted and being, being principally in charge of the justice system on behalf of the people, that he did not know that his assistants were engaged in massive blotched code of misconduct, and that his police department that was funneling him those cases was not involved in police brutality of the highest level. It's incredible that for the mayor, former assistant state's attorney, to take the position that he did not know what Jon Burge was doing. That's an incredible position, it seems to me. It may be accurate, but it's just incredible incompetence that that is, in fact, the case. So, I refuse to believe that he's that incompetent. And so, I, I think that the situation was don't drop no boats, don't make no waves, and move on, and move on. Daley, as, as a state's attorney, has never, to my knowledge, sanctioned any prosecutor for misconduct, has never voluntarily reversed, or ordered the reversal of any convictions based upon misconduct. Once convicted, it is the defendant's obligation to find his way out of this conviction, whether it'd be a valid conviction or not. And it is a court's problem to decide whether or not to unravel this conviction, rather than the prosecutor stepping up to the plate and saying, we have committed error and this case should be reversed. Story_ID: 295838 Speaker 1: Now, now that raises a question. I wonder, you know, you said Daley [Richard M. Daley] has never done that [reversed convictions], but has any prosecutor ever said that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not to my knowledge-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --not to my knowledge. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, none of them really-- Speaker 2: There, there are times where, where prosecutors on the trial court level will, will drop a case for want of evidence. But, you know, we had an attorney general and assistant attorney general, a female, who resigned because she refused to write a brief in support of a conviction where a man had been sentenced to death. And it was clear that it was an improper conviction, and the attorney general ordered her to support that conviction. She, she resigned. Speaker 1: Yeah, just this last election (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can't recall her name now. Speaker 1: Yeah, the--just in this last election, the attorney general was the prosecutor in the case where a Latino man was convicted of killing--I think a woman out in DuPage County [Illinois], I mean, a little girl in DuPage County. I can't think of her name now--[Jeanine] Nicarico, come to think, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. And-- Speaker 2: Rolando Cruz-- Speaker 1: Rolando Cruz, right, and he--it says, it's been shown that he didn't do it, and he was kind of railroaded it through there, you know. Yet, there's been no apology on the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No apologies. The Nicarico family is completely convinced that Rolando Cruz and [Alejandro] Hernandez, the persons that committed the crime. That's because the police have brainwashed them into, into believing that. In spite of the fact that it is almost 100 percent certain that the man that, in fact, committed the murder, is in, in the state penitentiary--a man named [Brian] Dugan. Story_ID: 295839 Speaker 1: I'm sure you're asked about this 'cause people talk about in the barbershops. They talk about in the restaurants. They talk about, how can a lawyer defend this bum and this guy who they know did this or think--strongly suspect is a menace to a community, you know. Speaker 2: A lawyer who does his best job cannot prevent a conviction if the evidence is overpowered. If the state has does its job, accumulated the evidence, has credible witnesses, and puts on a credible case, there's no way to overcome that. The problem is that the defense lawyer has an obligation to test every single step, every single piece of evidence that is put before the fact finder to make certain that it is logical and consistent and admissible. And a defendant, no matter who he or she is, is incapable of doing that without the assistance of counsel. What is the obligation of a defense lawyer? Only to make the system work. If it were not for defense lawyers, you, you don't have to have a trial. Well, what would you need a trial for? The state makes the accusation, then you lock him up. But somewhere along the line, somebody is going to say no, let's get into this a little bit deeper. That's the role of the, of the defense lawyer--not a question of trying to obstruct justice. It's a question of making the justice system better, so that we all can have faith in it. There is very little faith in the black community in the outcome of the criminal justice system of Cook County [Illinois] or any other county. I don't think black people believe that the criminal justice system is fair to them. And the reason for that is, is that defense lawyers have not done the kind of job that they should be doing. Speaker 1: So now, well what kind (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's part of the reason, that's part of the reason. Story_ID: 295840 Speaker 1: Well, the whole black communities all over the United States were--seemed to be more than happy when O.J. Simpson was not convicted. And many people think is really more of an indictment of the justice system then, of whether O.J. Simpson was innocent or guilty. Do you have any thoughts about that? Speaker 2: I think the evidence, as I understand it, that I'm a spectator in the O.J. Simpson case, but an avid spectator. I watched as many sessions of that trial as I, as I could. I think that the evidence was woefully unsatisfactory. O.J. Simpson's conviction if it, if the, if a conviction were to be had, would have to be bottomed on the credibility of [Mark] Fuhrman, the police officer that discovered all of the incriminating evidence against O.J. And this person is one of the last persons that you would describe credibility to. Had I been [Lance] Ito, and Fuhrman had taken the stand and implicated O.J. Simpson in the commission of murder, and then when called back to the stand by the defense, takes the Fifth Amendment and refuses to testify, I would have struck all of his testimony, and the state would have had no case. I think the jury reached the correct verdict in O.J. The evidence was woefully insufficient to establish O.J.'s complicity in that case. At best, it was pure speculation that O.J. was involved in it, and I, I would think rather weak speculation. When you kill a person with a knife, you got to get up close and personal. That, that murder scene was a bloody mess where we've got on O.J. is a speck of blood, which is said to be the blood of one of those two people in his [Ford] Bronco. And we got a bloody glove, which Fuhrman says he found on O.J.'s lawn, as he illegally entered O.J.'s premises in order to inform O.J. illegally that his wife [Nicole Brown Simpson], whom O.J. was separated from, had been killed. Now, I got, I believe a lot of things, but in no way in the world did I believe that this well-trained police officer went to O.J. Simpson's house knowing that O.J. was separated from his wife, who, and when he gets there, he jumps over the fence to accidentally run into a glove that O.J. has stupidly enough laid, laying out in the lawn to implicate him in, in murder. I just wouldn't believe that. That, that is something that is not credible to me. So, without those two pieces, and particularly, I wouldn't believe it when I see O.J. trying to try on this glove that won't fit a man whose hands are my size. And O.J.'s hands are twice as big as mine, and I see him trying to try this glove on and it doesn't fit, then how am I going to say that this is O.J.'s glove? Story_ID: 295841 Speaker 1: The case was badly tried. It was--I think that the, I think that what you see going on, and O.J. [Simpson] is the reverse of what you saw going on in what's his name--can't we all just get along? Speaker 2: Yeah, Rodney King (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rodney King. And not only in the sense of the, the juries. See, I think Rodney King's jury was clearly racist. I think O.J.'s jury, who had as many white people on it as it had black, simply didn't have the evidence. Somebody did not have enough evidence unless we're going to say that the black people on the jury, which some people have denounced as being dumb-dumbs, and unable to comprehend the evidence, also influenced the white folk who are presumptively were better able to understand it because that it took twelve to acquit O.J., or it'd be a hung jury. You might well say, well, they divided along racial lines and it was playback for Rodney King or any other number of racial things. This was straight-out acquittal. Everybody had to agree. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: O.J., O.J. Simpson's case is the bane of our society and raises up all of the racism that is under-, underlying in our society. I recall the day that the verdict came back. My courthouse sort of like shut down momentarily. And all of the personnel was in the back part of the court building away from the public listening to the television. I elected to go into my chambers and just turn on the radio because I fully expected O.J. to be convicted--not because I thought that the evidence was such. I just thought that the, you know, the case was such a high profile nature. When the verdicts were read, I, like most black folks, said yes! Not a single judge, court reporter, clerk, no white person in that courtroom, in that courthouse, ever mentioned O.J. Simpson to me again from that day to this. It's like he didn't exist. Before that, everybody was talking about O.J.'s case--what a shame it was, you know. So, you know, racism is well and alive in our, in our society. And, thus, it is well and alive in our, in our court system. Then the two are--that seems to me to be quite normal. Story_ID: 295842 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let's go back something. Now, you became a Circuit Court [Circuit Court of Cook County, Cook County, Illinois] judge in 1980 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 1986. Speaker 1: --six [1986], right. Well, tell us how that happened and-- Speaker 2: I was sitting in my office when my then-partner and my secretary, in the summer of 1985, Ronald [A.] Bobbit and Ann Creevy [ph.]. And Ronald said, "Why don't you run, run for the bench?" And I said, "Ronald, you, you must be mad. I have no, none--not any political connections at all. What makes you think I could get elected to the bench?" He said, "Well, you know, Harold [Mayor Harold Washington]. Why don't you go down, and Jim Montgomery [HistoryMaker James D. Montgomery]", who was then Harold Washington's corporation counsel, and I had been partners and friends through the years. He said, "Why don't you go down and talk to Jim?" I said, "Ronald, I have no money to invest in a campaign. I have no workers to invest in the campaign. I have no way of believing that the black political structure in the city would support me in the campaign. It is a waste." Well, to make a long story short, I decided, we decided--he decided that I was going, I was going to run for the bench. And I approached the mayor, then-Mayor Harold Washington, and sought his blessings. And he said he would support me. And then, we set about trying to raise some money. And I had no--I don't guess any of us really knew what Harold's coattails meant. Harold had not participated in an election where his prestige was brought to bear. And nobody knew what, knew what that meant. Harold sent out six hundred thousand sample ballots to his constituents. It was largely the black community and they came out in droves, came out in droves. I was in a, I was in the race principally with three people. I think there were five of us, but, principally, are three people--the slated candidate, which is a Jewish fellow, and an Irish guy, and me. Up and down the North Shore [Chicago, Illinois], up and down the North Shore, we ran, all of us, each one of us ran even with one another. Over in the southwest end of the city, I got beat to death. In the south end, southwest end of the city, I got beat to death. And in the hood, I took sixty some odd percent of the vote, more than unprecedented amount. And I became the unchallenged Democratic candidate for the position. Well, that could happen, but this was at a time when you ran city-wide. The races are now much smaller than that, sub-circuits, and it's easier for minorities to be, to get elected, with or without political support. But at the time that I ran, absent political support from some place, it was almost an impossibility. There's no way to--we printed over half a million pieces of literature. What do you do with it unless somebody is going to help you distribute it? And the political parties won't help you distribute it. But when Harold asked the black community and the black aldermen, and they began to recognize where their future lie, they were begging me almost to bring the literature to them, so that they could distribute. But if you do, you try that run, almost everyone who tried that kind of run--black--who tried that run without--and white, too--you tried a city-wide run without political support--lost. And that's what I was talking to, to Ronald about--how in the world can you conceive of me, you know, winning this kind of, kind of race? But they knew something that I didn't know, and that was the strength of Harold Washington's personality in the, in the black community. Speaker 1: Let me point out, too, that I guess, when you win the Democratic primary in Chicago [Illinois], you're in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --basically, 'cause there's no Republican Party in the city as such really (unclear), yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was unchallenged. The, the Republicans, the Republicans didn't even bother to run candidates, so it was an unchallenged, unchallenged race after you win the primary. I did nothing after that. Story_ID: 295843 Speaker 1: Now, prior to that time, now had you--now you were friends and colleagues with James Montgomery [HistoryMaker James D. Montgomery], but had you been involved in any civil rights cases prior (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, throughout the '60s [1960s] yeah. Speaker 1: We didn't mention those but-- Speaker 2: In, sometime in the early part of the '60s [1960s]--I don't remember just exactly when it was, maybe it was during the years of the school marches. A number of people got arrested for sitting in the street, one of whom was my then fifteen year old cousin. And his mother called me up and asked me if, if I would go and see about her son. I had no intention of getting involved in, in, with, with the movement [Civil Rights Movement] at that time. I was very busily trying to prac-, you know, get a practice going. I went to the courthouse, and I witnessed both black and white people being drugged literally, drugged into court. Because they refused to walk, and so they dragged them, dragged them in before the judge. The judge would set exorbitant bonds with the view towards they're not getting out without regard to whether or not there was a probability that they would flee. Most of them would probably would not have made bail anyway because they wanted to stay in jail as a form of protest. And it just so offended me that I started to, to get involved. And at that time, Al Raby [Albert Raby] was the coordinator of the Coordinating Council of Community Organizations [Chicago, Illinois], and he got arrested. They had a number of arrests, and no one was devoting any attention to his case particularly. And I recognized that the system was really going to try to come down hard on him to make an example out of him, and so I offered to represent him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can-- Speaker 2: And he accepted, and I became, for lack of a better term, the movement's lawyer. And throughout that period, every time there was a march or a demonstration, I was there. Speaker 1: Can (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went on every, every open housing march, I march around the mayor's [Mayor Richard J. Daley] house. I marched with [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory. The only thing I didn't do was go to jail because I was more valuable to the movement out of jail than in. I tried their cases. I almost lost my, my, my practice--well, such as it was, and my family 'cause I was staying out all the time, and not devoting attention to my practice because I was involved in representing these hundreds and hundreds of people who had gotten arrested. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what-- Speaker 2: Through that, I met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when, when the King movement came to Chicago. And Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and I stayed involved with them until after Dr. King was assassinated. Speaker 1: That's SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and Operation Breadbasket [Atlanta, Georgia] and yeah. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Now what year was it that you defended Al Raby? When did that-- Speaker 2: I--King was living on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], I believe, in '65 [1965]? Speaker 1: I think you're right. Speaker 2: So, I started representing Raby, I guess, maybe in '63 [1963] maybe, '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Now we fast forward again to being a judge [on the Circuit Court of Cook County, Cook County, Illinois], I guess. That's what--anything else about that period you want--these are the things that we haven't discussed? Speaker 2: Well, the only thing out of the, that period obviously brought about massive changes in our society. And I've become convinced that the only way that we're going to change the conditions of today, which are uniquely different from that period, is to do the same, to engage in the same kind of conduct. I don't think the system hears you until you rock the boat. And I don't think that the political process, that is electing people to political office is going to rock the boat. It's the grassroots people who have to make the system know that they are in pain. And the only way to do that is to hit the street. Story_ID: 295844 Speaker 1: What is your judicial philosophy? What would you consider your judicial philosophy to be? Speaker 2: I think that fairness--I, you know, if I had the one synonym, it would be fairness--fairness. I think that the utilization of the criminal justice system, solely for the purposes of punishment, negates the essence of the system. It is, it is not a system that is designed, or should be designed solely for punishment. There's a lot of help that can be administered to people who are in pain. If you believe as I do that crime is a sociological phenomena, if you tell me what the social conditions are of a community, I'll tell you how much crime there is in that community. And I can also tell you, with a high degree of accuracy, what kind of crime is in that community. So, if you're going to abolish or diminish the level of crime, you're going to have to change the social conditions. And as long as you're not, then you're just putting a band-aid on this social cancer. People think in terms of the criminal justice system as being proliferated by violent criminals. And that's not true. The overwhelming majority, the overwhelming majority of people in our prison systems are not violent criminals. If we were to empty out those non-violent criminals, you'd have a very tiny prison population. But so long as the Corrections Corporation of America [CoreCivic, Nashville, Tennessee] is on the stock exchange, you'll never going to empty out your prisons. Story_ID: 295845 Speaker 1: Okay. We're talking about the number of black men that are in jail disproportionately. Speaker 2: The consequence of that, not only is to those men personally, but it destabilizes your community. When you take that number of men, marriageable young men out of the community, you have a dearth of men for eligible, marriageable females to marry. Consequently, the eligible males acquire a disproportionate view of their worth. And the females acquire a disproportionate negative view of their worth. And you have the proliferation of out-of-wedlock children because the men don't respect the women. And the women don't have any other alternative for a meaningful outlet, sexual outlet. And all these people are at their height of their sexuality. They're at the age where they should be and would normally be reproducing. And so, you get this horribly disruption of the normal social--furthering that, our society further disadvantages these people by releasing them back into a community where they cannot work. And it is, it is, it's, it's an insanity that I don't quite understand. We take these people who are the least educated, warehouse them, treat--teach them nothing, release them back into the community, and then ban them from the jobs that they would normally be able to acquire with the educational skills that they have. There, they cannot get. For instance, you can't pick up garbage; they can't be a barber; and the fifty-five other low-level menial jobs that they cannot perform because they're, they're felons. So, what is the consequence of that? They hang out on the corner. They smoke a little reefer. They snort a little cocaine. And pretty soon, they commit a crime or two. They sell a ten-pack and they're back in prison. And the recidivism rate is directly related to the joblessness, that is, proliferates in the community, a jobless rate that has been sky high in the black community for fifty years, fifty years. Black teenagers have been the highest identifiable, unemployed group in the nation for over fifty years, acquiring no skills that lead into adult life and meaningful employment. Those are the things that I think the criminal justice system is directly responsible for furthering, as opposed to ameliorating. And I think it, the criminal justice system could be an instrument in ameliorating some of those conditions. Story_ID: 295846 Speaker 1: What can you do, as a Circuit Court [Circuit Court of Cook County, Cook County, Illinois] judge to ameliorate those--that situation that you just described? Speaker 2: The, the law requires that a judge consider probation, or the least other restrictive form of sanction against a first defender. No matter, almost what the offense is, the law says that most criminal offenses are probationable. Only when you get up into the aggravated criminal sexual assault, commonly referred to as rape, murder, armed robbery, hijacking, those kind of offenses, do you run into non-probationable offenses. The others are probationable. I wonder how many people are in the penitentiary today who are first offenders with probationable offenses, where some judge did not find them worthy of probation for some reason. I read, not as you did, too, I presume, not too long ago, that the mayor's son [Patrick R. Daley] enlisted in, in the [U.S.] Army. And everybody was giving him accolades for going off to do his country's bidding. And I said to myself, if you were black, you'd be in the penitentiary because I remember when you were a teenager, you busted a man's head open with a baseball bat (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's well, yeah (unclear). Speaker 2: --and instead of transferring you out of the juvenile system into the criminal adult criminal system, they allowed you to remain a juvenile. In Cook County [Illinois], no white teenager who is eligible for discretionary transfer to the criminal justice system has ever been transferred. And blacks get transferred out with regularity, with regularity. So, it's that kind of thing that you can do if you become sensitive enough, and you don't care about taking the adverse criticism that may follow it to give a kid a chance because my life, my life certainly is fully exemplified second chances. You know, I'm, I'm a great believer in second chances. I have no alternative, but to believe in second chances. And I don't care what it is that you have done. You are redeemable. And presumptively, all of our theology tells us that. But when we apply that in the criminal justice system, we don't--it doesn't, doesn't seem to work. The theology goes out the window. And I think it goes out the window because judges don't want to be criticized, and have to come up for reelection or retention, and have adverse publicity hanging over their heads. It's a negation of their sworn constitutional duties in my judgment. Speaker 1: The public puts a lot of pressure on judges (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --from time to time around different things. Speaker 2: Don't want the pressure, don't take the job. Speaker 1: I remember the judge up in Rogers Park [Chicago, Illinois], and I can't remember his name now, but I've--it slips my mind who was, he was a Jewish judge who was sentencing young men to do book reports. Speaker 2: Oh, Stuart Nudelman (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: I think that's who, who you're referring to. Speaker 1: I don't--it doesn't sound like the right name but I don't-- Speaker 2: Oh sure, it may, may not be. Speaker 1: Okay. But he was--part of what they would do is do a book report, you know. I mean, he'd give them probation, but they'd have to read so many books, come back to report about the contents. And people up in Rogers Park went up, you know, got excited about it. They voted him out of office, you know, 'cause they were making it seem as if that's all he was giving, you know, in terms of time, was book reports. But that was a part of his, you know, what he was giving. Story_ID: 295847 Speaker 1: I know your biggest, the decision that you made that's caused the biggest uproar is the decision regarding the Chicago White Sox baseball game, right, where two fans ran out on the field, attacked the coach for the Kansas City Royals, and beat him up. And it was two white guys [William Ligue, Jr. and William Ligue, III], father and son. Can you tell us about that case and-- Speaker 2: I struggled with that case. Let me see if I can straighten out one of the lies that persist upon being told about that case that helps support the proposition that the sentence was inappropriate. It is contended that the coach whose name is escaping me right now. It'll come to me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tom Gamboa, I think, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Gamboa suffered permanent hearing loss. I don't know whether he did or not, but the record that was made does not support that proposition at all. In fact, it negates it because when Mr. Gamboa testified in court, under oath, in the juvenile court against the, the young man's son, he said he was all right, and that he had never seen a doctor, and that he was going to see a doctor the following day. When he testified before me, when the case was before me, Mr. Gamboa never testified. So, the record made before me is void of any, any medical evidence at all--I mean none. The man was found guilty of aggravated battery, not because he inflicted bodily harm, but because he committed a battery in a public place, see. Every time you hear about this story, you hear about Gamboa's permanent hearing loss. That's, that's, that's a lie. Or, if it may not be a lie, it may be, in fact, be the case, but it was not before me. So, I have before me, an obligation under the, under the law, to first consider the least restrictive punishment to impose upon this young man. In doing that, I look at his criminal record. He has a prior criminal conviction of no magnitude when he was a juvenile. He was--I forgot how old he is--in the late twenties, but no other involvement in the criminal justice system. He's an alcoholic. He had sat out in Cellular Field [Comiskey Park; Guaranteed Rate Field, Chicago, Illinois] drinking their beer that they sold him at a huge profit until it intoxicated him. I figured that redeeming this young man was more important than punishing him for the benefit of baseball, for the benefit of baseball, to allow baseball to use him as an example because sending messages is not what the criminal justice system is all about. If I said on the record, I'm going to send a message to the public by punishing you, the court would reverse me because that's an inappropriate reason for imposing the sentence. I'm to deal with what is good for this defendant, given the circumstances that he has created, and who he is. They forgot that this man did six months in the county jail. They forgot that he was on probation for three years. They forgot that he was ordered to take drug and alcohol rehabilitation. They forgot that he was ordered to take parenting classes. They forgot that he was ordered to find work. All they know is that he didn't go to prison. And I walk away from that sentence convinced today that it was the right one, it was the right one. Had--if I had to do it again tomorrow, I would do it again. Speaker 1: Okay, you know-- Speaker 2: That's a question of treating everybody--in measuring everybody by the same yardstick as nearly as you can. Story_ID: 295848 Speaker 1: And another decision, it was some criticism about, though not on the level of baseball. But this seems a little more serious to me was the situation involving a member of the--I guess the [Black] P. Stone Nation street gang, a man by, at least an alleged member--I don't think it was a member--a man named White, who was, Kenyatta White (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Kenyatta White. Speaker 1: --who was, that you gave (simultaneous) -- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bail. Speaker 1: --yeah, a lower bail than what, than the [Chicago] Tribune thought, you know, or others thought, or some members of the [Chicago] Police Department thought was appropriate for--I think he shot a man fifteen times, I think. Speaker 2: Kenyatta White came, came before me. He was charged with murder, and he was being held without bail. Under the, under the, under our constitution's, state constitution, all offenses are bailable except capital offenses. Murder is a bailable offense. Kenyatta's lawyer asked for a bail. I held a hearing. It turns out the presentation that was made before me was that it is alleged that Kenyatta shot a, a man to death many times. And his brother, the Stevens' [ph.] brother, was the witness. I was told that this brother had subsequently recanted, and had given Kenyatta's lawyer a statement denying that Kenyatta was involved in the shooting, and expressing reasons for why he had lied, lied to the police department, and predicating that lie on police misconduct. I then found that the evidence was not sufficiently strong enough for me to deny bail in this case. Then the bail should be denied only if it is clear that this man is a danger to the community. And on this evidence, I did not think so. Alleging him to be a Blackstone Ranger [Black P. Stone Nation] or whatever other gang he was in, is nothing but the state's attorney's allegation. And even if he was, it wouldn't mean anything, any more so than he was a member of Jehovah's Witness [Jehovah's Witnesses], for lack of a better organization. So, I reduced his bail from no bail to $100,000 dollars. I think that was, that was the amount, maybe $150,000, but somewhere around in there. He made it. Time goes on, time goes on. He's back in court on another charge of murder. He's, again, being held without bail. His lawyer comes before me and asked for bail, tells me that Kenyatta was in Los Angeles [California] at the time that this police claimed that this killing took place. And the witnesses that pinned it on him had, again, recanted. And he produced documentary of it. It's true or not, forged or otherwise, that, in fact, he was in California at the time of the shooting. I reduced his bail. And the state, the police department went berserk, the police department went berserk. They checked it out and found out that Kenyatta was, indeed, in Los Angeles at the time of the alleged second murder. And the Tribune never printed a word of that. So, the point is, you can't take at face value what the prosecutors put before you--if you want to do your job. If you want to just be safe in your job, and collect your salary and not rock the boat, I could have let Kenyatta stay in jail. It wouldn't have been no sweat off of my, off of me. I thought it was in-, inappropriate to hold him in bail, no matter who he was, not unless there was some evidence of what he'd done. And the state woefully failed to present any evidence that would justify keeping him in jail so. Story_ID: 295849 Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll also tell you that bail, a constitutional right, is probably the most violated constitutional right that a citizen has. And it is violated by the courts, and it's violated right at the inception, and it has no effect on anyone, but poor people. And it has a devastating effect on poor people. You lock a man up, and keep him in jail for a year or more awaiting trial. It matters not whether he's acquitted or not. He's lost everything. He's lost his job, his woman maybe, his home, his car, his possessions, whereas bail is--if he has some money, he just post the bail. So, you don't find poor people over in the county jail awaiting trial. Lack of bail has another problem, which the state's attorney's office, I suggest, feeds off of. Bail will require a man to readily plead guilty to a lesser offense in order to get out. I have an example. I represented a man who was charged with rape in the amphitheater rape, took place sometime in the early 1980s where it was alleged that during the course of a con-, concert in the amphitheater [International Amphitheatre, Chicago, Illinois], a number of young men stripped a number of young women naked and raped them in front of the bandstand. My client was being held on thirty thou-, $300,000-dollar bail. The state didn't have a snowball's chance in hell of proving him guilty of that offense. I asked the court to reduce his bail. The court said no. The state offered to allow him to plead guilty to a lesser offense, and give him probation if he pled guilty. I said to the judge [Earl Strayhorn], "Judge, if you reduce his bail, he will not plead guilty, but you're going to make him plead guilty unless you reduce his bail." And the judge said, "He can demand trial." So, this young man is faced with a dilemma of sitting there in jail awaiting trial, or going home that day. And I, you know, I--you don't have to speculate about what he did. He pled guilty to a lesser offense. They released him from custody and he went home. That happens every day in the criminal court. It happens every day. The judge--people come before me and plead guilty, and they tell me that they're pleading guilty because they can't stay in that jail any longer. I didn't commit this crime, but my lawyer says I can't go to trial--I let them out. If the state is, if the state is willing to reduce his charge, and let him plead guilty and go home today, I'll let him go home. And the state can try him at some later time. Otherwise, the bail system is being used as a bludgeon. And I never felt that I was wrong in or, or stepping outside of the system. I thought I was being in complete conformity with what a decent criminal justice system was all about. My colleagues--many of them disagree, but I didn't go on the, on the bench to join the crowd. I went on the bench believing that there were many, many ills in the criminal justice system. I acquired that belief as a practicing lawyer. When I went on the bench [Circuit Court of Cook County, Cook County, Illinois], nothing changed except my status within the system, but nothing else changed. The, the system was still bad, and so I tried to address it as nearly as I could from that vantage point. Story_ID: 295850 Speaker 1: How would you reform it? I mean, is it--well, is it a way to reform this now, you know? Speaker 2: Well, I think when you--this is a political system. And when you have a population that doesn't vote, there's no reason to be terribly concerned about their ills. They're not going to do anything about it, whereas opposed to a system that is voting, and you want to cater to those ills, then you lock people up. You can't go wrong locking up people who don't vote--see. But if you let people out, and or if you, if you tried to ameliorate the system and run it in accordance to what I think is the intentment [ph.] of it when these, when, when the state statute specifically provides that judges consider probation as a first alternative or even lesser of, lesser of sanctions than that. And you, you find that very few people are getting that kind of treatment. And you find that those people are all minorities for the most part, and that the majority members of the society are getting that kind of treatment, then you know what's happening. Look at how many times Robert Downey [Jr.] has been convicted of possession of drugs. Look how many times Bush's [President George Walker Bush] daughters [Barbara Bush and Jenna Bush Hager] have been before the system. What is going to happen to Martha Stewart when she comes out, as opposed to John Jones from Cabrini-Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois] when he gets out? And it is those kinds of inequities. You ask me how to, how do we remedy it? I think you--a population that is suffering, like our population is suffering, needs to go to the street. If you come to the courts for a remedy, I told you earlier, the court is a poor place to remedy social ills. I think they need to go to the street, and not only in a violent way. I don't mean in a--'cause I think if you go, if you go to the street in a violent way, you're going to get annihilated, just as King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] pointed out over and over again. But the efficiency of non-violent protest was demonstrated all through the '60s [1960s], you know. You can pick up a history book and, and then tell that. Those who didn't live through the era, the magic of the, of it is overwhelming. And that's what needs to happen if we're going to have any amelioration of the system. I don't think you can do it through the courts. Speaker 1: The picture you just painted basically is one where poor people, whether they're black or white or Hispanic or whatever, if they don't have any money, they're going to get it, right? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right. The only reason that you don't see poor people, white people, poor white people over in that jail is 'cause they're too many poor black and Hispanic ones over there to house. But if you go to West Virginia, go to Appalachia, and see who's in and who's in, who's in jail. The system, the system works if you got money, or works better for you if you have money, have money. Michael Jackson is not in jail awaiting trial on very serious charges, on a $3 million bail, but, you know, he made the bail in half hour. You know, you charge John Jones $3 million worth of bail, you know, or three hundred thousand [dollars] or three thousand [dollars], you know, you'll lock him up for good. So, it is, it's all about the money, and this is a system like every--justice is a commodity. And it is marketable. The quality of your representation, the qual-, the amount of your bail, or your ability to make the bail, the quality of your representation, all depends upon how much money you have. It has nothing to do with whether you're guilty or innocent of the crime that you've committed. Story_ID: 295851 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you about--you mentioned, we didn't pursue this, but in the earlier discussion, you mentioned the victim impact statement in court, and what that has meant in criminal cases--what, can you explain? Speaker 2: Victim impact statements allow judges to becoming emotionally involved with the victims of their, of crime, where they are supposed to be detached emotionally as nearly as human beings can. But the whole purpose of the victim impact statement is to drag the judge into the emotional aspects of the crime. And some of them are horrendous, so much so that the [U.S.] Supreme Court said that victim impact statements in capital cases would no longer be permitted. There's never been a single victim impact statement in a capital case where the victim did not ask for the death penalty for the defendant. And in non-capital cases, there has never be a victim impact statement where the victim didn't ask for the maximum possible sentence. So, I don't, you know, you don't have to ask yourself what the victim wants. I know what the victim wants. It just depends upon how the victim is going to articulate it is the only difference in the victim impact statement. It's wrong, it's wrong to allow it. But you--a judge cannot prevent it if the state's attorney offers it. You have to receive it. If you've allowed yourself to become distracted by it, you can--results in some very gargantuan sentences. Story_ID: 295579 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I guess my hope is that our young people will become more cognizant of the political social environment in which they live, and how that political social environment can be restructured. I'm a great believer in the right to vote, and our people have died trying to acquire the right to vote. And I think it ought to be mandatory for every eighteen year old black person to have a voter's registration card, and that they use it--their right to vote. The failure to, to vote is an abdication of their citizenship and allows our community to be treated with disdain, and it is up to them to change it. My generation, and maybe even the one immediately below me, have done pretty much all they can in that regard. And so, it is the younger generation that has the right to vote to exercise it. And I think that, that would bring about a major shift in the political power and, hopefully, in the socioeconomic power of the commun-, of our community. Our community suffers from resources. Our schools are falling down. We can compel, we can compel the state legislator--legislature to fund schools appropriately and fully, if their jobs depended upon it by voting and voting our interests. And our interests, I presume, is educating our children. That's, that's my hope. The overriding--I, I think if that happens, some of my other concerns will, will fall away. The criminal justice system, and our involvement within the criminal justice system will be abated or, if not abated, certainly ameliorated, and over a period of time, maybe even totally abated. It all hinges upon the right to have access to resources. And the only way in this country to do that is either through revolution, violent or otherwise, hopefully non-violent, and if it's going to be revolution or registering to vote, and voting. Story_ID: 295580 Speaker 1: What volunteer or professional organizations are you the most involved in or-- Speaker 2: In an active side of way, none. I'm going to start becoming more, more involved. I ceased to be involved in organizations when I went on the bench [Circuit Court of Cook County, Cook County, Illinois] because it is--has the potential for conflicts, too great. And so, I frequent PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] in the 'Saturday Morning Forum' at PUSH, and have through the years, even the years that I've been on the bench with a high degree of regularity. But other than that, and fraternal and judicial organizations, I belong to none. Okay. That was a choice that I made at the time that I went on the bench. Story_ID: 295581 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would have stayed in school. The--in, in spite of the fact that I survived, I missed a lot, and I miss it even today. There are areas of my education that have great voids in them that I would not--that would not be there had I stayed in school. Some of the great works, the great literature, I never read it. It took me a long time to become even relatively conversant with low-level mathematics, algebra, and low-level geometry, and those kinds of things. Calculus and trigonometry and those things are still something that I have an extremely difficult time with where every high school student should come out knowing, knowing these things. You know, and what I'm trying to point out is that I simply missed a lot along the way by not being in high school. When I came--the reason that I was able to survive is I had excellent reading skills. And I was able to read, and a fairly good mind, so that I could interpret with, with a fair degree of accuracy. But in terms of base knowledge, where things require you to either build on prior knowledge, I had lost that. So that's one of the things that I would, that I would do differently. Other than that, it's pretty hard to search around, and probably could have been a better husband, maybe a better father. But I, you know, I'll leave them to evaluate that for me. But in terms of my own, own life, and my own development, and my relationship to my community, I don't think that I would do it much differently. I was satisfied that I gave back to the community to the extent that I could, given, given the circumstances that I found myself in. Story_ID: 295582 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your family. I don't think we talked about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have two beautiful daughters [Pamela Holt and Paula Holt Hall]. One is a lawyer who does not practice law. She, you know, your attitude, your family attitudes can sometimes benefit you quite greatly, and they can sometimes foul you up. My daughter graduated from law school, got a job with the public defender's office, was assigned to the juvenile division of the court in the abuse and neglect section. She stayed there one year and quit. She said that there was no way that she was going to do that all her life, that the court system was just stealing people's children from, from them, and she didn't want to be part of that. And she's not--that was in 1991 or '2 [1992], and she has not practiced law a day since. She sells real estate and is quite successful at it. And my other daughter is--has a master's [degree] from, master's and M.B.A. from Kellogg [School of Management, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and has been searching for herself ever since. She's had that master's degree for at least a decade. She's looking for herself. I suggested to her that if you got a job, you might find yourself, but she has been able to survive somehow without a job. And I don't ask her how that--well, she's married now, and so, and her husband is very gainfully employed. And so, she doesn't have that as a problem, but when she did not, before she got married, I, I had no idea how she was surviving, but she did. And suggesting to her that she obtain a job did not seem to be something that she really wanted to do, but she was a very resourceful girl and, you know. So, they're both very bright buppies, and they're self-supporting, and that, that, that's where we are. The relationship that I have with their mother [Dorothy Holt] is, is not that, that good. We've been separated for a number of years, but those, you know, the (unclear) we've been married forty-five years, so I don't consider that the worst thing that has ever happened to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your mother [Ethel Hamilton Holt], you know, died before you were, you were exonerated from that case so. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you, you come from a larger--I mean, there's more family members. And you said you had a cousin that's an attorney, that became an attorney and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --some other people (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I was not close to him. He grew up in Nashville [Tennessee]. I met him as a--when we were both adults, so we were never very close. He has a daughter who is also an attorney, a very prominent attorney in the city. We have a better relation--I have a better relationship with her than I did with her dad, and that's not good. You know, we see each other once every two or three years. Story_ID: 295583 Speaker 1: Well when you look back on your life and everything you've done to this point--now, you just retired. What would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think I have been an inspiration for lawyers in the criminal justice field who have a bend towards fairness--both prosecutors and, and defense lawyers. At least, they appeared at a retirement dinner for me in droves from both sides of the criminal justice system, and expressed to me that, that was the way they felt. And if that is, in fact, the case, then I'm satisfied with my tenure on the bench [Circuit Court of Cook County, Cook County, Illinois]. I tried to be fair, and I tried to treat people who appeared before me, regardless as to who they were, and what they'd done, or what they were said to have done, I tried to treat them with dignity and respect. Speaker 1: Okay. I was reading online, when we were doing research about you that The Chicago Reporter, when they were write an article about how judges were chosen, and they were trying to really talk about fairness in the court system, they, they quoted you. Yeah, so it must be-- Speaker 2: I did the best I could to be as fair as I know how. That reporter that did that article in the Reporter asked me if my experience with the--being indicted affected my view of the criminal justice system. The answer to that seemed to be, obviously, yes, but then, so has every other experience that I've ever had. And all of my experiences culminate to present to the person that, that I am now, but that one, of course, had a huge impact on how I see the criminal justice system because I'm caught up in it, and know, you know, personally what it could have done to me, and how the system tried to treat me, you know. In a sense, they tried to treat me just like a nigger, you know, to offer me a lawyer, an opportunity to plead guilty in order--whether I'm, whether or not, they can prove it because they know that the frustration of being there might overcome me. Nothing could be what--nothing could be more degrading. And that's the way I saw it, and I vowed that I would never ever, ever offer a defendant that kind of Hopkins choice [sic. Hobson's choice]--never, never. It's immoral to offer a person that kind of choice knowing--to, particularly, in today's world--knowing that if you're talking about a felon, that you've destroyed his life, you've destroyed his life. And if it is an under-educated felon, as a consequence of the inadequate education that you provided for him in your school system, you have bankrupted him for life. And I, I just absolutely refused to do that, absolutely refused to do that. Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that comes to mind that we haven't touched upon in this discussion that you think you want to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I can't think of it. I'm sure when I get home, I'll say, why did, why didn't I tell him about this? No, I, I can't think of anything. Story_ID: 295584 Speaker 1: The last question is like legacy in some respects, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I guess--again, I'm back to, I would like to be remembered as a man, a lawyer, jurist, a father who tried to be fair, tried to be right, who deeply regrets all of the mistakes that I've made in life. And I've made a host of them. I don't know if I apologized for them because I was coming through this life the first time. And I was searching just alike all the rest of us were searching. If I had 20/20 hindsight, I can see a whole host of things that I would not have done, but the overall picture of my life would look pretty much like it does now. The details would be perhaps extremely different...