 Story_ID: 57921 Speaker 1: Today is July the 20th, the year 2000. I am Constance A. "Connie" Howard. C-O-N-S-T-A-N-C-E, middle initial A for Arlene, A-R-L-E-N-E, "Connie" is the nickname, Howard, H-O-W-A-R-D. I was born in Chicago, Illinois in 1942, December the 14th, in fact. Story_ID: 57922 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I have many favorite foods, but I think that if you ask me to limit it to a couple, I'd probably say strawberry shortcake and pork chops--probably cooked any kind of way you can do it. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite season or time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. I always say that it's possibly summer because I was born in winter. And, I think that, well, my mother always, tease me. She said she perhaps, tried to freeze me to death. So I love summer weather. Speaker 1: And your favorite color? Speaker 2: Well, I have a couple of favorite colors, and I'm gonna tell you why. Blue has always been a favorite color since I was a very, little girl because of the coolness of the color. But as of the time when I became a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority, pink and green - being our sorority colors, were added to the blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite day--destination for a good vacation? Speaker 2: Well, in later years it's been my, the home of my grandchildren, California. I like to go there and, and spend time with my, my sweethearts. Speaker 1: What city in California? Speaker 2: Well, I have a couple of, places in California that I go. One is Moreno Valley, and the other is, Canyon Cou-Country, California. Story_ID: 57923 Speaker 1: Can you give me the names of your parents and spell them? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes. My father is the late Henry L. Bozeman, H-E-N-R-Y, his middle initial is L. for Leon, L-E-O-N, and his last name is B-O-Z-E-M-A-N, which, of course, is my maiden name. Speaker 1: And your mom? Speaker 2: My mother was the, is the late Thelma Inez Bozeman. She was a Jackson before she was married. T-H-E-L-M-A, Inez, I-N-E-Z, Bozeman again is B-O-Z-E-M-A-N, nee Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Where are their homes? Speaker 2: Well, my mother was born in Chicago, Illinois. She was raised in Vicksburg, Mississippi, and at the time that she was growing up there, she met my father [Henry Bozeman]. So that, he, he was born there, and they became sweethearts and, and ultimately they, got married and moved to Chicago to live. Speaker 1: And, give me-- I know you wrote it down, but this is for the tape. Speaker 2: mm-hmm. Speaker 1: The birth order of your siblings, starting with the oldest, down? Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes, my oldest sibling is my brother, Henry. Henry E. Bozeman, Henry Edwin Bozeman, and while we always called him 'Junior,' he in fact was not Junior because he had a mid--different middle name than my father. He is, couple of years older than me. I have a sister who is, a couple of years younger than I am, and she is Sandra Annette Bozeman-Wright. she is a, a as I said, a couple of years younger than I am. I had--I had at one time a, a younger brother as well, John Bozeman, who's passed away. He would have been about ten years younger than me. Speaker 1: Okay. four? Speaker 2: There were four of us all together, two boys and two girls. Speaker 1: What was it like growing up in the Bozeman household? Speaker 2: I think my mother would have considered it a-a-a barrel of laughs all the time. In fact, she became very frustrated sometimes because everything that happened, we'd make a joke of it. My father, was not always with us, but, when he was there, he was a, comedian, told a lot of jokes, was called 'the life of the party.' We inherited that (chuckle) from him, and so, my mother would say, "everything that happens is a joke to you all." I mean, certainly, she knew how to make us serious when there was a real serious, moment, but, for the most part, we were rather happy. We were not, we were not wealthy people, but, we didn't know we were poor. Because, my mother made sure that we were always fed, we were always clothed, and we had a pretty good time as kids. Speaker 1: What side of Chicago did you grow up on? Speaker 2: I was born on the south side of Chicago. the location is now called South Commons. That my brother--older brother, and my sister and I were all born at 2012 Indiana. We subsequently moved to the Woodlawn area, and that's where my younger brother was born, in that area, but it's always been the south side of Chicago. Story_ID: 57924 Speaker 1: Your--your parents, your mother [Thelma Bozeman] was born here [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Your father [Henry Bozeman] was born? Speaker 2: In Vicksburg, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Tell me what you remember of your mother as an individual, as you were growing up. Speaker 2: Very strong person, and I guess I'll have to, to say that I-I--she's-she's gone now, but I remember her as, always being, proper talking Thelma Jackson. That's what they called her when she was going to school, because her grandparents taught her to enunciate every word properly, and that's the way she talked. And she apparently, got that over to us as well, because I try to do the same (chuckle). Speaker 1: Give me a little bit more. Give me an example of your mother. Of perhaps an event you remember most about your mother as an individual. Speaker 2: My mother was just a--she was a pretty serious person, but gosh I just remember that she always stressed that we needed to go to school. That we needed to, make certain that we got a good education. Because, she felt that that was the, the way that we were going to be able to be successful. So that, for much most of the time it was do your homework. She let my brother have a little bit more freedom than she let us girls, and I think that's probably the case in most families. She taught us--she wanted us to be ladies. And, I guess, she was one who always talked about making sure your clothing matched. You know, don't, just go out of here with any old thing on. You were gonna wear brown, everything was supposed to be brown. You're gonna wear black, everything's gotta be black, you know, and all the colors mixing and matching, she said. What can I say about mom, except that, she, was, was, was an inspiration, and, even when my father had, decided that he didn't want to be with us for a period, then, she was the person who became strong and took over, his role as well. And even though my brother was, And guess what? I'm starting to do? I'm starting to cry. Story_ID: 57925 Speaker 1: So you, so you remembered your mother [Thelma Bozeman] as really holding things together when your father [Henry Bozeman] decided-- Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, yes. Certainly. She had to, because she knew that, it was gonna take, some firmness. And, We--there were two-two-two fellows that she had to always make sure they understood that, regardless of the fact that she was a female, she was still in charge, and she made certain that they knew that. So, yes, she was a very, firm person. She worked all of her life, and, she worked on, very, entry-level type jobs, as well as, when she went to the post office to work. Which was the last job that she had, before she retired. I can remember she, she always, did the, what can I call it. It was called a scheme. And she would make our lives pretty miserable, because she would have to take her time and study that, because she would have to know how to take this test. And it was a periodic test that you perhaps are familiar with. And, so we would know that when the scheme time came, it was time for us to go into the room and to be quiet and to let her study. And then she'd come home and say, "I passed it!" And we would all be very happy. Speaker 1: How old were you when, your dad left home? Speaker 2: I was--actually, I think I was nine years old when he made a decision to go. couldn't, deal with the pressures I understand. Speaker 1: What kind of work did he do? Speaker 2: He did various kinds of factory-type work. He was a very--I think he was a brilliant man, but, he was always at the wrong place at the wrong--at the, at the, wrong time. I think. He never quite, was in a position to find the niche that would have made him the success that I knew that he could be. My dad could speak, fluent Spanish, some German. He had been in the service. Unfortunately, the service for him as the--say Vietnam and others that came out of the service of late--they were involved with drugs. My father was involved with alcohol. So he had-he-he wasn't able to, to stay there and, and take care of us. Story_ID: 57926 Speaker 1: What kind of personality was he [Henry Bozeman]? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. As I said he was a very comedic person. Wanted to--he joked and laughed much of the time. And so, we always knew that we could--when dad came home, when he was there, that there was, there were gonna be a, there was gonna be a lot of fun. And we had a good time with him. Speaker 1: Oh, gosh, you can see it. Speaker 2: Your dad--let's look at it from his perspective for a minute. Do you have any idea of the kinds of things, the struggles and challenges he may have been facing as an African-American man during the period when you were growing up? Speaker 1: Well Speaker 2: (simultaneously) and, and what kind of family life did he come from? Speaker 1: Well, now that's interesting. Because there were thirteen of them in his family. I think there were seven fellows and six females. And so, they had a very large family. The Bozemans of Vicksburg [Mississippi] were a musical family. Everybody played an instrument, so that, whenever, there was an opportunity, the parents would showcase the children. He was, as I said, he just told jokes all the time. He was, second youngest of the children. In fact, the--there was almost a generation between him and the oldest children. Speaker 2: Was he a sensitive kind of man or bold or--what kind of personality in that direction would you say he had? Speaker 1: I just want to say that he's more, he was more studious. And although he did not get the formal training, academic training, he was a very studious person. He read a lot. Says that he taught himself these languages. And, there was, there were a lot of things that he that, he made a decision to, to do, because he read about them and made a decision that he wanted to learn Spanish. He wanted to learn other languages. He wanted to-to be able to converse in-in languages to people. So, when I talk about him being brilliant, I always think about the fact that, when I, when I began to run for office, and, of course, he didn't pass back then, so I knew him as an adult. When I began to run for office and I had to, to, translate into Spanish, some of my literature, he did that for me. So, I remember my, my dad, as a person who was very, very smart. But not--it was not his time. He was either before his time or, his time just never coincided with, with the, with the current situation for him. Story_ID: 57927 Speaker 1: How well did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: Well, I knew both sets of my grandparents very well. In fact, my maternal grandmother [Annie Jackson] was living with me, prior to her death. My paternal [sic, maternal] grandfather [Edward Jackson] I never knew. In fact, I understand that back in, in the day that, she--that he and my grandmother did not stay together that long. So I never, I never met Ed Jackson. I-I've seen pictures of him. But, my paternal grandparents, Lucinda and Ed Bozeman-And-and you notice that I have two Eds as grandfathers? I've known--I knew them until they were, well beyond their fiftieth anniversary of marriage, right, and then they passed one after the other. But yes, I knew them well, and was always very happy to, to be able to go and visit them. My, maternal grandmother was much closer to us, and, in fact, at one point she moved into my home. And, I made a home for her. And, prior to her, passing away, she left our home and went into a nursing home. Speaker 1: What kind of work did each set of grandparents do? Speaker 2: You know, I never, I never knew what my grand-- my paternal grandparents did. I just know that they were there. We went to visit them and they were at the house. So, I'm assuming that there was something that was bringing money into the house, but, I just don't know what that was. My, my, my maternal grandmother, I knew she was involved in political, affairs in some kind of way. And perhaps that was where I got, somewhat of an idea about what I wanted to do. She often spoke about, some of the early politicians, and how she, as a Republican person, interacted with them. And, she never thought that we'd have a, an African-American mayor. I remember when she said, "we'll never-- that'll never happen." And when Harold Washington was elected, she was just flabbergasted. But, yes. She was from the old 2nd Ward, um-- I guess, organization, way back in-in-in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. She was born in 1902 in Vicksburg, but she had-- She moved here. And she said she came here from Vicksburg, Mississippi cecause she had seen--she had seen her last lynching. 1919, she came here, and she made a decision she would never go back there to live. And then, of course, when she got here, that's when the, the riots of 1919 occurred. And she told me about how, because they were afraid for their, safety. That they would concoct all kinds of, booby traps-- pails of water over the door, and that kind of thing, so if anybody came to the door, then they would, the water would fall on them. And, and that kind of thing. Story_ID: 57928 Speaker 1: Okay, can you, share with us some of the memories you have that you heard, from your grandmother or, you know, from adults, regarding politics of the day when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Well, the most I can remember is that my grandmother [Annie Jackson], would always, tell us about how she was a precinct worker. And she would go from door to door and knock on doors and try to get the vote out. There was something that, went on, and, I'm trying to remember. There was something that went on where many of her friends made a decision to become Democrats. And so, at-- there was a point where she was sort of feeling a little bit, isolated. Because they had become Democrats. As you know that most African-American peoples are--people are today, and she remained a Republican. So she was--it was a constant, verbal, battle, or debate about why they made a decision to change and, and why she was still, in the-the, mode of Republican because of Abraham Lincoln (chuckle). Story_ID: 57929 Speaker 1: What type of child were you growing up? Speaker 2: I was a model child, of course. Well, I don't know. I, I probably was as mischievous as any other child. But my mother [Thelma Bozeman] did not stand for, for, for bad children. She did not want us to be--She didn't want us to get in trouble with the police, ever. She always said, "You never do so and so." She wanted to make certain that my sister and I, became adults and married before we got involved with-with-with, sex with-with-with the fellows. She wanted to make certain that we-we finished, school--went to school and went to college. So that, it-it wasn't as if she kept us in prison. But she didn't want us to actually be out, playing a lot. When we came home from school, it was, you go and do your homework. She wanted us to help her keep the house in, in some kind of order. And I guess I sort of, became sort of a disciplined person. When my father [Henry Bozeman] made a decision that he had to do some other thing, then, she began to go to work, and there was nobody there to take care of my little baby brother. And so, I became sort of like--they called me his second mother. I at one point, resented it, because I felt that I was a child, and not able to do many things that other children did. But, I knew that my mother had to go to work, and so I've learned to cook at that time. I-I began to cook cauldrons of food, and they had to eat it (laughing). And sometimes my brother and sister would, complain. I'd said, "Hey, that's it. That's-that's it." And I-I think I learned, to do things a little bit better. But, for the most part, that was--those were the times when, I sort of developed into what I'm sometimes-somehow-sometimes called today, a "mother hen,". Because I was--I'm always-even-even when I didn't have my little baby brother and didn't have the responsibility of, watching out for my sister and for my older brother, I still felt that I had to be bossy. And-and so, I-I sorta became that. And today, people say that I'm a mother hen because I'm--I seek out--you can, you can say, well, you know, there's a problem. I say, "Huh? Problem?" And then I'm, I'm right there. I'm right on it. And then sometimes people have said to me, "Well, Connie, we don't really need you to do this. We can--somebody else can do it." So, I think that as a, a little girl, I became sort of like, the mother hen that I'm called today. And, I think, that made me sort of a discipline person, more so than maybe other young children who were really able to have more of a childhood. I was probably--my childhood was probably stifled to some extent because of my, my father leaving and my mother having to do what she did to make sure that we were able to, survive. Story_ID: 57930 Speaker 1: [Before we move on to, your school years and so on. Tell me what your neighborhood, perhaps even your block was like for you growing up? Life on your block, or some things you remember--that stand out.] Speaker 2: Let's see, what do I remember about my st--my block? When I-I was born in 1949. We lived at 3012 Indiana [Chicago, Illinois]. And that neighborhood, of course, has changed substantially now. But I can remember, not being able to go outside ever. We never were able to go out and play. We-we were there up until, gosh, I was six years old, I think it was. I was born in 1942, incidentally. Why did I say 1949? But in 1949, we moved from that location, and we moved to Woodlawn. My mother [Thelma Bozeman] never let us go out to play with other kids. We sort of, stayed in the back yard, inside, in a fence. And my sister and I, we had to be best friends whether we liked it or not, 'cause that's what we did. The neighborhood was sort of noisy, because there was a big street, 31st and Indiana. Well, 31st Street and Indiana was just very busy and people just walked all of the time. My aunt lived right on 31st Street, and when we went to see her, she lived upstairs, so we could look down onto the street. And there was never a time when you couldn't look out on that street and see people moving. They were walking back and forth. They just never slept. It just seems like, nowadays, of course, you know at certain times of the night, the streets become quiet. People go home and take care of their home business. But this street was always noisy. And I'd sit there, and I was just, just amazed at the, the going and coming of people. And it was entertainment for me at my aunt's house. I could hear some of the goings on, but my mother never let us come out. Now we moved in '49 [1949], as I said, to 65th and Drexel. And I, I had been going to, Douglas Elementary School. I think I was there for my whole kindergarten and, the first half of my first grade year, and then in '49, when we moved to, 65th and Drexel in Woodlawn, that was a very quiet neighborhood. Hardly, heard anything. It was just a, a nice residential community. At the time, there were, still, Caucasian people that lived on the block, but for the most part, it, it became African American very soon. That particular part of Woodlawn we called the East Woodlawn area--began to, show signs of deterioration much before the West Woodlawn part, and that was the, the area on the west side of Cottage Grove. I went to Wadsworth Elementary School, starting there my second half of-of, my first year. That was an experience that I'll probably always remember. I remember when, we had a big, celebration because a relative of James Wadsworth was coming, and we were celebrating. And I just remember we sang and just-just had a good time doing that. I was, I was considered sort of bright in school. In fact, I knew every answer to every question. When the teacher, any teacher raise, asked a question, I had my hand up. And I was pretty much, a pet in most of my, teacher's pet in most of the grades in, at elementary school. I was--I guess one of the fondest memories is when I was in seventh grade, my brother was in eighth, and my sister was in sixth, I think, and we were all representing our grade levels in the spelling bee. And I won the spelling bee. And I got a chance to go to, the, the finals of the city. I didn't win there, but I was so--that was such a beautiful trip. At that time, it was held at Chicago Teachers College [Chicago, Illinois], which was on 68th and Stewart. And I, I went there and was among a number of, of young people coming from various schools throughout the city. And they knew those words, and how to spell them better than I did. But it was a good experience just going there and being a part of that. Story_ID: 57931 Speaker 1: Looking on the high school years, what are some of your favorite memories from high school, and who are the teachers that influenced you in those years? Speaker 2: I was, a student at Hyde Park High School [now Hyde Park Academy High School in Chicago, Illinois]. Gosh, I-I probably enjoyed Latin more so than other classes, but not because of the language--because of the mythology that we learned. Everything that we, that we learned in Latin had to, had to be told through the eyes of various gods and goddesses. And, and I was really sort of a romantic person, so I-I really liked that. And even today when I see a Ulysses and the Cyclops and Jason and Medea and all them, I say, oh, I remember, Mrs. Cologley (ph.) and Mrs. Atwater (ph.) from the Latin classes. I do remember a science teacher that I had, Mr. Oliver. And I-I've-I've seen Mr. Oliver recently. Because, he was a principal at a--at a school out, close to my district. And, he seems to be in, in pretty good shape. He must have been a very young person as a high school teacher. And then, there's another teacher, who I didn't have, but I remember Mr. Perez at, Hyde Park. And now he's a, an optometrist, so he and his wife come to the various events that I have. I really like math. And I really enjoyed math because it just, it was just so logical for me. And I did sort of well. I-I wrote well, and so I liked English and English Composition. Let's see, what else did I--did I like in high school? Speaker 1: Did you run for any offices? Speaker 2: I did run for an office in high school. In fact, one of those photographs that I provided, shows me as a candidate. The way they did these things at Hyde Park, they called it, an assembly day, elections assembly day. And for some weeks prior to elections assembly day, you sort of got the word out that you were running for the particular office. And you did those things that you, felt were necessary, like making little pluggers or leaflets or whatever. And then you got those out to your-your fellow students. Then on election assembly day, then you got up on the stage and you said a few words or you had a-a little skit that you put on. And I-I remember those, uh those days because they were just fun, just fun to be able to, to walk down the aisle and carrying posters, and then to get up on the stage and say some things. I cannot remember anything that I ever said. I think I ran twice, and I never won. I had won, though, in elementary school. My-my brother had been--had run for office in--at Wadsworth Elementary School, and then I ran for an office, and I won. So, I was sort of enthused about that. Tried to do it in high school, never did it. Never did anything about running for office in college. Didn't get back into the electoral political arena until I was, married and in my home, and one day, somebody knocked at the door and said, "Do you know, we have a candidate and we'd like you to come and help us." And I said, oh, okay. And that was the beginning of the next phase of my life when I really got involved in the electoral political process. Story_ID: 57932 Speaker 1: Beyond your experience running for office in high school [Hyde Park High School in Chicago, Illinois], were you very social beyond your classes and your, you know, scholastic achievements, were you social? Speaker 2: Well, I would have liked to have been a little more social, but, my mother [Thelma Bozeman] was very strict, and again, I think I've probably told you that she sort of tried to keep us close, my sister and I. So we never could get involved in the tri-high wire or things like that. Very, very rarely would she allow us to go to the boys club, the Woodlawn Boys Club, and that was always a lot of fun. But for the most part, when I got to be, a high school student, it was, she would, she would say, "Okay, fine, now what time is it supposed to start?" She would come and pick us up. So it was--it was a very restrictive (laughing) environment. My mother said she was not gonna risk us getting into trouble, and she just made sure that she was, she was pretty much on top of everything. Speaker 1: When you got to the point you were starting to think of college, what was life like for you then? And what was helping you to decide what you wanted to go into, what school you wanted to take? What did you want to major in? Give me a sense of where you were then. Speaker 2: Actually, there probably was never any question that I was gonna go to Chicago Teachers College [now Chicago State University in Chicago, Illinois]. At least at that time, I--I thought I perhaps wanted to be a teacher, and, I worked toward that. Speaker 1: And there today is-is, Chicago State? Speaker 2: It's-it's Chicago State now, right. But, yeah--early on, I did want to be-be a teacher. But I-I made a decision to not do that. And I've been-- I've done a number of other things since then, journalism, social services, and I was a newspaper reporter. So I've done a number of things. Story_ID: 57933 Speaker 1: So in your college years, as you moved into your major and although, you know, teaching--you didn't go into it--how did you feel about that training process, and that, you know, that young adult spirit getting ready for life in the real world? Speaker 2: Gosh, I-I-I probably could have been a little bit more serious in-in college. I got involved in-in just the independence. Again, my mother [Thelma Bozeman] had kept us rather close, so it was like, gosh, now I'm not as confined. And so I probably could have done--been a better student. But I-I did okay, and I obviously got through that process. I didn't attempt to get the master's degree until '95 [1995]. So then I got that. But I did okay in the--in the--enough for me to get my bachelor's in liberal arts. I was--I was interested in doing some things in-in college. I was in some of the clubs, I was in the Future Teachers. I-I got involved at that point in-in sorority activities. Speaker 1: And what kind of activities did you gravitate to most in those--in that general selection? Speaker 2: Mostly, I guess things that had to do with, with meetings. I-I went to meetings when they--when there was--were things that had to do with some- something that had to do with improving the quality of life. I was interested in political matters as well. But for the most part, I did homework. But I could have--again, I could have been a better student. I didn't spend as much time as I could have on, getting the A's and the B's that my mom wanted me to, but I did okay. Story_ID: 57934 Speaker 1: Were you aware of the broader community as far--broader I'm meaning, in citywide, statewide, countrywide, civil rights, political maze that was-- Speaker 2: --I was aware. I was aware of what was going on. We just never got involved in that. Never got involved in any of that. Saw it on television, heard about it, met people like Adam Clayton Powell. You know, but I never actually made a decision to get into any kind of march or protest. It was just not something that I thought was some--that I wanted to do. Other people were doing it. I think it was in the '70s [1970s] when I actually got involved in a march, where I marched into Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois], and-and I think I was almost killed because the people were so violent and, and so insensitive--they threw things at us. M80s--that's when I first learned what an M80 was. They were throwing those things at us. They were explosives! And rocks and bricks. And we were just going to try to go into a park that was a public park. So I can imagine I probably would have, had I been a little bit more in-in tune to doing things like that, I might have gotten involved in the '60s [1960s]. And, I guess, I was involved in--later on, I was involved in a lot of community organization work attempting to, improve the quality of life for people. Speaker 1: What years were those in Marquette Park? Speaker 2: I went to Marquette Park, I think it was in '7--was it '73 [1973]. I think it was '73 or so because I was working with the Kenwood Oakland Community Organization at the time. And, I got involved with some--with a group that said that they were gonna march to Marquette Park, and I said, "Okay, fine." And, my husband [Phillip Howard] said, "You wanna do that?" And I said, "Yeah. We gotta do this." And then afterwards he said, "You know, you shouldn't have gone." As he was helping me to deal with all this bruises and scars that I had all over me. And what was so t--so interesting when--went into the organization--that was on Saturday--went into the organization on the following Monday and talked to the young people about what I had done, and they said, "You shouldn't have gone." (Laughter) It was as if they-they were feeling nothing at all, and-and probably one of the things that we have not done appropriately or sufficiently is let our young people know what has gone on for them to be where they are today. Because too many of them don't understand, and they don't, they don't appreciate the kinds of things that have gone on before them. They think that the freedoms that they have, have just fallen out of the sky. So that's sort of sad, but I suppose that it's our fault for not having made certain that they understood from whence they came and from whence we came. Story_ID: 57935 Speaker 1: And, what year was it when you met, and later married your husband [Phillip Howard]? And how did that relationship unfold? Speaker 2: I met Phillip, gosh--we were married in 1963. So, a girlfriend of mine introduced me to him. We were working, I was going to school. We were working part time at a Spiegel's. I don't even know if they have Spiegel's anymore. We were working part-time at a Spiegel's on 20, was it 24th and Rockwell [Chicago, Illinois]? And she said that she had someone she wanted me to meet. And I-I met him. He was a very nice young man and we started dating. And we got married in '63 [1963]. And I have a son who is now thirty-six (laughs), older than I am. And he was born in, '64, Friday, March the 13th, 1964. I did everything that I could to have that baby on the day before because I didn't want to have a Friday the 13th baby, but of course, he-he decided that he wanted to come on that day. Yeah, it's my-my-my only son. He's a pilot with Southwest Airlines now. And, in fact he's gonna be coming to town to visit this evening. And I will be going to, going home and preparing for him. Story_ID: 57936 Speaker 1: How did you segue into--I know you mentioned that 'bout mid '70s [1970s], '73 [1973], whenever, when you actually got a call to come and participate in politics. Would you give me an idea of how that political career and activity situation started to unfold? Speaker 2: Living in Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] I was--we had bought our home and we were sort of trying to get established there. I'd joined the community organization and we were doing the things with the children and trying to-to keep the neighborhood in good shape. And one day someone knocked on the door and told me that they were campaigning for Phillip Smith who was running for alderman of the 21st Ward. And I said, okay, and they wanted me to sign the petition so he could get on the ballot. And I said, fine, because I had by that time sort of developed an attitude that the powers to be were just not in our corner. That I had really been--my whole attitude had been colored by the-the machine [Chicago political machine]. The machine in this city was just such a terrible thing and it just ran over people, and-and the common ordinary man was not able to make any decisions or--really able to enjoy the goods and services that government offered. And so, when this, woman came by and said, "I am working for Phillip Smith," I signed the petition. And she said, "Well, by the way, do you think maybe you could give us some help?" I said well, okay. And I came out. I became--I did the same thing she was doing--going from door-to-door passing petitions. And I guess I did that well enough for them to say to me, "Well now, we want you to do, we're gonna give you a promotion," in so many words. I got to be an area coordinator. So there were about four or five precincts that they wanted me to deal with. Now, one precinct is about eight blocks. So that meant going from door to door and knocking on the door and trying to gain entrance, or at least getting people to talk to you through the door. In those other instances, as being a--as an area coordinator, I had to coordinate other people, so they each--so they had identified people who had been agreeable to-to-to being the precinct worker, as we called it, for those precincts. And I had to make certain that they did their jobs. So in subsequent years, I-I worked for--well, Phil Smith ran again. He never won. I worked for other campaigns, other people, who I felt represented us well. Story_ID: 57937 Speaker 1: I recall this was also in the mid to late '70s [1970s]. Didn't you, weren't you active in Roland Burris' first campaign for [Illinois] State Comptroller? Speaker 2: I--it's probable that I was. I was in, I was active in Roland Burris' campaign for everything. He-he ran for comptroller, he ran for, for, attorney general, and, governor. I was--I've been active in all of his campaigns, yes. I think I've been active in campaigns for pretty much everybody who was--has been a Democrat, because that's what I made a decision I was going to be, and who's been sort of progressive in their thinking. I've worked in campaigns for presidents and governors and-and senators. Carol Braun [Carol Moseley Braun, HM], obviously, was one of my-my friends and I was very happy to-to work in her campaign. And I continue to do that. Now, let me just sort of tell you how I first became an elected official myself. Back in '83 [1983], the General Assembly [Illinois General Assembly] decided that, rather than there be one State Central committeeman for each of the congressional districts in the state, that because of the pressures from women, there were to be two state central committeemen from each of the congressional districts in the state. One male and one female. At that time, when that particular law was passed, there were twenty-two congressional districts in the State, twenty of which had elected males, and two of which had elected females. So that, at that point, there was a dictate that said, each of those Congressional districts must now figure out a way to get a person of the opposite sex. So that there were then twenty congressional districts that had to find a female, and two that had to find a male. In the 1st congressional district, where I had lived all of my life, I was--I was minding my own business and I got a phone call from someone who said, "Connie, why don't you consider that," I said, look, I have been an independent, progressive voice. They will not consider me for a regular organization position. Said, "Why not? You should try it." I said okay, fine. Now if they, if they want to do this, very good. I was to--it was suggested that I talk to Harold Washington because he had become the mayor at that time and I had worked for him. So we were very well acquainted with each other. And he said, "Do you really want to do that?" And I said, well, yes, it's apparently something that, is gonna help me to learn more about the political process. He said, "Fine, then I'll help you." So he made a couple of phone calls, talked to Cecil Partee, who was, in fact, the person in the 1st congressional district who had been elected. And, Cecil, worked with me. They had a meeting where people came and presented their credentials, which I did as well. And, I got the weighted vote. Story_ID: 57938 Speaker 1: Are you familiar with the weighted vote? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That is the, the vote of the ward committeeman from that district, and they get a weighted vote based on the vote that came out to vote for them. So that if somebody from, say the 6th Ward, to become ward committeeman and to have been, to have become victorious as ward committeeman got, 30,000 votes. They could then cast 30,000 votes when they went to the big meeting. And so, that, maybe the 5th Ward had 20,000 votes and maybe another ward would have 10,000 votes. So they cast their votes, and I got the majority of the weighted vote. And so I became the Democratic State Central Committeeman from the 1st congressional district, and I was that with Mr. Partee. I was that after Mr. Partee was no longer that. I became the--I stayed in the position. I-I was the first woman in our district that's ever had that position. And I still have the position incidentally because every four years I got elected. And so, next election will be in two years for that, and I will in-undoubtedly, try again for that position. So I became elected official at that point. Government wasn't anything I had thought about--I was a Democratic party official--that started--yes, I became a Democratic party official in '83 [1983], having been appointed by the vote of the, of the weighted vote of the ward committeeman. As--after that, then I had to--I was on my own. I had to run every four years. So, it was '86 [1986], '90 [1990], '94 [1994], '98 [1998], and again it'll be in 2002 that I'll have to run for this position if I want to continue. And some instances I've had to do it along with being state representative, because by '80 [1980]--oh gosh--'93 [1993], I decided to run for state representative, so that when I ran, in '96 [1996], I had to run for two--for the two positions. Story_ID: 57939 Speaker 1: What made you decide to run for [Illinois] state representative? Speaker 2: You know what? Prior to that time I had deferred to other people. If you come to me and say you wanted to run, if I thought you were a good person, you got my support. When the decade changed, there was a--there was an effort to make certain that African Americans were-were equally and-and appropriately represented in the legislature. So there was something called a--what do they call that? A super majority district. They developed the district that I live in as a super majority district, which meant that I think it was 68 percent African Americans living in a district were--actually, the district was-was-was comprised of 68 percent African American. And that meant that there was to be an African American representing that district. Well, the first time that--the first election after that, the person that won was a Caucasian person. And I said, well now, not that I don't--I have any problems with people of other races, but, you know, there was, there's a--there's a real need for representation of African-Americans. The person who ran--who's in that position--also at that point made a decision to run for congress. And so I said, well, it's my turn. I have worked for people all these years, and it's now time for people to work with me. And because I had been a state central committeeman, and because I think, I'd just done so much for so many different people in so many campaigns--. Then, I ran. I was running for re-election to state central committee and for re-elect--for election, that is, to state representative. And I had four opponents in each of those races. But I was relatively fortunate because I won. I didn't get the support of every committeeman. In fact, I got the support of one ward committeeman. The state representative district that I represent has parts of six Chicago wards, and it also has a portion of Thornton Township. In the six--in all of those areas, I was supported by one committeeman, and that's in the 8th ward. John Stroger has always been supportive of me unconditionally. I've never been said--told, "You gotta join my organization," none of that. He's just said he believed that I was a good person, and that I should be able to do, to do that. So, I became--I was elected. And, I'm going into my fourth term. Unfortunately we have to run every two years for state rep. There is some talk though, that there might be legislation that would result in a four-year term for state reps. And a six-year term for senators. Right now, senators have a staggered, 4-2-4 or 2-4-4, based on a ten-year period. But, I just--I think I've been fortunate. I work hard (laughing). And that's, that's absolutely necessary. I always tell people that, I don't do a lot of campaigning, because I just feel that you just do your job. So rather than being out talking about I'm running for this, I'm running for that, I'm at the meeting saying this is how we gotta be able to work together to get this done and to get that done. I think that, that sort of is more--is just as successful, or it's more successful than if I was out just talking about, here's some buttons and I'm running for re-election. Story_ID: 57940 Speaker 1: let's talk about your day-to-day work in the house [Illinois House of Representatives]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Tell, tell us what it's like. Tell us, what your major challenge has been, and tell us that little nit-picky thing that picks at you when you're trying to deal with on a day-to-day--not trying to deal with on a day--we just want a sense of you as a representative in action. Speaker 2: You know, I, I guess the thing that has bothered me more than anything else is that everybody doesn't think exactly like me. And I-I guess I-I probably should have known that. But, I-I got the impression that if I said, you know, this is the kind of program that we should have, that people would say, "you're absolutely right; we should do that." And they would all support me on it. That's not been the case. And so I've had a sort of a rude awakening in many instances where I thought it was just automatic that I was gonna get support. One of these particular issues is about expungement. Expungement is a process of, clearing the record of someone who has been incarcerated. In the process of trying to get people jobs--I-I--in my office we're always trying to get jobs for people. We have noticed that many people cannot get many jobs. A lot of jobs in state government require that you have no background in-in--with arrests and conviction records. These are good people; they've made mistakes, some of them fifteen, twenty years ago. Maybe sometimes more than that. But because of that, they cannot get jobs. And often times, there is a-a stigma that they carry that even precludes private employers from considering them. So I said, maybe there's a need to try to get something done that would make it possible for people who have those kinds of records, but who've turned over a new leaf, decided to keep their nose clean, and all those other cliches. Give them an opportunity to have a second chance. And so I had this expungement legislation. I, took it to my colleagues, and they sort of looked at me like, "hmmm, what is this all about?" I explained that it was about trying to make certain that individuals were able to have a new opportunity to get a job, to be able to adopt children, which they-they don't let you be--they don't, they don't let you become foster parents. And foster parent--the foster parent process is prerequisite to your actually adopting. There's certain kind of housing you can't get into, especially public housing. You can't get certain kinds of government grants. So persons who have been incarcerated, you know, you-- it's almost like you need to just did a hole and crawl in it, and just pull the dirt over yourself sometimes, because, what happens is, if you don't have an opportunity, then the chances are that you are gonna go back to prison. Because you're gonna be out here preying on people to try to survive. So, this past se--well, session before last, I tried it, and it didn't work. This past session in the spring, I tried it again, and they- the--my colleagues who were in--on the judiciary 2 committee said to me, "Connie, you know you, I know you, you worked hard on this, but we just, you know, there too many problems with this." I think one of the problems is that people don't want to get--to become thought of as soft on crime. They want to be law and order people because they--they wanna--they think that their constituents, would like them to be that. And perhaps they have a reason. I know that, unfortunately, a number of my constituents fall into the-the category of needing some special kind of-of-of assistance. And so I will continue to try to push that bill. Story_ID: 57941 Speaker 1: I'm also interested in trying to do something with the Department of Children and Family Services [DCFS]. I ha--one of the chairmanships I, that I have is, chairman of children and youth. And, I had been also, prior to becoming chairman of this committee, I was named as a chairman of the subcommittee on DCFS reform. Everybody recognizes that DCFS needs a lot of help. Even the director said, "You know, whatever you all can do, I know that this-this, agency is in serious trouble, and-and you can help us." So, I have been having hearings across the state, hearing testimony from individuals who are themselves involved in the system, and from agencies, private agencies that interact with the system. We're gonna have our last hearing coming up very soon. And then we're gonna write a report, which will make some recommendations to the [Illinois] General Assembly, that in turn will, hopefully, result in that department's operation being reformed to some extent. Have heard some real horror stories--grandmothers aren't able to adopt children that their mother--well, generally there's not a father involved--the mother cannot keep the child because she's-she's drug-drug abusing. But then the grandmother can't even be considered. So there's a, there are whole bunches of real serious problems that we need to address. And one of the things that many of my constituents are concerned about is the fact that they believe, and I've subsequently learn--come to believe, too, that African American children ought to be first placed in the homes of African Americans as opposed to other cultures. I believe there's a cultural difference. And while there are culturally sensitive persons of other races, I think the first consideration should be given to someone of that child's, race. And the federal government says that, they don't have to do that. In fact, there-there are laws that have been passed, or administrative acts have been, been taken or-or enacted since Clinton has been in office that say, whoever is available. If the person has been checked out and that family is a decent family, we don't care what the culture is. That child will go there. And I think that that's-that's not acceptable to me. And I know that it's not acceptable to many persons who are in-in-in my community. But we don't have any alternative at this point. Story_ID: 57942 Speaker 1: What, what do you think the average voter--or non-voter--in the African American community--what do you think is their understanding of state government and how it operates? And what is their level of interest and, and what things can be done to increase participation and understanding of state government? Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I think too many people, regardless of what community, my-my constituency or others across the state, have very little understanding about what state government is. When I go into a room, I generally ask the question of those who I meet, "Do you know who your state representative is?" Not many do. They will tell me the name of the congressman, the name of the alderman, and any other person, maybe some town trustee. But they cannot, for the most part, tell me the name of the state representative. And so I say to them, "Do you know that we're making the laws? We are making the laws that are, negatively or positively impacting your lives. You need to know this." So I'm hopeful that as a result of my being persistent, that people, that some people at least, will have become more sensitive to the electoral political process. I, have always attempted to, to get over to-to anybody that I talk to, that everything that you do in your life has to do with an elected or an appointed official. If the person who is elected is not directly interacting with you--it's an appointed official. From the time that you're born until the time that you die, the kind clothing we wear--we talk about materials and fabric in the general assembly. About what is fire resistant; what is not. The kinds of things that people must do in order to deal with the proper standards and-and-and fabric. We talk about toothpaste. We talk about the beauty salons, clo-cl-cleaners. Story_ID: 57943 Speaker 1: Something as simple as the clothing that you wear, the streets that you walk on, the schools that we have--the quality of schools, whether we have enough money to deal with technology in our schools and not be left behind. In fact, you of course, know that, we just completed doing a census. And that census that is done on the federal government level, that census has to do with how much money comes into our communities. There were so many people who wanted to not be involved in the census. We-we had to pretty much sit and talk to individuals about how money coming into that community means that your, your children will have decent schools. Means that there will be institutions, the fire houses, and all the other kinds of things, the libraries. All that depends on whether or not you have the numbers to justify building that kind of facility. So that, while, while people think it's just about a job for me. It's not about a job for me or any of my colleagues. It's about trying to make certain that you elect good people who in fact are going to be representative of you, who pretty much think as you do, and will go and vote in ways that you want them to vote. So, one of the battles that we have always had, we ha-had up until the time when I came of course is-is the schools and funding. We have not yet solved the problem to the extent that it needs to be solved. About 1995, I think it was, the general assembly [Illinois] decided to allow the structure to be changed so that now we have a more business structure over the schools. We have a chief executive officer and those kinds of things, those kind of titles that they use in business--in the business world. And that person was given so much prerogative so that the teacher's union was-was-was sort of watered down to some extent. We are currently working on a bill that will sunset--I think it's next year and I think, and I think it means that we're gonna have to, either make a serious permanent vote on funding for schools or else we're going to just continue to do this over and over. About three years ago, a decision was made that we would have a three-year program. Okay, we said in the, in the black caucus, we said, "Hold on, that's crazy. Let's do this once and for all." Let's develop a program that will fund schools at a decent level, at a fair level across this state once and for all. They refused to do that. And now this legislation that we're currently living under is going to the sunset and we have to revisit that question again. I think that what's gonna be necessary is that, we change the manner in which funds come in. At this point, we're working on--for the most part--property taxes. That's the major source, and so that certainly makes it unequal in many communities. Chicago happens to be--to get a decent property taxes but there are some communities in this state where the schools get very little money and need much, much more. So education is a--is a question that the voter needs to understand is very important. Story_ID: 57944 Speaker 1: And of course there are many, many, many questions that we decide, crime questions. Questions about how much time one spends in-in-in prisons. There is a group of people that are in prison now that became incarcerated back in the '70s [1970s] under what was called indeterminate sentencing and they were given number--C-something was their serial number. And these men are, some of them are so old now that they can hardly see, but they will not let 'em out of prison. And so there is a big campaign to try to get the c numbers some kind of consideration through the parole board. But they were given times like fifty to a hundred years. So any time between the fifty and a hundred years then the parole board will sit down and they'll say yes or no. And for the most part they've been saying, "No." So these fellows, and some females are getting to be very much up-up in age. So that's one thing that I am gonna be working on during the next term, trying to see if I can get any consideration given to them. As well, I'm working with a couple of the individuals who are now on death row who demonstrated to me that there is a possibility that they're not guilty. And they've given me all kinds of evidence. And I have been in meetings with a number of people including the state's attorney and hopefully, once this moratorium has been decided, once the governor says we no longer need a moratorium, I will have done the work along with others to--to get these people off of death row. Story_ID: 57945 Speaker 1: Would you give me some stories of the interaction and reaction relationship, some of the more colorful state representatives in your period of serving in the legislature? Speaker 2: Colorful. Who could those be? I don't look as my colleagues as being colorful, and--let me just say that there is a gentleman who is not a member of the black caucus. He is from I think it's, gosh, Representative Black [William B. Black]. If you came ever to the general assembly [Illinois] to observe the process, you just wonder if this man was going to bust the gasket. He just tirades. He stands and he throws books. He throws anything he can pick up and his debate is just so intense and after the question has been decided, then he's just another person. He's called the minority--oh gosh what they call that? The position where he's-he's the-the attack dog and that--the floor leader I think is what they call it--and he is, he does that. He-he earns his money but everybody whoever comes to the general assembly says what's wrong with him? When he starts yelling and hollering and screaming. They all look, What's the problem? That's just Representative Black doing his thing so he's a very colorful person. Bill Black. Let's see, I have been very fortunate to be--to have served with Senator Emil Jones [HM] who is a very knowledgeable person. He's been there an awful long time. I understand that prior to my coming he-he served very well in the house of representatives and now he of course in the senate. Let's see, state representative Wyvetter Younge is from East St. Louis, Illinois, and she has probably been there longer than almost anybody. The license plates that we have on our cars are generally assembly license plates and they number from 1 through 118 because that's the number that we have in the entire general assembly, well in the house of representatives. Her number I think is 4 because she's been there for so long. Mine is 73. I started off with 104 and then I went to 88 and now I'm 73 and, I'm going into my fourth term because I don't have any opposition. Incidentally that's one thing that I wanted to mention to you. I've not had opposition since I first ran and there were four people in each of my races so I've been sort of fortunate in that either people just have made a decision that Connie Howard is just unbeatable or that I've-I've sort of, endeared myself to into the hearts of some people. So I am seventy-three now and because I'm gonna be going into my fourth term and there'll be people who will be leaving, there-there are some who have been defeated, who have more seniority than I to, and then there are others who have made a decision to run for other offices and bec--you can't run for two offices at the same time, so they have to give up the state representative position to go to the other office. So then Wyvetter Younge has number four. She has been representing East St. Louis since, oh gosh, for twenty-some-odd years now and she's probably one of the most serious-minded individuals you've ever met. She is her-her entire life is about East St. Louis and she's always she--when she rises to speak it's never about--it's got to be about East St. Louis and she has a battle there because things are, the conditions in that-that city are sort of poor, but no one can ever say that Wyvetter Younge is not an absolute--the absolute appropriate representative for her, for her area. Story_ID: 57946 Speaker 1: Representative Art Turner [Arthur Turner] has been there for quite a while too. Very smart young man--represents an area on the west side, as they say when they are talking. Donne Trotter is my senator and I've-I've learned a lot from him and I respect him. And I have a good relationship with Michael Madigan too, the speaker of the house. When I first cam,e Michael Madigan had lost the speaker position because the majority had changed from Democrat to Republican and so I was there with--I started in that two-year period where Lee Daniels from the Republican Party was in fact the speaker, and Michel Madison--he had a number of meetings. He called us all together-- Democratic caucus--and he said, good people I don't like not being the speaker. He said, I want you to know that I'll--he said I'll be--I'll stay here with you if you promise that we're going to get this--my chair back next year--next term. So we worked very hard on that. He's a very sincere person. He was my seatmate at one time and I always said to people, in order to sit in this block of seats with Michael Madigan and myself, you have to be born in the year 1942. So there were some other people who decided that they wanted to move up and I said, "Naw, naw you got to be born in '42 [1942]." But, so I've had a good experience working with him, and one of the things that I, I'll never forget is when I-I was ending my second term, and it was time for me to be considered to be a chair because he does, he never considers anybody for chair positions of any committee until you're in your third term. And he said to me--in sometime I think it was November of that year before I became a third termer. He called my office and said you know you gonna be in the position to be a chair and I said great and he said but the problem is we have no committee for you. He said as I've gone down the list, the-the-the people that came in your class that are senior to you, seniority meaning that their names were A, B, C, D or the early H's, and so by the time he got to me, he said there was no-no committee for me. He said so just tell me what do you want to do for the next couple of years? What do you want to concentrate on? It took me about two or three days and I called him back and said technology. I want you to establish a computer technology committee and of course I want to be the chair. And that's what he did and so I was I've been the first chair and I-I do that now. In addition to the children and youth, I'm the chair of computer technology and nobody gets to be chair of two committees. But Carol Ronen left Children and Youth and she, I was the assistant chair--the co-chair--so she, she suggested that I take over that one too. At the end of this term, I will give up one of those committees and it's, it's gonna be children and youth because my heart is with computer technology. And in fact, my passion is eliminating the digital divide. Story_ID: 57947 Speaker 1: Are you familiar with the terminology the digital divide? There is unfortunately a real gap between the haves and have-nots when it comes to computer technology. And so understanding that by the year 2004, eighty percent of the jobs will need some kind of computer technology experience or at least knowledge. And I-I-I said that I would concentrate on that, so that much of my waking day is meeting and talking to people about programs that can come into not only my district but across the state. There are committees in our state, where the haves and have-nots is not the question. These people have money but they are situated in a, in a way that they cannot get good access to, to the internet. Representative Black [William B. Black] lives in one of those districts. He lives in a rural town and it seems that where they are it is the--the wiring is not there, the infrastructure is not there that they need in order to have a good hook-up. So that, I'm working on that, and so when people say you're concerned about the digital divide for your community, I say not just for the constituents of 32nd district but for the entire state of Illinois. So, I had what I called a omnibus digital divide bill this past time which my Republican colleagues did not see fit--that is in the senate--did not see fit to pass and, so I was only able to get about a million dollars to do a program. I wanted six million dollars, but we're working with that to dev--to develop community computer technology centers. We'll be able to do eighteen across the state and what we're trying to do is to get them to plan community groups to apply for this money so they can plan a computer technology center, so they can look for volunteers, so they can seek resources in terms of money and-and manpower etc., to begin to attack this problem so that people begin to know what a computer is. And what the internet is. If you don't know computers and the internet, you can pretty much hang it up. That's what I'm trying to get over to people now. Speaker 2: As, as far as support on your new emphasis in, in computer technology, you've already said that the Republicans are more-- Speaker 1: (simultaneous)--Yeah the--in the, in the house, we did okay in the house. It was when we to, to the senate, that they made a decision that they just were not going to support. Story_ID: 57948 Speaker 1: How do you see yourself overcoming that (unclear)? Speaker 2: That is, that's, that's a good question. I've been told by some of those who were not supporting it before that they will consider it now. Let me tell you one of the arguments that, that I try to make. With all of these technology jobs being developed and-and-and created, every single year--whose gonna, whose gonna be able to-to-to qualify for those jobs? There are many jobs in high tech companies in the suburbs, in DuPage County [Illinois], in other suburbs, even in the city of Chicago [Illinois] but we don't have enough people trained to do that. So that--I've been trying to get them to understand we have got to address that question. We gotta produce those individuals who have a knowledge of. And it's not just about someone sitting with a pc at--on a desk. It's about biotechnology, it's about all those other kinds of related fields-- the health fields, and it just goes on and on where they need to know something about technology. So that's one of the arguments that I am hopeful-- will I can get over to enough people to say, you know you're right. We need to do this. My fear is that something is happening that I heard a rumor of, and that is that perhaps there was going to be a mass effort to bring people from other countries who already have some of these skills to work in these jobs. And, so I-I-I'm-I'm just hopeful that that's not going to happen because if we got people in this state, in this country of course, and in this state, who are unemployed and who perhaps can be trained, then why not train them as opposed to bringing someone from another country? Because we still have the responsibility of taking care of or providing for those who live here. I just, I just hope that, what some of my constituents say is not the case, and that is that people are being abandoned, and thoughts are currently on them going to prison and, and-and-and making sure that this state can build new prisons every single year. This budget, this 46 billion dollar budget that we just passed, there are three new prisons in it. Every single year we build new prisons. It's become an economy for some of these cities in this state. The rural cities all vie for the opportunity to have a prison built. Oftentimes that's their industry. They don't have, they have the farms, but of course the farming communities are suffering because the conglomerates are coming in and taking them--their land and taking--taking them over so that now these rural communities have to figure out something else to do so they're somehow relying upon the industrial prison complex. Story_ID: 57949 Speaker 1: What would like, what would you like for your legacy to be to African Americans? Speaker 2: That's, that's a question that I don't often think about. I think I would probably if-if-if forced to say something, I think I'd probably would have to say that I, hoped that I am remembered for the person who said, everybody in this state needs to know how to operate a computer. That most people will know how important the internet is as well. So basically it is about that and, and certainly I'd like, I'd like it to be said that the world is a better place for her having been there, but more specifically, I think that I'm concerned about the world of computers and how computers are going to be the future for everybody, and anybody who is not knowledgeable is going to be left behind. Story_ID: 57950 Speaker 1: What do you consider your most important values, professionally and personally? Speaker 2: Gosh. Most important values. Are-are-are you asking me about-- Speaker 1: What things--tangible, intangible--do you value most as an individual, as a state legislator? Speaker 2: I think family, my family is something that I value. I-I'm concerned about my community (pause). I'm concerned about the way that our children, our--too many of our children are being lost. Our future is being lost. I'm concerned that if we don't do something quickly to deal with this drug abuse problem, that, that whole generations are gonna be, are gonna be lost. One of the things that I have noticed while I'm doing the DCFS Reform Committee Hearings is that there's a whole new phenomena in this country of grandmothers raising children. The parents have just gone about the wayside. Many times the father has never been there. But now the mom has gotten off into drugs as they say in the, in the streets. And that person is no longer able to, to assume the responsibilities for-for, for children so that the grandparents have had to. So I'm concerned about family and how we can bring our families back to-together in some kind of way. At least the mom should be able to-to, to raise her own children. I don't know what it is that makes a person get involved in the drug culture. I just don't know what it is. But somehow we're gonna have to figure it out, or again it's just going to be a generation of people that are gonna be lost. And our children are certainly suffering because of that. Story_ID: 57951 Speaker 1: Can you trace for me piece on the state legislature African-American (unclear). Can you trace for our students the process of a bill through-through, through the state? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm glad you asked that question cause I do that many times. I have gone to many schools in my district and outside my district and mentored young people and talked about that process. I-I always suggest to them and to their parents and to others that anything that you're thinking about can at some point become a law in this state. And use an example of supposing you kids want to have a four-day school week rather than five. Then you bring that idea to a person like myself and you say, Representative Howard, what, why don't you try to develop this into legislation? I would take that legislation or take that idea and give it to my staff people who are grounded in the law. They develop it into the legal lease as a bill and then I would file that with the clerk and it becomes a house bill whatever the next number is. Once it becomes a house bill, then it immediately goes into the house rules committee. The house rules committee decides whether or not it's something that ought to see the light of day. Sometimes bills have never seen the light of day because they have been so controversial. It's something that perhaps the speaker doesn't particularly like, and he has the power. It's something that a number of the people in my-my caucus don't like and they say, well, we don't even want that bill to come out of-of the rules committee. So the rules committee makes the-the decision about what comes out and eventually goes into a substantive committee. We have about fifty-some-odd substantive committees, from children and youth to human services, judiciary, environment, etc. So a bill, for instance that one about four-day school weeks, that would go to an education committee and there are probably anywhere between seven and twenty-seven members of a substantive committee. Those individuals will consider that bill and make a determination about whether or not it ought to go onto the floor. Story_ID: 57952 Speaker 1: People come to testify on that bill. The person, for instance myself, I would have to present the bill, and I would then have people come to talk about how this is going to impact the state. You can save money. Because we only have to worry about four days and not five days. Then there will be somebody else who might say, well I think we ought not to do that because in that day a child can have learned so much more. And if you, if-if you do that, then there will be no, that one day be lost of learning. So there will be people speaking on both sides of the question. Then the committee votes. If the committee votes it out, it goes back to the rules committee of that house. The house rules committee says its gonna come onto the floor where the entire 118 of us will then vote on it. If we make a decision that yes, well we'll have a debate on the floor. No outsiders are allowed to make--to be a part of this debate. No testimony is given. That all has to be done in the substantive committee. Once we votes, if it, if it gets sixty votes, then that's the-the, the minimum number it has to get. And we vote with our little electronic system, it then goes to the other chamber which is the senate. Of course the senate bills go through the same process and they come over to us. If it goes through the same process, and it successfully goes into the senate rules committee, it comes out of there and goes to the substantive committee. Then it goes to the senate floor. If it comes out of there successfully, then the next step is the governor's desk. And the governor can do I think it's three things: the governor can either sign it into law, can veto it and say I don't think it ought to be law, or can let it sit on the desk for sixty days and it automatically becomes law. Okay, so that's three things that can happen. Now when the governor makes a decision that it ought not to b law and says as much, says I want this-this to be vetoed. I don't think it ought to be, we can in the--in the house and in the senate, we can say we don't care what you want. We can override what you're saying. I think it takes a simple majority, so it's not just sixty votes. It's seventy-one votes I think at that point that, must be gotten in the house. If it's a bill that originated with the senate, it has to have thirty votes to pass in the first place and then if it goes back, I think it has to have something like forty-some-odd votes over there. But the governor can either veto the entire bill and say I don't want any of it, or he can say it's okay except for this one little part. So that's called an amendatory veto. And what he'll do--he'll say if you take this part out, or if you change this part to read a certain kind of way. So we can make a decision to either except the veto or make a decision to override the veto. And then if we override it, it's-it's gone, it's law. So it becomes a public act at that point. We have, incidentally we have a website where anybody who's interested can look up every bill that has ever been filed. Generally in the house, in a, in a term, in one session, we have filed something like three or four-thousand bills. In the senate about a thousand bills. I would say about a third of them actually ever come out of the rules committee and go on to the substantive committees and then there is a certain percentage that never get out of that process. So by the time we get to the end of a session, there might be 3-- or 400 bills altogether. Maybe not sometimes not that many that actually go to the governor and the governor then takes the time to--or least his people and he take the time to look through them all to see whether or not they want them to become the law. Story_ID: 57953 Speaker 1: What did it feel like when you won--actually won the election on election night (unclear) next morning. And then, what did you feel like when you went to Springfield as an elected official for the first time? Speaker 2: On the night of election, I was just it was--it was, I was unbelieving. It was something that I just never thought would happen. And the reason is because I think I told you earlier, I didn't have the support of some heavy hitters. And I, and I just, just felt that, because some other people were in the race that had more support that I saw, than I did, that it was not gonna happen. And so when the results started coming in precinct by precinct, and I had real good numbers, then you know, I began to become a little bit more enthused and then finally there was, there was enough in to say that I had won and I said well great. It was--I walked around sort of like in a daze for a while though because I just couldn't believe it. I thought I was dreaming. In fact, like you know, as they say. I anticipated, going to Springfield [Illinois]. When I went for the orientation, I was just--there was so much information. I just couldn't understand how I was gonna learn all this stuff, because they gave you a real intense orientation. I-I-I said, wow am I doing the right thing? You know you, you sort of wonder what have I gotten myself into? And so I went through the orientation and finally January 11th of 1995, I was actually sworn in. Now that was a very exciting day because that was the day when everybody who was a part of the, was a part of the, of each of the houses, we all get sworn in on the same day, and you're sworn in for that term and there were people everywhere. There were just so many people and I, I had brought people to, to come, you know to come in to witness that for me. The next day after that was over, we sent our people home, and we had to stay, and they said, "Now you get down to business." Story_ID: 57954 Speaker 1: That was the time when we had to select our parking spaces and we got our numbers for our licenses, and we had to pay money for the licenses. And for anybody who doesn't understand this, we have to pay for our own cars and our license plates. So the state gives us nothing on that. We began to talk about the kinds of things that we would do to select committees and they want you to have at least five committees, and I always managed to have seven or eight. I don't know how that happens. But there are so many things that I'm interested in doing so it's just difficult to eliminate them. Finally, the day came when I went to my first substantive committee meeting, you know, hearing, and I was sitting there and people began to ask questions, and I was just, I said, o gosh. Listen to the questions they are asking. They're so sophisticated and, and the manner in which they were doing things. Many of these people are lawyers and I'm not a lawyer. And they were so sophisticated, they were using this real legal terminology and I said, I will never be able to do this. Pretty soon you know you-you, you let your, your chairman know you got a little bitty question to ask, and you ask the question, and you get a good answer because the people who are testifying they're always so respectful. "Yes, representative and we under--yes representative." And they-- So you finally began to bolster, the courage to begin to ask more and more questions. Now it's second nature. Second nature to me now and I ask anything, have no problems, have learned how to use some of the legal terms that other people use, have learned to-to-to, to make statements and get up in the--on the floor and debate like everybody else does. And so it comes, comes to you but it does take concentration. One of the problems I have never yet though been able to address is the paper that you get every single time you go to session. The business to be in is paper. We get reams and reams of paper with all kinds of information. Everybody who has any idea of what they think ought to be a law or bill, they come and give us paper. You read this, representative, you will know about the farm industry. You read this, you'll know all about everything that has to do with schools, and so we bring paper home. And I have, attempt to organize it in some kind of way. I don't do a lot of throwing away of stuff. And perhaps that's, that is a thought, but I do--I can say that I, have much, many, many resource papers that I can go to when I need to. And I do that quite often. But, yes that was, I have gotten to a point now that I never thought I would ever get to, and that is to become a confident person that I, can do and I can, I can debate with the best of them and, and that I can, that I can represent my district in a way that I think is-is, what my district deserves. Story_ID: 57955 Speaker 1: Was your mother [Thelma Bozeman] living when you first--? Speaker 2: No. My mother was not living. She passed in '89 [1989]. She saw me become a state central committeeman and she really enjoyed that. She--I would invite her to go along with me to many events ad she, she enjoyed my doing that. But no she didn't get a chance to see me be state representative. Speaker 1: How did your new position of state representative affect your personality? Speaker 2: Well, my child was already grown and on his own so that I didn't have to worry about that. Some people have young children and they have to really be concerned about child care and all that. I didn't have that kind of problem. I guess, just accepting the fact that I'd have to leave Chicago [Illinois], every single week and live in Springfield [Illinois]. Cause that's what we do. We go into session Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. We come home on Thursday afternoon or Friday, stay the whole weekend and then Tuesday morning or Monday evening we come back. Just the fact that I'd have to leave and-and, and go to Springfield, and driving three hours one way, and three hours if you're speeding almost. And I don't speed of course. But, you know being a very defensive driver, just that long drive every week and back was something. The fact that I couldn't just, be there and do things on my house was a little bit difficult. There were many other kinds of commitments that I had, that I had to sort of put aside and, tell people I just can't, I can't do it. And so they say, okay fine. We'll wait 'til you get home and we'll save it for you. So that's what I, do when, when I, when I'm going to speak, then they'll just wait until I get back and they'll have the meetings when I'm gonna be there. But, for the most part, I guess my life was about trying to do things--to get out and do many things. In fact, my husband [Phillip Howard] has this little joke that he tells people when they say, well Mr. Howard can you donate or volunteer any time to do so and he said, "Nope. I've done my donating, my wife. You have gotten my wife and, and that's what, what you gonna get." So because he knew that if you came and you had a good cause, then I would, I would be involved in it. And that's another problem. That I can't, I have not yet learned to say no. You can't say no when people are saying well you know these kids they need this and they need that. Okay, fine. Well you know that this man is not guilty. Okay, I'll be there. Well you know they need computers over here. Okay, I'll give 'em 10 thousand dollars--which is one thing that's good. Story_ID: 57956 Speaker 1: As a state representative, we have what's called member initiatives, and we get x number of dollars that we can spread out into our own districts. And what I've done with my money for the last two years is basically technology. I have thirty-two elementary schools. My district is the southeast side of Chicago for the most part and also I have, as I said, a part of Thornton Township. Thirty-two elementary schools, two high schools in the district and one that sits outside the district but my children in Calumet City go there. And, I have two post-secondary institutions, one is the Olive-Harvey College [Chicago, Illinois] and one is Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and I gave them all money, five thousand dollars to each of my elementary schools and I gave ten to the high schools and I gave fifteen to the colleges, the first year, and then this year I, I didn't give any money to the elementary and secondary but I gave more money to the colleges. But I gave money to the community organizations as well because some of them have never ever gotten a cent from government. I mean, as a community organization they were always selling chicken dinners, having bake sales and things like that where they get a little bit of money and they can't do an awful lot with it. So I said to the community organizations--the Chesterfield Community Organization, West Chesterfield--I just went through the whole gamut. Gave them all ten thousand dollars to do programs and so they were all very happy about that. So this is the first time anybody's ever asked us if we wanted some money and, and you know they got it, so I am--I feel sort of good about the member initiative and what I've been able to do with it. Story_ID: 57957 Speaker 1: You are a grandmother? Speaker 2: Yes. I am a grandmother of three children that my--that are my son's children, and then two more that I have had to accept because he married their mother, and so now I have five grandchildren, and they're all model children. And they come visit me every so often and gosh, children are for young people. And they have so much energy, but I love them all to pieces. I learned where the American Girl Club [sic, American Girl Place] is, and left half of my paycheck there (laughing). And I went to Disney Quest and left the other half there, so yeah. And I--my, my grandchildren don't ask for dolls. They want computers. So that's what grandmother's had to do. iMac and Dell and those kind of things. That's what I do. But I'm happy because the youngest is five and she's the only one that doesn't have a computer now. The others all have computers. Speaker 1: What does your, your husband [Phillip Howard] do? Speaker 2: He's retired. He use to work at, Union Carbide. Some--they, they called him a chemical operator. Now he's retired and he skis, he skates, he plays racket ball, he rock climbs, he canoes. Did I say bicycle? Runs? He's a tri-athlete. This man will do anything that has to do with sports. And if it's not doing it, it's watching it on that television. So which is why we have separate television systems in my house so I can watch the mystery stories and, and all the whodunits while he's doing that kind of thing. Speaker 1: You ever have the chance to use him as a sounding board or wailing wall or, or just exchange ideas? Speaker 2: O yeah. We discuss things all the time because what happens is people will call my house and if I'm not there, then they want to discuss it with him. And he says he tries to explain to them that you know I have my own opinion and oftentimes, and probably more often than not, it's not the same as the representatives. So he sort of tries to get my understanding. An understanding of what--where I am on a question. So he can at least say, well that's this is what she says, and this is what I believe. But yes all the time we have discussions about various kinds of issues. And when we get out in public, he probably answers more questions than I do. I just sort of elbow him sometimes you know and tell him, hey, it's my turn buddy. Yeah. So my husband gets involved only if I'm out, and he's with me, then he will answer some questions. Story_ID: 57958 Speaker 1: One last question that takes us back to all this paper. Is the computer gonna help control some of this paper problem with--? Speaker 2: Because as soon as I learn how to use the scanner, I'm gonna try to-- well firstly, some of the paper has gotta go. I understand that it is probably time--date sensitive, and as we go through it, we try to, discard as much as we can. But in those instances where I feel that it is really good resource information, then we're gonna try to learn how to learn how to do a scanning of that and then maybe catalog it in some kind of way. So yeah, I think the computer is gonna help substantially with that. I don't know what I ever did without a computer. I don't know what people do without them now. Story_ID: 57959 Speaker 1: How do you prepare administrative staff? Tell us how that works in helping you do what you do? Speaker 2: Well that's an interesting question. The state of Illinois, does not pay us that well. And neither do they give us enough money to run our offices. So we have to raise money to even get sufficient staff. We have, we can perhaps pay half of a staff person decently. I have been in some instances fortunate to get good people and sometimes, as they say you get what you pay for. I have somebody now who I think is pretty good, and I am very, very pleased. He's a new person, but he's on the case and very professional. I am hopeful that he will be at a point soon where I can sort of relegate--delegate a lot of-of, of work to him to do. And I won't have to do as much. But, people who have more staff have been able to raise more money on their own. See the state only gives us x number of bucks and then you must raise other money to supplement if you so desire. There are some districts that have (unclear) of money and there are some who don't. And so you do the best that you can. Speaker 1: Do you have good support? Volunteer support in that area? Speaker 2: I think that I do have, have decent support, but a volunteer is not quite the same as a staff person so you, you, utilize them to the extent that you can and you continue to try to get more people in to help. Sometimes volunteers are here today and they're gone today, so you find yourself having to retrain people ongoing, but I'm always looking for volunteers. So if there is anybody that you know, just tell 'em to give me a call and I will put them to work. Story_ID: 57960 Speaker 1: Now okay, this will be the final question. Is there anything a young school person whether in elementary school, high school, college. Is there anything you didn't talk about that you think they should know about being in the state legislature? (unclear)? Speaker 2: I always say to young people that I talk to when I go to a school that I'm hopeful that one day, one of them will have made a decision to follow in my footsteps. But do you know most of them want to be football players or rock--not rock, but rap singers? And-and, and it's really sort of probably good that I go there cause at least they learn something about an elected official. They don't even know for whatever reasons, I guess they don't have that in the schools anymore, the civic lessons and all that we use to have? They don't even know what aldermen are. They don't know what the congr-- They know the president and they know, they knew plenty about Monica Lewinski. They knew, they knew all about that. I mean they ask me those questions. Do you know the president? Do you know Monica Lewinski? And I would say, well no I don't know Miss Lewinski, and that was something that wasn't within the realm of my responsibilities but these kids they, they do know about the presidency. I would just wish that somehow, and I don't know how it happens because if it doesn't start in the home, it generally doesn't happen in the school either, that they become interested in, in the political arena. I would, I would hope that at some point that there will be some serious thought given to a curriculum earlier in the school history, in the school career so that, kids can learn what it's like. When I go to career days, they very politely clap but they want to hear about what somebody--the fireman is saying. That, that's much more exciting to them and I think it,it probably has to do to, with the fact their parent are not drawing their attention to this. Their parents are not saying, now this is the person that is representing you. This is the person that's doing this. This is the person that makes sure that you have adequate school funding. That makes sure that this happens and make sure that that happens, etc. The parents are not doing that because the parents are not that concerned about it. Story_ID: 57961 Speaker 1: Can you see any way to bring, to close some of the gap? Speaker 2: Only thing I see is that, persons who are as interested as, as I am must continue to try to--to do those things that are necessary to make the importance of these elected positions known. I was just in a conference in, Chicago [Illinois]. We had a conference, the national conference of state legislators, and when the women came to get, the noble women, these are the black elected women--what they're gonna do, they're gonna have an institute established where they'll be able to interest and recruit young women to, to be involved in the process of becoming elected officials. And I was just flabbergasted. I said, why is it that we've had to resort to this? At one time you, you know you, you, you wanted to do this because you saw this as something that was exciting, that it was something that was important? And now we gotta go out and, and try to interest a young woman into becoming an elected official? So this is, it's really sort of sad. I don't know what you can do except maybe that, the thing that, that we're talking about, the institute, putting something in the schools, in the curriculum, making certain that, elec-elected officials, making certain that they have the time that they can give on a regular basis. Whenever I go to a school, I--if it's a K through sixth school, I start at kindergarten and I go all the way through and I have to change my spiel cause kindergartners are probably saying what is this woman talking about? And why isn't she telling us about Barney? But I-I, I have a different spiel for the kindergartners on up through the sixth graders. So we gotta, we gotta figure out. And I, and I'm gonna talk to Paul Vallas because I remember when I when he first came into office, into the position he's in, I suggested to him that we needed to do chess in the schools. I said, everybody is not gonna be a football, basketball, baseball player. Everybody doesn't have that, inclination. They don't have that skill. But there are some young people who want to compete, so why not chess? I don't know how to place chess myself, but I've seen those young people do it and they are absolutely wonderful. They can play that game and he did institute that. He's got chess in all of the elementary schools and high schools now. They got programs and one of the problems is we don't have the, the teacher or some staff person that will always oversee these programs but I think that you gotta be able to institute programs early on that will catch the kids' attention so that they can, they can begin on the right road like chess. If we somehow are able to bring a program in like a civics program for the third and fourth graders, that is on the level that they can understand, then perhaps they will say well when I grow-up, I want to be a state representative. Or an alderman. Or the president, or congressman or whatever. But we gotta put that into their minds and I don't think that's being done now. Speaker 1: Have you heard about them teaching civics in the fourth grade? Speaker 2: No, but they should (laughing). I mean, I think you--failing to do that. I don't know when we're gonna do it, because when I was a kid, it was in high school that we learned civics, but we did have it. I'm not even sure they have that anymore. I don't even think that high schools do it. But I think as I was saying, the kids, they're learning so much, much earlier now. There is so much more to learn, and their learning how to get in trouble and their learning all these negative things. We gotta get them to a point where they're positively impacted about something like becoming an elected official, becoming somebody that's either appointed or elected, somebody that represents and, and sort of teaching them that, that is a worthy profession. Story_ID: 57962 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Could I have you describe this? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. You want me to do it now? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, whatever this picture is. Speaker 2: Yeah, that is a picture of Constance Bozeman when I was probably about, could about four or five months ago. Gosh. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Four or five months? Speaker 2: I'm sure it was about four or five months old, yeah. That was me in 1942, well, actually, it was probably in 1943 'cause I was born December the fourteenth, in '42' [1942]. So it was some time during the early part of 1943 that that picture was taken. Speaker 1: Yes, I was about four years old, I think on that picture. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): About four years old? Speaker 1: About four years. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And where was this? Speaker 1: That was taken on the back porch of the family homestead, 3012 Indiana, and it, oh, gosh, about 1946 or '47' [1947]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) Next. Speaker 1: I was the bride in a Tom Thumb wedding. A Tom Thumb wedding is a little fundraising program that they used in churches in that day. And there was really a whole wedding, and I happened to be chosen to be the bride, it's a popularity type contest. Speaker 2: And they say he might be living in Michigan or the suburbs, and his brother is named John Paul White, but we can't locate him for some reason. Speaker 1: Have you talked to Howard Brookins? Speaker 2: We've interviewed Howard Brookins. I don't think he knew--because I asked him about him. I don't-- Speaker 1: You asked him? And he didn't know about it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead and describe this picture? Speaker 1: This is a picture of my first grade experience at the Wadsworth Elementary School, James Wadsworth. I was in the 1A. That meant I was in the upper half of the first grade. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Do they do it alphabetically? Great, when you say, first half? Speaker 1: Well, actually, you--the first half of the, of the first-grade year, was 1B. And then it went, then you went to the second half, which is 1A. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That was back in the, in the day, as they say. They don't do that any longer. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, describe this? Speaker 2: This is the fifth grade. This is the upper half of the fifth grade at this, James Wadsworth Elementary School again. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Would you describe (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah, this is my eighth grade graduation picture. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What year was this? Speaker 1: Gosh, '56' [1956]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And this is when you're still down at--what address was this at? Speaker 1: This was when we moved into Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. We were at 65th and Drexel at that time. Again, on the back porch (laughter). Speaker 2: Photograph of me as a candidate for secretary of the senior class. And actually, we had to--the 4A and 4B, so I was running for 4A secretary, and my name is Constance Bozeman at that time. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And are you in this picture? Speaker 2: Yes, there I am. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, 'cause--unfortunately, I did not win, but I was very enthusiastic about that. That was that assembly that we were talking about. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Right. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Do you know what year high school this was? Speaker 2: Gosh, it was some time between '56' [1956] and '60' [1960]. (Laughter) That's all I can say, probably my, say my third year. Speaker 1: Try to always say which high school? Speaker 2: This was Hyde Park High School, yeah, Hyde Park High School, right. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Describe this photograph? Speaker 2: Yes, this is my high school graduation picture from Hyde Park High School, in 1960, June 1960. And this brings back memories. We're in the process now of organizing our 40th year anniversary party from high school. We'll be doing that in September of this year, and we've organized it on the Internet. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead and describe this photograph? Speaker 2: Okay, this is a photograph that was taken around the time that I decided I wanted to be a radio announcer. And this is just one of those photographs that I took around that time. And then this is like I said, it's one-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Approximately what year? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, that was about '7' [1973] or so, about '73 [1973]. And I was going to the Career Academy for Broadcasting at the time. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: In 1973, I was going to the Career Academy for Broadcasting School, taking a course, hoping to be a great radio announcer. Story_ID: 57963 Speaker 1: That's the first fundraiser that I ever had--that was the first fundraiser. I was running for delegate-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Hold on for a second. Wait until they actually put it up. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): When did you take this picture? Speaker 1: Gosh, that was in the first--one of the years in the first four years of the Clinton [President Bill Clinton] administration. Hillary [Hillary Clinton] came to town to a Democratic Party function, and I got a chance to take a picture with her. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. When was this picture taken? Speaker 1: Okay, this was during the time that, this was in '84' [1984] and Harold Washington [Mayor Harold Washington] had a favorite sons slate of delegates and alternates to the Democratic Convention. And I was one of the alternate candidates, or I was one of the alternates, and we were raising money at this fundraiser. And I got him to take a picture with my mother-in-law, who's on my right or of his--on the Mayor's right and my mother who is on my left. So I had both my moms on the picture with the Mayor. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself, along with my three siblings, one of whom is deceased now. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Can you differentiate from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Sure. The one with the mustache to my far--to the left of the photo is my brother, Henry [Bozeman], who is a couple of years older than me. He is seated next to my deceased brother, John [Bozeman], who was about 10 years younger than me, and then, of course, right next to me is my sister Sandra [Bozeman-Wright], who is a couple of years younger than I am. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Describe this picture. Speaker 1: This is a picture of those of us who had been elected to be delegates and alternates to the 1984 Democratic National Convention as the Mayor's favorite sons slate. Pictures were Professor Robert Starks, I am next on the picture. Then there's the late Artensa Randolph, who was the Central Advisory Committee of the, of CHA Chairman. Next is President John Stroger of the Cook County Board. Next is Professor Timuel Black. Next is Representative Barbara Flynn Currie who is now the Assistant Majority Leader of the House. Next is Attorney Arnette Hubbard who is currently a judge, and then, of course, there is Mayor Harold Washington. And at the podium speaking is Sid Ordower. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, go ahead. Speaker 2: This is myself and State Representative Lou Jones [Lovana "Lou" Jones]. This was my second fundraiser that I had, and Ms. Jones had come to wish me well. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What year is this? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, that was in ninety--gosh, '94' [1994]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Ninety-four [1994]? Speaker 2: Um-hum. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What was the location? Speaker 1: Okay, that was, I think that was the, a place called the "Net". Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What city? Speaker 1: Chicago. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Here in Chicago [Illinois]. Okay. All right, describe this photograph for me. Speaker 2: Okay, this is another fundraiser, and I'm accompanied on this photograph--and we're at the "Net" again, and I'm accompanied on this photograph with, by Marianne Pettway (ph.) who was the treasurer of my organization and Oliver Brewster who is the district director. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 2: This is the window of the office that I used at 43rd and King Drive when I was a State Central Committeeman, when I first started off, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself receiving my Master's degree in Corrections and Criminal Justice from Dr. Dolores Cross at Chicago State University in 1995. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Can you describe this photo? Speaker 2: Sure. Let's see. Which one is that? This is another fundraiser, and I am accompanied at the mic by three individuals who were candidates for judge, and they've all subsequently been elected, Judge Jane Stuart, Judge Marjorie Laws and Judge Clay--I've forgotten her first name [Evelyn Clay]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE): You have to say it from left to right. Speaker 2: Okay, closest to me with the white suit is Judge Jane Stuart. Next to her right is Judge Marjorie Laws, and to her right in the pink is Judge Evelyn Clay. They came to support me at my fundraiser. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 2: That's about it. Speaker 1: Okay, this is a photograph of some of us who were members of the Black Caucus and also Barbara Flynn Currie. When we were saying good-bye to Carol Moseley Braun, and she was getting ready to leave us to go to New Zealand to become the ambassador. Let's see. I can start from the far left. The lady is State Representative, Barbara Flynn Currie, who was the Assistant Majority Leader. Behind her is [State] Senator Barack Obama [current President Barack Obama] [HM]. Next to him is Senator Margaret Smith [Margaret Chase Smith]. Of course, that's Carol Mosely Braun [HM] with the beautiful smile. And then there's Constance Howard, next to her, Representative Howard. And then my senator, Senator, Senator Don Trotter. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 1: This is the same event that we were saying good-bye to Carol [Moseley Braun], and of course, to the far left is myself. Next is Carol Moseley Braun and her Excellency, as they call her now, Carol Moseley Braun, and then that's the Little Warrior, Reverend Willie Taplin Barrow [HM], and then Senator Margaret Smith. Speaker 2: Can you restate the event because in the edit-- Speaker 1: Sure--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --they won't always--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I see. When Carol Mosley Braun was-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 1: That's a party for Excellency Carol Mosley Braun who was going to become the Ambassador to New Zealand. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And when did she leave? Speaker 2: She left last year--was it last year or this year? I don't remember. When did she leave? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I think it was last year. Speaker 2: Last year, okay. It was sort of recent. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right. Go ahead. Speaker 2: This is a hearing that I was involved in, and I think it had to do with some kind of children, children's issue. The person to my right is Portia Cannell (ph.), and she was from one of the social services agencies that was there to testify. The person to my left is State Representative Larry McKeon. He is on the Human Services Committee, along with me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What year? Speaker 2: Circa, 1996. Story_ID: 57964 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): [another film shortly intertwines]. Speaker 2: That's a picture of the Speaker of the House [Illinois], the Honorable Michael Madigan and myself. We are at one of his galas, his great fundraisers. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What year? Speaker 1: That was in '95' [1995]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Ninety-five [1995]? Speaker 1: Um-hum, that's the first one I went to, right. Speaker 2: I mean I'm not, you know, you all decide what's important. I'm not--(laughter). And, you know what, I have a picture with Clinton [President Bill Clinton], I can't find it. Somebody's probably pilfered my picture. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION). Speaker 2: This is another fundraiser. It's an event that Vice President Gore [Al Gore] came to, and, of course, I took a photograph with him at that time. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Would you describe this photograph? Speaker 2: Yes, the National Black United Front was having an event, and I went there to be supportive. I am on the right side of Dr. Conrad Worrill [HM], who is a professor at Northeastern Illinois University, Center for Intercity Studies, and as well, he is the chairman of the National Black United Front. The gentleman to his left is Dr. Jacob Carruthers [HM] who is also an instructor at Northeastern Illinois University, Center for Intercity Studies. And I would think this was taken about a couple years ago, maybe about in '98' [1998], at the Black United Front headquarters which is out in Calumet Park, Illinois. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great, and (unclear)-- Speaker 2: This is Eric Campbell from-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): When was this picture taken? Speaker 2: Gosh, that was last, probably, maybe it was two years ago, so about 1998, and he had come to visit us after he won the election. He came back to the, to the chamber to say hello. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Photograph for me? Speaker 2: Okay, this is a photograph of a number of members of the Black Caucus on a day when some members of the, of an organization called the City Colleges of Chicago Presidents, when they came to visit. And on this particular picture, starting with the far left is State Representative Arthur Turner [HM]. The next person is Dr. Lawrence Cox who is from Olive Harvey College. Then there's State Representative Lou Jones [Lovana "Lou" Jones], Senator Don E. Trotter, Representative Howard, Representative Coy Pugh, Zerrie Campbell [HM] who is the president at Malcolm X College. Then there's Representative Monique Davis [HM] and representative--at that time, Representative Eugene Moore, and last, but not least, Representative Calvin Giles [HM]...