 Story_ID: 179425 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And observing is Camille Baxter and Kenyatta Daniels. And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including your middle initial. Speaker 2: My name is Mellody Hobson, Mellody L. Hobson, M-E-L-L-O-D-Y L. H-O-B as in boy, S-O-N. Speaker 1: What does the L stand for? Speaker 2: Louise. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never use the L. Speaker 1: But it's all archival, okay. And can we have your--? Speaker 2: It's my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Can we have your date of birth? Speaker 2: Four three sixty-nine [April 3, 1969] Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today is August fifth, ninth--August fifth, 2003. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: We're at the offices of Ariel Capital Management [later, Ariel Investments] which is my firm, which is 200 East Randolph Drive in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: And your profession? Speaker 2: I am in the investment management and mutual fund business. Story_ID: 179426 Speaker 1: I'd like to start out, we always start out with five questions, they're a little People magazine-ish, if you'll just bear with me. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Spinach. Speaker 1: Your favorite--that's unusual--that's a good one, okay. Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Orange. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Italy. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Kill and drive on. Story_ID: 179427 Speaker 1: I'd like to start out by asking you, you know about your family. And can we start with your mother and if you would give her name and what you know about her background and her growing up. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Dorothy Brown. Brown is her maiden name. Her married name to her first husband was Ashley, Dorothy Ashley where she had five children. And I was the sixth child that actually have a different father, Hobson. I came much, much later in the whole scheme of things. My siblings are actually much older than me. My mother grew up in Chicago [Illinois]. She was the middle child of three children and the only girl. And her brother Ralph Brown still lives in Chicago where he has five children. And her brother Brownie who was named after the doctor who delivered him, his real name was actually O'Brien, passed away a few years ago. She was an entrepreneur and specifically she was in the real estate business. And she did conversion projects, condo, condominium conversion projects when I was a kid growing up, very industrious, extraordinarily hardworking, wonderful person. Very, very good heart, take the shirt off her back and give it to a stranger. Speaker 1: Do you know where her family came from or were they also from Chicago? Speaker 2: Her parents were both from Chicago although her mother was one-half Cherokee Indian. So I don't know where their parts were from. My grandparents, I've never had grandparents really because my grandmother died when she was very young at the age of fifty-four, her name was Louise Brown. And my grandfather died when I was five years old which is actually the first memory that I ever have is of my grandfather's funeral. And his name was Millard Fillmore Brown after the president. And he--they didn't have any extended family, much extended family and so as a result of that I don't know a lot about those backgrounds at all. Story_ID: 179428 Speaker 1: Now what about your father, his name and--you said Hobson? Speaker 2: Right, my father's name is Louis Hobson and he lives in Chicago [Illinois]. His--I don't know a lot about my father because my father was not a part of my life when I was growing up. Story_ID: 179429 Speaker 1: Tell us about your earliest memory though. You said it was at your grandfather's [Millard Fillmore Brown] funeral. Can you describe that? Speaker 2: I just--it's the first time I ever remember anything. And I remember--I know I was five because it was right around the time that I started to go to kindergarten and I remember sitting in this church on my mother's [Dorothy Brown] lap with people passing by. Her father was someone that was really just loved and you know she was his pride and joy really. She was the only person of the three kids who chose to work with him and he was an entrepreneur and so she was really devastated by the loss. And I remember afterward she had this huge party and I just sort of remember that that party was a big thing. And it was on the top of Lake Point Tower [Chicago, Illinois] and I just remember sort of someone keeping us while this party was going on. It was more just to celebrate his life and how much he meant to her which is obviously when you think about the fact that this was twenty-nine years ago, you know our people weren't doing things like that. Story_ID: 179430 Speaker 1: Now when--your mother [Dorothy Brown], do you know when she got involved in real estate? Speaker 2: From childhood so-- Speaker 1: From working with your grandfather [Millard Fillmore Brown]? Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah. That was her, you know it was just her life. Speaker 1: Okay- Speaker 2: It was the family business (simultaneous). Story_ID: 179431 Speaker 1: Now when--give us your siblings' names even--those are your step-- Speaker 2: We don't think of it that way. Speaker 1: Okay, but-- Speaker 2: I've never in my life referred to them that way. Speaker 1: Sorry. Sorry, well give us your siblings in order, birth order. Speaker 2: My siblings, the oldest is named Sharon Tina Ashley and she goes by Tina. The next oldest is Patricia Hamel and she was Patricia Ashley Hamel. The next is Donna Ashley. The next is David Ashley III, and then the next is Angel Brown. Speaker 1: And you're the baby? Speaker 2: And I'm the youngest. Speaker 1: Okay, the youngest. Speaker 2: The closest, my sister Angel who we call Bootsie is nine years older than me and my oldest sister is twenty-plus years older than me. She'll be upset if I gave the actual number. Story_ID: 179432 Speaker 1: --Let's talk about your growing up, you know what--where you grew up in Chicago [Illinois] and it--and I'd like you to sort of take you back to that you know and describe the block that you lived on and-- Speaker 2: I didn't live on a block because I lived in a high rise. And I never lived in a house in my whole life. I've only lived in apartments. I grew up in downtown Chicago and really sort of had a very unconventional upbringing. My mother [Dorothy Brown] was working extraordinarily hard to support us and I guess I was your real definition of a latch key kid in some ways. Interestingly, even though my siblings were so much older than me, my nieces are just--one is two years older than me and one is one year older than me--one year younger. And so as a result of that, my nieces were more like my siblings. We lived in the same apartment building. And not in the same apartment but in the same apartment building and even when we moved, we all moved as a clan it seemed. And so my memories of growing up are riding my bike along Lake Shore Drive [Chicago, Illinois] on hot summer days and going to Water Tower Place [Chicago, Illinois] to hang out or to go to movies. And we had a lot of freedom. We were very, very, very independent and with that freedom came responsibility. I as a little child took the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] to school everyday and so the school bus, because our school bus driver kept getting into car accidents and I refused to be late for school. So I basically went on strike and wouldn't get on the school bus anymore at which point I started to take the regular CTA and we'd change buses and everything as little kids. My mother worked all the time which meant that we basically had to really get smart about taking care of ourselves. And so we would you know feed ourselves and clean up the house and all those things. And so living in apartment buildings where I lived there weren't a bunch of kids. I played with my friends from school and we'd go to their houses and things like that. But I couldn't ever go anywhere unless I had my transportation arranged there and back because I knew that my mother had to work. And so everything always had to be very button down before she would let me go and do a plan that involved being somewhere else. So just basically meant you know sort of hanging around our building and when I was a little kid we spent a lot of time when we needed to entertain ourselves, we'd go to the pool. And it was an indoor pool and we'd just swim for hours and play in the water and we'd spend a whole day on a Saturday by ourselves at the pool. Speaker 1: Now with your--so all of your siblings are living in the same apartment or some are older and have moved on? You moved on? Speaker 2: I never lived with my siblings really because they were adults when I was born. And my sister always jokes you know it was a--she was mortified that my mother was pregnant when she was in her twenties you know basically. Yeah, so I've never actually--they were always around. My mother has always joked that I basically was born with five mothers. They were--there was--I have siblings in a very non-traditional sense in that I was always told to respect them, always told to do exactly what they said. I've never in my life really argued with my siblings because it would be like arguing with your parents. Every Mother's Day I had to buy all of them Mother's Day presents when I was a child and still till this day. And it was just a different--which is why I think I'm actually very comfortable with older people. And also they never treated me like a child because they were so much older they didn't, you know ever sort of talk down to me, they just sort of talked to me as if I was one of them, but clearly I wasn't. Story_ID: 179433 Speaker 1: Now what was--what elementary school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to the Ogden School, William B. Ogden [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois] which is on Oak, Rush and State [Street, Chicago, Illinois], right in the middle of the city. It's a little school in the middle of the city. It was actually--it's a public school but it was extraordinarily strict. Speaker 1: And describe that. What do you mean by that? Speaker 2: In fifth grade, all of my grades were read aloud, all, for all students on every test or every homework assignment, everything that you did. We had to stand on gray squares when we were forming lines and when we were waiting for things. We had one teacher one day came to school and she--I was in seventh grade and she took the phone book and she ripped out pages and she handed them out. And she said Mellody, you have column number two, you have to memorize all the names, addresses and phone numbers by tomorrow. And that was to make us better at memorizing things. And you could imagine how hard that is when the names are all the same and you get--it's like the initial is different or whatever and the address and phone numbers. You had overnight to do that. There was a lot of homework, a lot. So you know most kids would go home and get you know ten sentences that they would have to diagram and language class, we'd get a hundred. Speaker 1: Do you remember who the principal was at the school? Speaker 2: Mary E. Shannon was the principal and she ended up becoming the district superintendent for our area. And she was a phenomenal, extraordinarily principal--principal. And before that we had--and Mary Shannon was a doctor. She had a Ph.D. [degree], Dr. Shannon. And before that we had Dr. Herrigan [ph.] who also became a very significant person in the Chicago Public School System. So Ogden was known as one of the you know wonderful neighborhood schools in Chicago, very, very, very successful with their students and just very different. The parents were very active. We were a school that when the teachers went on strike somehow the parents figured out how to get alternative teachers for us and we'd go and have school at Fourth Presbyterian Church. Speaker 1: Now of--what was the racial makeup of that school? Speaker 2: It was not very diverse. So for years, there would only be a couple of black kids in each class and that was something actually my mother was very, very concerned about. And mostly her concern it was--actually it was the weirdest thing because in some ways--I remember coming home one day when I was really little and I talked about how someone hadn't treated me right and it wasn't fair. My mother immediately looked at me and I told you how she was this you know wonderful, is this wonderful, generous, thoughtful person, cares terribly about people. I mean just to an extreme that you wouldn't even believe. And I remember I said to her, I said you know I didn't--someone wasn't nice to me or whatever. And she said life is not fair. It never will be. I don't ever want to hear you talk about things like this again, and I never did. At the same time, which toughens you up. I mean I was a little kid. This wasn't like you know I was thirteen or something. But she made it very, very clear, no excuses for anything and you never blamed other people for your lack of accomplishment. But at the same time, I remember whenever I would go to someone's birthday party or anything like that, my mother would--her first question would be, were there other black kids there? First question when I walked into the door. And then she'd also want to know how I was treated. And she never wanted me to be with people who mistreated me and maybe I couldn't come home and say oh this person mistreated me. But if she knew something was going on, she would not want me in that setting so she would just remove me from it. Story_ID: 179434 Speaker 1: Do you remember an incident where you felt that you were mistreated you know like that with, you know at birthday parties or kids' homes? Speaker 2: You know in my--I think in the beginning you're--you know kids are just kids and I don't remember anything being inappropriate because my mother [Dorothy Brown] sometimes would just not let me go. And I would be like, no they're the nicest people. You know I'd be begging, tears streaming down my face, that sort of thing. But she was just always very cautious. But then also I do remember as I got older, sort of seventh, eighth grade, there being issues. I remember one friend, who was a very close friend, telling me that her parents didn't want her playing with me anymore because I was black. And I couldn't like--in Chicago you know metropolitan city you know people were really smart. I couldn't even believe that this would be the perspective of parents, you know it just seemed to me to be really, really goofy. So that is something that I do remember from that time. But they never said anything to me. They didn't mistreat me, anything like that. And then I remember when we were little I told you we sort of just would just run around. And there'd be places where we would go like if we were in Water Tower Place [Chicago, Illinois] you know where you could just kind of tell people were sort of either watching you funny or treating you funny. And it always was--I was very attuned to it and I always pay attention to my environment. And I remember once being in Lord & Taylor and I was just walking through the store and to cut through to go somewhere else. And I must have been like ten or eleven years old and I was with one of my nieces and I saw someone shoplifting. And I remember going up to the sales person, I said that person just shoplifted. And I remember my mother, I went home and I was so proud of myself and she was insane. She's like don't ever do anything like that again because she was worried the person would see that I turned them in and do something to me, you know things like that. And I remember the woman who I told she was just sort of like taken aback that this little black kid was coming up to her telling her something like that. So you know yes you know part of life in being a black person in America is knowing that everything doesn't always go perfectly and people have stereotypes or a point of view that does not reflect reality. Story_ID: 179435 Speaker 1: Now where did you live? What was the address of your--the apartment while you were going to [William B.] Ogden [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I lived in a lot of places. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we moved around quite a bit. My mother [Dorothy Brown] had a--she was just, she had a really tough business. You know people always sort of have this sense that I had this sort of pristine existence and it wasn't like that at all. And I think a lot of it had to do, she always, always, always wanted us to be in a good environment. But you know sometimes that was a studio apartment and sometimes that was you know two bedrooms. And it was, it was very hard. You know it was very, very hard, very, very hard. Speaker 1: I was just trying to get a sense of the, you know not neighborhood but the area. Was it you know--? Speaker 2: Mostly I lived in the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois] when I was growing up. So one, you had to live around the school and my mother--it was very important to her that we went to Ogden School, that I went to Ogden School. My siblings didn't go there. They grew up on the South Side, which she felt environment was everything. And her whole idea which I do believe in, one, she made great sacrifices for me in that regard and then secondly her whole point of view was exposure. She thought that the more you could see the more you would--could dream basically. And so her idea was that you go to the places where you can see what the best is, whatever that might be. And at least you didn't necessarily have to be where it was but you had to have some proximity to it so you can observe it. Story_ID: 179436 Speaker 1: What--how would you describe yourself as a young child? Speaker 2: I laugh because my sisters will tell you I was like neurotic. I mean I was just really--I was a very obsessive child. I, I mean till this day I can't imagine how they put up with me. I just think I wore out the whole family and in all sorts of ways I was just extraordinarily disciplined and diligent about everything. And if something wasn't done well I was just very hard to deal with. And till this day I mean little things like my mother [Dorothy Brown] would always be late. She was late to my grade school graduation, college graduation, high school, whatever. I'm never late. You know things like that, that just--I and I would be so upset if there was even the threat of being late like the school bus. You know my mother used to drive us to school when I was in high school in a car pool and a couple of times she was late and then I insisted that if she was even--if I even thought she might remotely be late I had to take a cab to school that day. And so then she started just giving me cab money because then I'd go pickup all of my friends in a cab to get to school because she knew I just, there was no way I was not only going to tolerate it for me but then to sort of have my friends be potentially you know embarrassed by us being late. That just was never going to happen. So, and there's all sorts of little things. I you know, I was obsessed with school, obsessed like I just--part of it was the school that I went to where they taught us to just be so diligent. But also I just, I remember as a little child when my mother would tell me it was a snow day, I would burst into tears and tell her she did not want me to get--good education and she had to prove to me that there was no school that day. And she'd have to go to the TV [television] and show me all the schools that were canceled for me to believe her which is crazy. I mean just, it doesn't make any sense. I don't know what I was so worried about. And I mean just anything--I would lock myself when I was doing my homework in the bathroom and I'd have to be in like an environment with no noise. And I would just run water to drown out the noise the whole time that I sat in there for hours. But that was the only place that I could go and study in quiet so I'd study on the floor of the bathroom, do all of my homework like that. And my mother would know I'd be in there. And she'd be like, you know she's just her own person. And I think it's somewhat you know related to being so young in this group of you know older siblings who had different personalities that I sort of meshed together in some ways. But I was just, I was like a weird little kid. Speaker 1: And you don't know what made you that way? Speaker 2: You know as I look back on it now I think a lot of it had to do with I really felt the need to have security and I couldn't always find it. And so I just--all the things that I could control, I controlled and wanted to make sure that they were really buttoned down. And that's the only thing I can figure it out I mean cause it was just you know, as I look back on it I mean I laugh but I just wonder if I just sort of worried them to death about everything. And I refused to buy lunch at school. I had to have lunch that I would take with me. And, because I would not eat the hot lunch at school, I just wouldn't eat it. I was really, really picky about what I ate. And so my mother, it would be one of those things that we'd be in the house and someone would reach for bread and she'd be like no, those are the last two pieces. That's Mellody's lunch tomorrow. And could you imagine you know having to--and if for some reason we didn't have lunch, she'd have to take me to like 7-Eleven to buy lunch and like sort of change her whole schedule so that I could go and buy a sandwich or a donut or whatever it was. And if for some reason--because I knew if I went to school without a lunch they'd force you to eat the hot lunch. I know these things sound really you know sort of small but they were just like gigantic to me at the time. I mean just everything. Story_ID: 179437 Speaker 1: But I--the great thing about it was that my mother [Dorothy Brown] would always say, I mean I remember this till this day. She was not a doting mother at all. But she also, if someone would ask her anything about me, she would say Mellody's perfect. And I would always laugh because I never thought she really felt that way. I always thought she wanted me to do better. But she was just, she knew I was the--my own hardest, worst critic and she also knew I never gave myself a break and she worried about that I think. And so I remember there was one time at our school, if you missed school on a test day it was not uncommon for a teacher to say oh this person isn't here because they weren't ready for the test. And so to me the idea that I could not be in the classroom that day when someone would say that would be like you know mortifying right? So it made sure we were all there on test day. And I remember one day I was you know so worried about homework and all this stuff and kind of weepy at my--you know on the floor of the bathroom. And my mother said, "just don't go to school tomorrow. Just don't go. Take a couple days off," like you just need some rest. And I went insane. I was like what are you talking about? I have to go to school tomorrow. But then in high school she would say that all the time. She's like, you "just take a couple of days off. Sleep in. Get a little rest." And I had a college counselor in high school who thought that I was sort of crazed because of family pushing which couldn't have been further from the truth and I was like you know you should call my mother. You won't like her answers when she's like it doesn't matter what grade you get in math today, you know that sort of thing. So she was a good balance to me. She figured me out very, very early and just always was a counterweight on everything to try to basically calm me down. And till this day I laugh so hard because my mother will say things like--I'll be you know in a rush talking to her. She says, no! This is your mother. Stop what you're doing. I don't care if you're late for the plane. I don't care who's sitting there, you're going to talk to me right now and she gets very, very testy. And I'm like mom I can't talk to you right now. And she says the president is busier than you are. The president of the United States can talk to his mother. And then he'll--she'll say you know the last time I checked you weren't the axis and the world was not revolving around you Mellody. So she's very you know no nonsense about certain things. Speaker 2: So she was your grounding center in many ways, she centered you and--? Speaker 1: She was but you know the thing is that's very funny. My mother will tell you today, I had my own mind as a little child and she will tell you that nothing she could do could change my mind. Now what she did affect very strongly were my values and she was absolute about areas of ethics and integrity and things like that. And she would just say the same things over and over and over and over again and that, those lines were non-negotiable. But around things, decisions that I was making and things like that, she did not--she let me make my own decision. She always treated me like I was capable of it, that she trusted me and that I would do the right thing. She always did that. And so any kind of big things that I had to do in my life till this day she'll tell you like I can't change Mellody's mind about anything and she's right. She, she'll say she can't even influence me because she knows I'll--and I--you know she always joked, I raised her to be so independent, this is one of the down sides of it. So did she ground me? She grounded me in values, yes. No question about it, about the way to be a good person, the way to treat other people. She always pushed me really hard to be more sensitive to other people, very hard. And her own acts were a great sign of that but she did not--she was not the kind of person that I would go to and say what do you think I should do here? We didn't have that kind of relationship and we still don't. Story_ID: 179438 Speaker 1: Now who was influencing you? Was there anyone else influencing you? Speaker 2: Well the great thing I always say about being the youngest, you get to study everyone's life in front of you. And if your siblings are adults you get to see all, you know, the good, the bad, whatever. And so I was very much influences by the choices that my siblings made and I anchored myself around them. So I would say like nope, don't want to do that. Yep, want to replicate that. Nope, never going to be in that situation, you know that sort of thing. And you can imagine with, in a family of five girls and one boy, basically like everything comes up. And so I got previews. It was like going to the movies and getting the advanced showing of, you know all the different ways that your life could go. So I was very much influenced by my siblings and I was also influenced by--I read a lot. I mean I would just read about people all the time as a child. I always read these biographies as a little kid in the library of our school. And I went through the whole series. There were probably like you know, like fifty or a hundred of them and every, you know week I would take out a different one. And so those sort of things starting to read about other peoples' lives definitely had a huge effect on me as a child. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of those biographies that you were particularly influenced by or thought you know the person was particularly neat or you wanted to emulate? Speaker 2: Now remember this is like you know the grade school biographies and the school library. And I can remember reading about you know Booker T. Washington. I can remember reading about [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. I can remember reading about, believe it or not like this comes to mind, Annie Oakley, you know, and Louisa May Alcott and so it was like a range of people. And mostly I guess I was influenced by the people who were again unconventional. I didn't want to have sort of this very predictable life and I still don't. Till this day I always say to my friends, I said I want to be like that movie, Shakespeare in Love, where in the movie the guy who has commissioned [William] Shakespeare to write the play keeps coming to him and says how will it end? And Shakespeare says back, "it's a mystery." And to me that's like the best life where you kind of don't know where the path will ultimately be. You can't write the whole book and write the last chapter yet. And so that unconventional way is something that very much speaks to me, and yet at the same time which sounds contradictory, I'm a person who is extraordinarily focused. And I have a lot of--you know I've worked at Ariel [Capital Management, later, Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] for twelve years. So I don't just meander around. Story_ID: 179635 Speaker 1: Now you know I want to take you back to those early years and I'd like you just to describe what, if you can, any sights, smells and sounds that remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Buckingham Fountain [Chicago, Illinois] reminds me of growing up for sure. And just like this thing that I was in awe of and so beautiful and clean. Sounds, because my sisters are so much older they're sort of like these Motown lovers and so I could sing most lyrics from like the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] which people always find to be kind of funny. I know all of the songs, all of the people. So when I think about like Motown I think about being a kid. I think about this--Roberta Flack, my mother [Dorothy Brown] is--her favorite song was 'The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face.' Whenever I hear that I immediately think of my mother. Sights, sounds, smells. I don't have a good smell for you because no one in my family except for one sibling can cook anything. So we didn't have one of those families that--we ordered food or went to get it. We never cooked it. Although I guess there, you know there was, you know smells to me as a child growing up were like you know Chef Boyardee Spaghetti and Meatballs and macaroni and cheese. For breakfast my mother would make rice with butter because like it was one of the things she knew how to make. And on Sundays we'd always have plain donuts with tea. Every Sunday morning I'd go and buy the donuts. And, and then we'd make tea. And till this day my mother, when we go to lunch or dinner she says Mellody makes the best tea, cause I would always make her cup and my cup. So it was very funny. Story_ID: 179636 Speaker 1: Now in school, what were subjects you were attracted to? Was there anything you were attracted to as a subject or that you liked particularly? Speaker 2: I was kind of an all around person. I didn't favor math or you know English. I wasn't one of those people who had you know one preference one way or the other. I hated geometry in high school. That was the only class I can remember thinking I was going to fail. I didn't like physics that much either. As a kid I kind of liked everything. I wasn't really picky. Speaker 1: Any teachers that particularly were fond of? Speaker 2: Oh there were a thousand teachers. I had great teachers my whole life, till this day. I have like won the birth lottery in terms of people schooling me. You know from [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] back, John Rogers to you know I've always had great teachers, always. I don't know how I've been so lucky. I only remember one teacher that I didn't work out well with and it was in first grade. And she--I just, I couldn't--she just frightened me to death. I don't know why. I hated going to school when I was in first grade and every morning I would get up and say I have a stomach ache and cry and say please don't make me go. Well this was counter to obviously I told you it was the rest of the time. And with you know having gone from the kindergartener who was obsessed to the first grader who didn't want to go to school, we--my mother [Dorothy Brown] immediately knew there was a problem. And I just couldn't learn in the environment that she had. It was just like really unstructured. We sat on the floor and we were doing all sorts of things. It was like too much for me to take in at once and so I just choked whenever she'd ask me a question. And the school realized it and they put me into second grade. Now this is the thing that's very funny. They put me into the second grade with the failing students because there was no other first grade for me to go into. So I went into the, like the difficult second grade kids. Now you're a first grader with the kids who are in second grade who aren't doing really well. They don't really like you so the one thing that happened it was like a transformative time. I was in first grade, they were in second and my whole thing became doing better than they would do. And that's like where the whole path started. I just remember like I was like I'm going to do better than they do tomorrow even though I was learning some of the same things. So then I ended up going into the advanced second grade when I was in second grade. And I remember getting into second grade and I tell people this all the time about people who give up on kids. I remember in second grade I had perfect penmanship and I could not read. I remember that like it--and I remember my teacher going to my mother and saying I don't get it, she can't read. And it took me a long time to learn how to read. And when I was in high school my math teacher would say I was "the second day girl." I got everything on the second day, never the first day. Well that period of not being able to read also like altered me because I was like this is not a good thing. So then I just like worked doubly hard and you know then I became obsessed with doing extraordinarily well. So it's sort of those, kindergarten went great and I can remember first and second grade. When people say sort of what most influenced you about sort of how you approached education and how you approached all your work and things like that, it was that weird period one, where I just was choking and could not perform and then that next period where I was definitely behind and I just was saying to myself this is not acceptable as a second grader. Speaker 1: So you were your own worst critic in many ways? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You would hear--okay-- Story_ID: 179637 Speaker 1: 'Cause my mother [Dorothy Brown] was the kind of person who sort of just like assumed I'd do my homework. And she wasn't the person poring over you. She didn't do homework with me, that wasn't her thing. And that wasn't--I don't have any--that's not a bad thing. She didn't read stories to me, but she sang songs, you know that sort of thing. Like she wasn't--you know when you look at today how parents raise kids and there's so much about you know read to them and do this and that and the other, it wasn't that she didn't do it, she was just really busy. But she knew if she gave us a book we'd sit down and read, you know. I used to go to work--this is an important point of what an important factor was. I didn't go to pre-kindergarten or have any kind of nursery school. And until I was five, I went to work every single day with my mother, every day. And we'd get to her office and she had like a little place for me to sit and I knew I had to keep myself entertained and quiet so that she could do all the things that she needed to do and not be fussy. And I knew when it was okay for me to ask if we could go and get lunch and things like that. But I think that was actually a very important, early you know part of my life, one cause I also observed her environment all the time and that is a memory that I have. I do have those memories of going with her everyday and we'd like get up and go to work. And my nieces went to nursery school and my mother was like, no she's just going to with me. And I think she kind of knew I was the last one and she wanted to maybe have like a little bit of a different relationship with me and maybe that's also why she just gave me so much rope on everything and wasn't sort of micromanaging me because those five years in the beginning, I was with her everyday of my life, all twenty-four hours. Story_ID: 179638 Speaker 1: Now when--are there other things that influenced you in those early years? Were--was it just your mother [Dorothy Brown] and you and observing your other siblings? Was it any teachers? Were there any other experiences or--? Speaker 2: I just remember our teachers at the [William B.] Ogden [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois] were very--they had very high expectations and they never were content with mediocrity. And so the teachers definitely--I mean I can tell you every teacher I had and what you know what influence they had on me. I remember Ms. Lindsey was my second grade teacher, the one who said about you know the reading. And I remember Ms. Lindsey was just this wonderful woman, older woman who was just very, very encouraging all the time. And back to my not missing any school, my sister was married and had a child my age and one day her husband called me and said I have a huge surprise for you. And I said what? And he said, we're taking you to Disney World [Bay Lake, Florida]. And my first answer was, I can't miss school to go to Disney World. I can't go. And he says, I knew you were going to say that so I called your teacher and she says it's okay. So I go to Disney World and I'm out of school for a week and I get back to school and we had taken these important tests. And I shouldn't even say this cause it was just like I can't believe she did it and she basically took all my tests so that I didn't miss them. I mean it's like, it's so inappropriate, I shouldn't even say it. But she was like--so then afterwards I took all the tests and she said I knew you'd get a hundred on them anyway, strange. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: I mean she definitely, she like, she was so compassionate. It was definitely someone who influenced me. She probably knew I needed a break. And it was just very, very funny actually now that I think back on it. And there was a whole host of them. Ms. Falbo in--my fifth grade teacher, she decided that--this is so funny to think about. Our school had an open campus in grade school and we were a city school downtown and we could go out to lunch as long as we had a note from our parents. And the restaurants in the neighborhood were like Wendy's and McDonald's and that sort of thing. So you think as a kid--but you could only start going out to lunch in fifth grade. So Ms. Falbo came to me and she said, will you bring my lunch back? So I said sure. So she says but it means that you can't stay and eat lunch at the restaurant with your friends. I was like, okay it's no problem. I'd be happy to come back and I'll just you know like do some work when I get back. So then all the teachers would give me their lunch orders and I'd come back with their lunches and bags with their change all perfectly assorted in the bag and things like--their receipt. And this would happen maybe like once a month. And they would--they'd have me sit in the room with them while they ate lunch. So I would just be sitting at a desk over on the side and they would be adults having lunch which you could imagine was like fascinating. So you know I--for that reason I didn't mind going and because I was doing this nice thing for them, they were always really nice to me you know about everything. Not in an inappropriate way but they were just you know sort of giving me the benefit of the doubt I think on some things. But I would go and get the lunch for the teachers. I'm coming back you know with frosties and drinks and bags and all sorts of things, it was hysterical actually now that I look about it, look at, look back on it-- Story_ID: 179639 Speaker 1: And then the other thing that actually definitely influenced me during that period was this--these people were just amazing. My fifth--sixth grade teacher had me enter a speech contest for the school and it was the declaratory speech contest where you would memorize something and then do it. And she had me memorize 'The Creation' by James Walden Johnson which today I could still say from start to finish. But I'd like really act it out you know, all the things. You know God invented you know light. He flung the moon and the stars you know into the sky, all this sort of thing. And so I won for the school. So I go to the district and I win for the district. So this is against twenty-five other schools. And I remember this and you talk about people that influence, I could--I mean it's like it was yesterday I remember this. My mother had to take me to the--we were on time. She had to take me to the contest at the district which is where Lincoln Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] is right now. That's where District Seven used to be to--for the competition and my mother said--you had to draw numbers to see who was going in what order. And she goes, go for the last number or the first one. Don't--try to see through the numbers and pick the first or the last, but go for the last one so they'll remember you. So somehow I got the last one. Twenty four kids are in front of you. Now that could be very discouraging as you're watching them through, right? But somehow it was like I got more resolved as I saw each one. So I ended up winning but before I got to the district and before I actually did this whole thing in front of the whole group, our principal made me every single day, Dr. Mary Shannon, for a month, come and say my speech during her lunch time, every single day for a month. And then just to be sure, she made me give the speech to the entire school at an assembly, just to make sure it was prefect. And so then I went and did the district thing which is where I guess I was okay with waiting till I was twenty-fifth out of the group. So as a result of that I won the contest and WBEZ, the radio station in Chicago was owned by the Chicago Public School System. It's National Public Radio. They did a call, an audition for public school students to be on the radio regularly and they had a citywide audition and hundreds of kids, they picked twelve and I got picked. And I only went to school late Monday afternoon through the rest of the week but I did not go to school Monday mornings through lunch. So I'd get to school around one o'clock on Mondays and we ended at 3:15. For two years I did that and so that was definitely like I worked. You know we didn't work for money but I was like going to work in the morning during the seventh and eighth grade. And it was an amazing thing. That's where I was a--another place where I was just exposed to a lot and really started that whole sense of how some things work, maybe in a non-traditional way. And just from that I ended up being on all things, a Jewish television show when I was in seventh grade called 'Beyond the Magic Door'. And anyone who is about my age knows Tiny Toe and you know there's the black kid on the Jewish television show which was hysterical. But their idea was that they would show the world on this show all the kids that were you know a part of the world. But as a result of that I worked at the television show on Sundays. So I did 'Beyond the Magic' Door on Sundays, WBEZ on Mondays and then went to school the rest of the time. And so the one thing about it was just like this unbelievable exposure, unbelievable. It was great. Story_ID: 179640 Speaker 1: Can you talk about some of the exposure? I mean who were the--how many kids were on 'Beyond the Magic Door'? How many of the--? Speaker 2: There were ten. Speaker 1: There were ten of you, okay. Speaker 2: Ten on 'Beyond the Magic Door' and twelve on the radio show called Audio Jam Live [ph]. Speaker 1: Okay. Well the audio show come first? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah the audio show-- Speaker 2: And the producer from the audio show Audio Jam Live recommended me for the television show and I did an audition and ended up getting selected. Speaker 1: So talk about that because you know you're on TV [television] today and so that was where it really started. Speaker 2: It really did. I mean I don't know--I guess the good thing is you learn all your mistakes you know then but definitely you know I was this kid on TV. Now it's a Sunday morning at 7:30 so the only people who knew you were on TV were other little kids, you know. It was--there wasn't the general adult who'd come up to you and say aren't you on that show? It was always like a six year old who would say "that's Mellody from 'Beyond the Magic Door'"--that sort of thing. But it was just, you know the one thing about that, the best thing about it, I shouldn't say the one thing, was the ability to learn to communicate and to be able to express an idea concisely and eloquently. And that's what we were taught to do all day long. We were taught to do that at WBEZ [radio station, Chicago, Illinois]. In the first hour at WBEZ we did exercises, that's all we did, around communication, listening, diction, you know you name it, that's what we did. And then we'd get into actually taping pieces, writing them, helping to edit and things like that. So it was very much an education the whole way. And then when we got to the television show, I didn't know anything about television so they started us from scratch and they always corrected everything you did wrong or said that was incorrect. So for instance I remember saying, oh they're filming in there. She says, no with TV it's tape, you know that sort of thing. And so I kind of knew about these things at a, sort of a different age I guess. But I didn't have this sort of like child actress dream. This wasn't where it was coming from at all. You know it was more just, it was a new experience that I thought was really fun and it was extra work, you know. I remember, Beyond the Magic Door, I think I got paid $20.00 for a show or something like that, or a hundred [dollars], maybe it was a hundred. So you weren't doing it for you know this wasn't like your claim to fame and riches, by any stretch of the imagination. Speaker 1: And were there people that you--like WBEZ, were there people that you met there who you know were on the air and influenced you at all or were you mainly primarily with the other kids and the producer? Speaker 2: We were with adults. They had adults and then they had kids and then they had the puppeteers who were adults. And you know the thing is anyone who works in children's television, they're educators, they're teachers. And so we spent a lot of time with a whole bunch of teachers, I mean a lot. And they were--and some of them went on to do really neat things. Tim Kazurinsky was on Beyond the Magic Door and he ended up being on Saturday Night Live. He's unbelievably hysterical. You know as a little kid you knew he was different and special. So-- Speaker 1: Anyone else who was part of the original crew? Speaker 2: The person that was the most I guess--there was a woman named Wendy Freeman [ph.] who was the producer for WBEZ that I worked with and then I also worked with her at Beyond the Magic Door and she was just one of these people, she was like my sisters. She treated me like an adult when I was a little kid, all sorts of things. I remember I went to her wedding. I remember bringing her, her wedding present to the show and I remember when she had a baby I went and bought a cake at Let Them Eat Cake, carried it to WBEZ and had pink or blue, hope your wish comes true with booties on it and all sorts of things. And I remember the cake was like $25 or $30 and I went to all the kids and I was like you have to chip in $2 for the cake. And I remember my mother having to take me to Let Them Eat Cake to order the cake which was on Rush Street [Chicago, Illinois], you know all sorts of funny things like that. But she was like this unbelievable mentor, teacher and you know just terrific person, all around terrific person, very encouraging. Speaker 1: And you did that for you said seventh and eighth? Speaker 2: For two years. Speaker 1: Seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179641 Speaker 1: And then now you're still at [William B.] Ogden [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] right and then in eighth grade you--what, how is the decision to go to Saint Ignatius [College Prep, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Saint Ignatius, yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Decision was very funny. My--we went to visit the schools so the question was would I go to Lincoln Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois] where it was a continuation of what our school was which was an international baccalaureate school. There were only fourteen in the nation and Ogden School was the first IB school in the United States. Lincoln Park became their sister high school. So the question was, do you go to IB which was international baccalaureate was based upon the French model of teaching children? And it was really established for diplomats children who move around from country to country wanting their education to always be in tact. So the curriculum was the same wherever you were. Or Saint Ignatius where a whole bunch of my friends were applying, I knew that or Lab school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. And Latin [School of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and [Francis W.] Parker [School, Chicago, Illinois] weren't schools that I had really considered very seriously. I don't know why, I just hadn't. I didn't really know anyone who went there or anything like that. So we went and visited all three and I remember I got to Saint Ignatius and I said, this is where I'm going to high school. And my mother [Dorothy Brown] was like why? And she kind of I think in her heart of hearts like Lab because she was like, it's so modern. I remember her saying that. And I said, I just feel really comfortable here. And she was like, okay. I applied and I got in and that was the decision, you know. Speaker 1: Now why did you--why was it comfortable for you? Speaker 2: It felt like there was a lot of tradition there. It felt small. It felt--there were some--I had come from a school with so many rules that Lab just seemed a little too far out on the spectrum in terms of the structure that they had where they sort of--their structure was just totally different from Ignatius. I mean Ignatius had--you walked up certain staircases, you walked down certain staircases. You had all sorts of standards to everything and that just seems more in keeping with where I was coming from at Ogden School. And it's not that I needed that, but it just was my preference that kind of order and routine. And I like the idea that was, the school was so old, you know that there was just so much tradition there. That was something that really spoke to me and it felt very small, felt very compact when I was in the building. And I just could picture myself there when I was walking around. I was like, oh yeah this is me. But the same thing happened with college, I mean I just knew. Story_ID: 179642 Speaker 1: And so describe your Saint Ignatius [College Prep, Chicago, Illinois] experience, was it a continuation of [William B.] Ogden [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] or were you--? Speaker 2: Saint Ignatius was different. It was not--gosh, Ogden wasn't heterogeneous. Saint Ignatius seemed to be more homogeneous and part of the reason was is that you had this all-encompassing religious aspect of it. And so everyone was Roman Catholic and I wasn't. And there were all sorts of aspects of that which sound silly maybe perhaps in hindsight today. I remember our teacher, one teacher sort of said raise your hand if your parents are divorced. And there were like three kids in the whole room, you know, things like that. No one lived downtown, very few kids. And so like our little carpool was like all the kids that lived downtown. All the kids came from Beverly [Illinois], they came from La Grange [Illinois], they came from Hinsdale [Illinois], I mean in the boatloads. So you sort of, like I just felt I was this--and then the black kids all came from like Pill Hill [Chicago, Illinois] and Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and so you were just like on the fringe. You weren't quite in any group, you didn't quite fit anywhere. And I remember thinking when I was in high school that I really liked Ignatius. I really liked the teachers that I had there but I remember thinking that like I could have lived without high school, like I just wanted to get it over with. You know I was kind of ready to go as soon as I got there. My first year at Ignatius, I was--Ogden was so grounded in me, I was still in my mode of just being so obsessed about everything. My GPA was 4.33 out of 4, so I had an A-plus average as a freshman. And it was just like not normal. It was a highly competitive school but again more of the sort of not giving yourself a break kind of thing. And I do think that I just kind of relaxed a little bit as time went on and I--but I never quite had the right group there or anything like that. I sort of just flittered between a couple of different groups. I didn't--even to this day when I look back on the relationships that I had there which were so important at the time, they didn't stand the test of time. And so that says something but I'm not quite sure what. There was one teacher there, Mr. Wall, who I just thought was like, you know, the neatest thing since sliced bread. I'm sure I had you know that typical crush on him kind of thing. I know I did. And I remember thinking he was so cool because, which today would be crazy, he smoked in class during class. And he was just like old school teacher, you know the idea of like you know someone in a tweed jacket smoking as they're teaching you English. Not that I condone smoking or I never was a smoker, I have to say this or my mother [Dorothy Brown] will start going insane. But it was just the idea that he was just irreverent you know he was this person who was just so--and just Ignatius was, it was a great, it was a safe environment. It was you know very challenging. I was very active in all afterschool activities and things like that. Story_ID: 179643 Speaker 1: And I'd probably say the most thing--the thing I remember most was we had these retreats that were mandatory and I went on something called the Kairos retreat which is a special retreat in your junior year. And that was one of those times that was like you know when I think about sort of like that water shed moment of how like you're in high school and you're like going through all the dorky, awkward high school stuff, like it all came together for me after that retreat. And there were all sorts of things that they did to us during that time, very psychological but very effective. Like one part of the retreat was a night where they had all of your parents write a letter to you of every kid and then they read the letters out loud. And it was like, you know, everything you could possibly imagine you know from parents saying you know I know my alcoholism has been a problem to parents saying you know things, you know my sickness or whatever it is, things that you necessarily didn't know about your friends, and just you know every child in the room was undone. I mean it was like you were a puddle. You just couldn't even--and it just sort of gave you such an appreciation for all the issues that people around you were confronting that you really didn't understand because you only saw them a certain way, a certain part of their life, a certain part of their day. And the other thing that they did was then everyone who had ever gone through the retreat, they had write you letters. So you'd go back to your room that night and they had a big huge envelope on your bed and your bed was filled with letters of people who knew you who had written to you from high school and your teachers. And it was one of those moments where the whole headline that they gave us during that period was you know they said that most kids are really insecure and you know doubting of themselves and lacking confidence. And the line from the retreat was "I'm loveable because God doesn't make junk." And we had these buttons that we wore. And you know in hindsight it sounds really hokey but it wasn't. And so then when you sat down with these letters where people like basically poured out their heart to you and told you why you were so special to them, it was like you know it was beyond touching, beyond you know anything I ever imagined. And then when we came home, we'd been gone for two days and they, you know you're just, you're worn out emotionally. And they--one thing I should also say, they had each teacher get up and give a talk about their life and other students did the same thing. And their talk would end and begin with a song and then it would, they would tell you things that you just, no teacher had ever told you before about, you know things that had happened to them or what have you. And you know from one teacher telling us how her sister was raped and killed you know all sorts of things. So again it's just emotionally, emotionally draining. And basically them trying to prove to us, life is just hard. There are things that are beyond your control. You got to pick yourself up. You're a good person. You have to strive to continue to be a good person, that sort of thing, that kind of message. We come home and they say you know we got to pick up all of your stuff in the library. The library at Ignatius is at the top of the building. You walk into the room and they had the music playing from someone's lecture and your entire family there to pick you up. It's like you know, and you walk in and they're all just clapping for you cause they know you'd gone through this like really emotional experience and so then everyone starts crying. I mean just like, it's just this you know well of tears, buckets, buckets, buckets, and just amazing. And then to do that in high school, that's a very significant memory that I have from Ignatius, significantly--significant. Story_ID: 179644 Speaker 1: So do you think that was representative of that school or their approach to teaching or influenced by the Catholic faith? I mean-- Speaker 2: Oh I think absolutely all of the above. I mean ethics and compassion and you know the motto of Saint Ignatius [College Prep, Chicago, Illinois] is men and women in the service of others. So it was all about how you could be a better person. And you know yeah, biology and math were a part of that in terms of challenging your mind. But there was more that they asked us to challenge than just our intellectual capability. And that was something that I think was a wonderful, amazing thing. I'm really grateful to have had that experience. Story_ID: 179449 Speaker 1: I want to ask you at Saint Ignatius [College Prep, Chicago, Illinois], what else was forming you as a person and what were you thinking that you wanted to do? Speaker 2: I was thinking a lot during that period about--I was asking myself a lot of life questions, you know what kind of career do I want to do? What kind of person do I want to be? And then I was also thinking a lot about Ignatius really instilled in me this idea of how was I going to help other people. And so those were some of the--you know as I was sort of forming my ideas there were those three buckets that I was thinking about. Speaker 1: Now are you aware at this point Mellody in your life, are you aware of things outside of, I mean in the outside, I mean are there people-- Speaker 2: News? Speaker 1: News, events-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what's happening in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't know, you know I'm not a person who grew up in any kind of social--you know I didn't grow up in Chicago society. My mother [Dorothy Brown] was a working mom, you know really working hard to make ends meet. I was not a part of Chicago's corporate community. I wasn't the child of someone. It was nothing like that. But I was a reader and I watched the news. I actually was--it's like the things you remember that I just, you know are all coming back to me. I used to collect newspapers from all over the world. Not--and they weren't places that I'd ever been but anyone who went on a trip I would say will you please bring me a newspaper from wherever you are going? And I had this huge stack which you could imagine is like not the most attractive thing. But one day one of my sisters threw them away, and I was devastated. And I ran away that day to the laundry chute to the room where they--actually where the garbage disposal was. And I was like I don't care if they never find me because I was just so upset that she threw away--and I remember being so proud. I had like papers from England and papers--the Miami Herald and all these things. And whenever my friends took trips because I didn't take trips. We didn't have that kind of existence. Whenever my friends took trips I'd say would you bring me back a newspaper and I'd read about what was going on in the local community. And I started doing that probably when I was like third grade and I would do it all the way through grade school. Speaker 1: Were there places that you thought you really wanted to go one day? Speaker 2: I wanted to go everywhere. I was like--still do want to go everywhere. It's on the list. I just started cross things off the list. And I go with or without people. I take a lot of trips alone. Speaker 1: Now you were--now you're in high school in the early '80s, is that--? Speaker 2: Yeah, so 1983 I went to high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Michael Jackson was on top of the charts. Speaker 1: And were you aware of any other things politically or you're, you know observe--? Speaker 2: I was aware of like, I remember in high school it was [Chicago City] "Council Wars". And so you had [Edward "Ed"] Vrdolyak and one of Vrdolyak's children went to our school. And our school had a lot of politicians' kids, so I was very aware of like politically what was going on in Chicago, no question about that. And then I was also aware of--I was always just like really interested in world events, which is how I ended up majoring in international relations when I was in college. So I'd read about other places. Yeah, so I would think I was probably more than your normal kid in terms of I--my favorite television show when I was a child and till this day is 60 Minutes. And I thought like the--when I first met Diane Sawyer I nearly fell over because I was--you don't understand. You know you've been the person I've been watching thinking you're in all these exotic, unbelievable places answering questions. So I guess I was a little bit of a news junkie which is why Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] and our business is perfect for me because understanding news and information is such a big part of what we do, big. Story_ID: 179450 Speaker 1: And when you were--let me ask you about [Chicago City] "Council Wars" since you mentioned that. Were there any discussions about race or you know things like that at the school or--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --do you remember--? Speaker 2: [Saint] Ignatius [College Prep, Chicago, Illinois] had a lot of--they would throw us--the Jesuits are known for being sort of the politically incorrect priests, order of priests within the Catholic faith. And they would throw us these like misses, these like mind benders and then they would make us figure them out. And they would have us challenge each other in class and they'd have them all the time. I mean like all--this one I remember till this day, my religion teacher he said a woman, she's seventeen years old, she's walking down the street. She's abducted. No, I'm sorry. A woman, she's seventeen years old, she has mental problems. She's put in a mental institution, she's raped. Does she keep the child or do they abort the child. So we all sit there and we say they abort the child, there's no question about it. And he looks at us and he says you just killed me. And we were like, oh my god. And so any kind of like, where things weren't so clear, they would try to make us push ourselves harder to think about sort of repercussions of our views, so that we could think responsibly. Like they were giving us information but they wanted us to think responsibly about that information. So race, lots of discussions, lots of discussions around really controversial themes in the Catholic faith, euthanasia to abortion, to--and they which I really respect, it was like my upbringing at home even though on certain issues I told you my mother [Dorothy Brown] was absolutely non-negotiable around values. They sort of let us have our own opinion. It wasn't about indoctrinating us. It was like at least pushing us. If we had the view, we had to defend it constantly. And we might--and if we couldn't defend it and our thesis started to fall apart, perhaps they would change our perspective. But they weren't there to tell us what to think. So yes, all the controversial sub--they brought in during that council wars period [Edward "Ed"] Vrdolyak and his--the people who were running against him for mayor, the debate was at Saint Ignatius in our gymnasium when we were high school students. I mean it was amazing to get that kind of exposure. Story_ID: 179451 Speaker 1: And do you remember when Harold Washington was elected [mayor of Chicago, Illinois] the--were you aware of that? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you think anything particular about that as a young person? Speaker 2: I, you know what, the issue wasn't as clear to me now as it is--it--then as it was, as it is now, excuse me. My mother [Dorothy Brown] I remember her being, running around the house with her arms in the air and being so happy. Like that's my impression that night when they election results came out. You know there are certain moments in your life you remember where you were and I remember being at home and him being elected and her running around, you know saying like oh my god, this is so important and such a big deal. And me not truly understanding how big a deal it was until later. And I was in college when he died and I remember being really removed from Chicago [Illinois] then and not really sort of understanding his death so much. Story_ID: 179452 Speaker 1: Now how did you end up going to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]? What was, what sort of was that decision--? Speaker 2: Gosh, there's always a story. So, I apply to college and-- Speaker 1: It's always assumed you were going to college right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. No, no, no. This is the neurotic Mellody. The six year old knew what Ivy League schools were. Never had a family member go to an Ivy League school, just knew. From when I was a little kid I used to say to my mother [Dorothy Brown], I'm going to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And she'd be like, where do you even get this from? It's like, it's a good school. That's where I'm going to college. So we go on a college trip when I was in high school and I remember that was a big deal. We--it was just you know like really expensive but I had to go and walk around the place to decide. So my best friends from high school went with us and one of my sisters and my mother. And our first stop was Princeton. And I was like oh this is nice but it was the first place I'd ever been. I was like oh it's nice. Then we went to Yale and we were like, no. And I had thought my whole life I was going to Yale but it just didn't feel right. Then we went to Boston [Massachusetts] and we went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I loved Harvard. I was like oh this is great. My mother loved Harvard. Loved Harvard and I still joke every black mother wants their kid to go to Harvard. So I apply to colleges and I remember so typical, I remember saying to my mother one day, what if I don't get in to a college? What could I do with myself? I mean like I could work in McDonald's. I could go to Europe or something like that and work in a McDonald's. Like I'm saying all these things and she's like Mellody, you're going to college. You're going to get in. I was like, you know you don't understand how competitive it was. Because I had assumed my mother knew nothing, right. And I was like, you know what like 15 percent of the people who apply to this school get in. They're really smart, smarter than me. So--oh and we went to Columbia [University, New York, New York] where she would not let me get out of the cab. She's like no, we're not going to Columbia. And this is where like her absolute came out. She's like there's no way you're going to Columbia so you're not even going to the interview. This is will be a knock down, drag out fight. And looking at it, you know I wasn't particularly moved so I was like okay, we closed the cab door and left. So I got into Princeton and Harvard. That's--those were the two places I applied. I applied to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. I applied to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] because Boston was feeling like a city that I would like to be in and I applied to Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.]. So pretty much I got in everywhere, I did. And I'm thinking I'm going to Harvard. I was like I'm just going to go to Harvard. My mother is saying things like everyone knows what Harvard University is. You could be anywhere in the world. It's like Coca-Cola, people know Harvard. So I say I'm going to Harvard and they had the dinners or parties for the new admitted students and Princeton sent me a notice about theirs. So I said--it was at the Chicago Yacht Club [Chicago, Illinois] and I was like why not? I should just go and see what it's like but I'm going to Harvard. So we get to the party and I'm at a table. Rick Rosenthal from [WGN] Channel 9 [Chicago, Illinois] is the emcee. He gets up and he starts talking about Princeton. He says how he was not a great student. He really didn't take it seriously until he graduated and his father came up to him and he gave him a box and he opened the box and it had his Princeton ring in it. And he still wears it to this day and he's start--he's realized the gift that his father had given him and he starts crying at the podium. And we're all like, I mean this is like the news guy from WGN, you know who's like in his fifties, just broken up. I mean not like a little sniffle, like choked up, can't talk kind of thing. Story_ID: 179453 Speaker 1: So I'm at my table. My brother-in-law went with me to the party cause I had no--I was like scrambling for an adult for these things. So we get to the--we're sitting down having the dinner and this Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] alum is sitting across from me. His name is Richard Missner, he's the class of '65 [1965]. And so he says, gosh it's so exciting you're going to Princeton. And I look at him and I'm like I'm not going to Princeton. And he says, why are you here? I said I don't know, I just thought it would be like a good experience to see but I'm going to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So he says--and if you knew him you'd understand him. He says, but at the time this was very odd. He said everyone get up, grab your napkin and your plate. This is in the middle of a sit down dinner. So we're like what are you talking about? And he's like--there are other adults at the table with their kids. So we all stand up and he says you move there, you move there, you move there and all of this is so that he can sit next to me. So he sits down and he says, "now I'm going to tell you why you're making the biggest mistake of your life." And I said what? And he says, "I went to Harvard for graduate school. I went to Princeton for undergraduate and I even went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for a master's [degree]. I've been to a lot of schools and you should go to Princeton." So I said no, I'm going to Harvard. I was like, my mother [Dorothy Brown] really wants me to go to Harvard and it's a world class university, you know what I'm saying--all of her-"everyone knows it wherever you go." Which usually I wasn't the one to quote my mother but in this situation I thought she had some good lines. So he says, you have to go to Princeton. That's where you have to go to school. That's where you should go to school. You'll love it. It's the right place for you. And he asked me like a thousand questions, almost like an interview. And he then says, you have to go to Princeton. So the dinner's over. I'm like oh it was so nice to meet you, you know being gracious and thank you for taking time. I say goodbye to him fully intending to go to Princeton. Now I only have like a couple of weeks to--fully intending to go to Harvard. I only have a couple of weeks before I have to accept and the next day the phone rings, it's him. And I'm like--he's like "this is Richard Missner. I sat next to you last night and I wanted to call you and see if you've made a decision." I was like yeah, you're great but I'm going to Harvard. He says, "you've got to go to Princeton." So he goes through this whole thing again and I'm like "thanks a lot, talk to you later." I hang up. Next day, he calls. He's like "this is Richard. What are you going to do?" It's like, "I'm going to Harvard." He goes through his whole thing. I hang up. Next day he calls. He says, "I need you to come to breakfast with me tomorrow." I'm in high school and I'm like okay. He said "but you're going to have to miss school in the morning for a part of it." I was like, "let me ask my mom." I go and ask my mom. Don't ask me what was going on? She was like okay. So he says meet me at the University Club [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. I'd never been there before. And he said I want to go--take you to a small breakfast. I was like okay, fine. So I get into the room and it is six Chicago [Illinois] businessmen very well-known including [HM] John Rogers [Jr.] and Senator Bill Bradley and me. So now I'm like deer in headlights, like totally like don't know what to do at all. One table, that's it. So Bill Bradley sees that I'm like a little uncomfortable so we all sit down and they must be thinking like why is Richard bringing this kid to breakfast right? We sit down and Bill Bradley says--and I don't know that he's like a Rhodes scholar and a Hall Of Fame basketball player and I don't know that he's like--I know being a senator is important but I don't really grasp how important he is but I know I'm in a room with very important people. And in hindsight looking back, John [H.] Bryan the head of Sara Lee [Corporation, Downers Grove, Illinois] was there and [James] Jim Crown from the [Henry] Crown [and Company, Chicago, Illinois] family, like I remember even though I had no idea who these people were at the time but I remember thinking these people are not regular people. So Bill Bradley says I don't want to talk to the rest of these people, I know everything there is to know about them. They're really not that interesting. But you are like a whole 'nother ball of wax because I haven't talked to a high school student in a long time. So tell me what high school was like. So I look at him and now it's like E.F. Hutton talks, everyone at the table stops talking and I'm like well... And he's like what are you worried about? And I remember at that time I was like, I worry about nuclear war. I was like you know cause it was [Ronald] Reagan and all those issues around the Cold War. I was like we're going to die of nuclear war and there's going to be a fallout and it's going to be horrible. He's like what else, you know and he's sort of like started having me talk about all these things. So say goodbye to everyone. I go to school, Richard calls me the next day and he says this is Richard. What are you going to do? I said, I'm going to Princeton. And I declined Harvard and went to Princeton. Speaker 2: Did you discuss it with your mother? Speaker 1: No. I mean I told her I was going to Princeton after that and she didn't, she--she did a little bit of her you know Harvard is such a great school. Boston's [Massachusetts] more like Chicago. Princeton is in the suburbs. You've never really been in a suburban setting. But then it was again one of those things where she knew I'd already made up the--made my mind up and she wanted me just to be happy. So she was like okay you're going to Princeton. Story_ID: 179454 Speaker 1: What were your friends doing? You said you had a best friend, what was she--was she going off to school too? Speaker 2: Um-hmm, she went to Swarthmore [College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] but she only stayed there for a year. She went to a different school actually. She went to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] for high school. So she was my best friend but she didn't go to my school. Speaker 1: Now so you go off to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and what is that experience cause really your experience is Chicago [Illinois] at that point. Speaker 2: Only Chicago. I'd only ever been to Florida once to Disney World. Okay, I remember this. My mother [Dorothy Brown] drops me off and I was in a single. I didn't have a roommate and that was on purpose because they ask you your preference. And my mother was like you make friends fine. The downside of having a roommate that you don't like versus the downside of you just having to force yourself to make friends seems to me to be an easy solution. Go for the single. I did. That logic seemed totally fine to me. But when you have a single and your mother drops you off, my mother stayed for like ten minutes, literally. She got me in the dorm, she went downstairs to use the bathroom and she said this is place is despicable because the bathroom didn't have stalls to the doors. They had shower curtains that were just like "disease sheets" we called them. And she was like oh I can't even believe how much this place costs for the dump that it is, which she thought the campus was pretty. And she literally she's like okay, gotta go. And I was like aren't you going to stay for a little bit? But this was so her, like she just would throw you in. She's like no. What should I stay for? Why? You got stuff to do. I got stuff to do. I'm going back. So she literally just turned and walked out. And didn't like do the let's get your room ready, let's unpack, nothing. She was like, see ya. So we--I remember that first minute the door shuts and you're in a single. Like there's no one for you to talk to. So I start unpacking and I open, leave my door open so that at least when other people are unpacking I could at least say hi to them as they're walking in. And I remember when I got there just that idea of I was never--except for that initial moment of like oh my god she's leaving me here by myself and not like trying to ease me into it, I was never homesick. I wasn't like one of these people who was like I hate it here. Like I didn't have any of that kind of anxiety and I just sort of just like dove right in. And my initial impressions was that the world was so much bigger than I thought and that people had had so many experiences and that their experiences had no correlation to wealth. And that there were people who were just adventurous and they figured out a way to make things happen and I wanted to be like those people. And I remember meeting people I couldn't how wealthy they were. I just, I was in shock you know. They'd helicopter to New York [New York] or I remember once with my, one of the guys from my hallway became my best friend freshman year and he was from Texas. And he has a house in Aspen [Colorado]. He had a house in River Oaks, Texas and right outside of Houston [Texas]. And we went to New York to go shopping and he went to Ralph Lauren and spent $4,000 and I was like, I had never--like there was so much stuff there was like--like there were boxes of clothes coming to Princeton. And he's like I need clothes for the winter. And I was like something I had never--we were eighteen. And then also I met people who came from like really tough situations and had just--they were amazing, really tough situations where you're just like oh my god this is just you know--people struggling with their sexual orientation. People--just things that just made the world seem so much bigger and more interesting to me-- Story_ID: 179455 Speaker 1: --Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] was like--that was where I think I came into myself was college. I felt very comfortable with myself at Princeton. I felt very comfortable with my decisions as to before that I just felt a lot of anxiety and I felt like I had been waiting for Princeton my whole life basically. And initially, my very first test was in advanced biology because I for some god awful reason took a more advanced class than I needed to. And I got the lowest grade in the entire class out of 300 people because I read the question wrong. And at Princeton you're on an honor code. Your test might be three hours with just two questions. And the professor leaves the room and I did not understand this question and till this day I remember it was about squirrels mating and there were black squirrels and gray squirrels and they ended up having black and gray squirrels and I thought the squirrels were spotted. I was like we never covered spotted squirrels in any of our classes. But it was that some squirrels were black and some squirrels were gray which is a very simple, you know, thing. I panic on this test, I mean panic, three hours, panic where I can't even read the second question cause I'm so undone, I mean hyperventilating, the whole thing. At Princeton they didn't put your name on your grade but they would give all the grades in the class with your social security number. And the--I got a D minus out of 200 people, 300 people in the class. And it was ranked according to--somehow it was shown by your social security number and the other way it was shown by your grade so it was like hard to find yourself but then I remember looking and seeing that I was the last one when it was posted. And I became for about three days, abject misery. I remember calling my mother and I said I'm not going to make it at Princeton. It's just, it's--the school is too hard for me. The people here are too smart. I'm not good enough to be here. I'm going to need to come home. It's not going to work out. I really am sorry. You know, I thought I was prepared but I'm not. And I went into my room and stayed underneath the covers for like a day. One of my roommates, they weren't really roommates but we called all the people lived on the floor with us cause they had singles. One of the person in another single, her parents were there from Atlanta [Georgia] for the weekend and her father comes into my room and he's like, we're going out to dinner. You want to come? You know they have the Atlanta accent. I said no, I'm staying here. He says "what's wrong with you?" And I said "I'm not smart. I failed my test." And he's like "life will be fine Mellody. You'll be fine. You'll be fine." And I wouldn't go out to dinner with them and I remember sort of you know taking the rest of the night to go inside of myself and say okay how are you going to fix this? So I went to see the teacher the next day and I said extra credit. I'll do whatever. I'll live in the lab. Show me how to turn this around, cause you only get two shots. You know your--three shots, your lab work, semi--the mid-semester test and then the final, that's it. And so I just basically lived with this teacher's aide and decided I had to turn this biology test--grade around and it all ended up working out, but it was very, very funny. That was my initial start at Princeton. Story_ID: 179456 Speaker 1: Now what made you decide on international relations? Did you come in thinking that at that point or when did that happen? Speaker 2: I came in thinking that yeah. I had applied to Georgetown [University] School [of] Foreign Service [Washington, D.C.] for that reason as well. I just wanted a global perspective. I was just always interested in the rest of the world. And I ended up doing my senior thesis work on South Africa and specifically I focused on children and I focused on the politicization of black children in South Africa which is amazing to study kids and how they were affected by the system and compare them to U.S. Speaker 1: Did you spend time abroad? Speaker 2: I went to South Africa-- Speaker 1: You did? Speaker 2: --for my--actually I went to South Africa my senior year, not for my thesis but I was what's called a Task Force Leader for the junior kids, junior class where they have like a student who is a teaching assistant. And that class went to South Africa and I went with them. Speaker 1: And you were there for how long? Speaker 2: I stayed for three weeks, almost a month. Speaker 1: Okay. And so now was-- Speaker 2: My mother [Dorothy Brown] did not like that. Speaker 1: She didn't. Speaker 2: And she wouldn't give any money for me to go. Speaker 1: Why, cause she was--? Speaker 2: She thought it was unsafe. So I had to go to the teacher which I did, and the head of the Woodrow Wilson School [of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] who is--was Henry Bienen who is now the head of Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. And I said, I need the money to go to South Africa and I can't get it from anywhere. And you know the Woodrow Wilson School has this huge endowment and they ended up paying for me to go which was great. Speaker 1: Did anything was particularly striking about that experience? Speaker 2: Everything was striking about that experience, everything. It was very disconcerting and that's where like all of the sort of injustices sort of came to life for me because you just saw the extremes were so extreme. And the situation was so horrible and it was so clear that it was just wrong. I mean just everything about it was wrong. And having--being a spectator of that was something. I just remember when I first went, flying there I was just totally undone. Like I thought you know what if they're mean to me when I get there, that sort of thing although they were very perceptive about Americans right off. They could just sort of look at you and tell if you were an American. And I was traveling with a U.S. ambassador so we had a lot of special privileges. He was our professor. But when I got there everything was startling, everything. We went to a place, we danced and people had never seen black kids dance with white kids but they were my friends from college. We went--we met Mandela [Nelson Mandela, former South African president and anti-apartheid activist] in the airport by accident. We were flying from Cape Town [South Africa] to Johannesburg [South Africa]--Johannesburg to Cape Town and Cape Town was fogged in and so they grounded all the flights. It was six in the morning. There was no one in this little Cape Town airport. We were sitting just sort of killing time and it must have been--our flight was at six and we must have been there at five because you figure we've got this huge group, there were twelve of us. And I look up and all of a sudden I'm like, Nelson Mandela is walking towards us and he was getting off of a private plane. And it was like there's this haze. And I was like maybe I'm just really tired. And he started walking closer and closer and I said to our teacher and our--my friends, I was like Nelson Mandela is walking towards us. And so he was with one aide. It was before he was president and he walks into the airport and he's grounded as well and he was flying to Cape Town. And so we, I mean like, a rock star, we immediately run to him, right? And we're like, you know we're literally sitting there. I till this day remember my knees shaking up and down where I could feel them shaking and I sort of remember just feeling really teary like I didn't know why I wanted to cry but I just did because I knew I was like looking in the face of history. And he said what are you doing here? And we said we're writing about your country and we're studying it. And he says well what can we do to be better? And he said well why don't I sit down with you for a few minutes 'cause I have to wait too and maybe you'll have some ideas. And he knew Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and he said--and he was just the nicest man. And then he got up and he said I can't wait to go back to the office and tell everyone who I met. And we were like, you got to be joking like so, so thoughtful and made it all about us. And we, I mean we took pictures with him, the whole thing, like the whole you know kit and kaboodle. And like it was, like your heart was racing. You're, sitting, talking to Nelson and I was like I guess if [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] were alive and I bumped into him at the airport this is what it would feel like. It felt extraordinary. And he was so kind and gentle, I couldn't believe how gentle. I mean he was like a gentle man in the true definition of the word and you could tell he was very strong but he was so, I mean he spoke in a whisper as many South Africans do. And you just sat there and you said I'm in awe. I mean total. Like till this day I can't even believe that I sat with him. I was in awe. And I just knew he had done so much I had no excuses. You know he had overcome--like if we couldn't do better with all that we had been given, all the education, everything else, what a travesty that would be, horrible. So anyway, that's my Mandela story. Story_ID: 179457 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer. And today's date is February 10, 2004. If you can state your name for us and spell it. Speaker 2: My name is Mellody Hobson, M-E-L-L-O-D-Y H-O-B as in boy, S-O-N. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: We're at Ariel Capital Management [later Ariel Investments] which is in Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 179458 Speaker 1: So can you talk about you know after you left, you know South Africa and this was a trip that your mother [Dorothy Brown] didn't you know really want you to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to come to? And it was emotionally you know emotionally I don't want to call--but it was emotional trip for you? Speaker 2: Yes. So as the trip was winding down I guess I would say it--I just thought it was a very eye opening experience. It was my only--I had read a lot about the civil rights movement. I had read a lot about [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], Malcolm X, Stokely Carmichael [later, Kwame Ture], all of these people and I think that being in South Africa made me feel like or simulate in some small way what the U.S. Civil Rights Movement was about, even though our teachers at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] were always very quick to point out that the struggles of African Americans in the U.S. was very different than the struggles for Africans in South African, Black Africans in South Africa. And specifically they always told us that Black Africans in South Africa would be more akin to our Native Americans in the U.S., because it was their country and then other people came in. So to the extent that you could make the comparison of people struggling and fighting for freedom and justice, I felt that I had a firsthand experience with it and I found it to be life changing. Speaker 1: Okay. And in what way Mellody? Speaker 2: I think I became much more cognizant of injustice. I mean I just--it wasn't that I didn't see it before, I just felt it much differently afterwards. And I had always been one of these people that felt that if you worked really hard, good things would happen to you and things like that. And then being there and then coming back to Chicago [Illinois] and seeing all sorts of people who worked hard and tried and did the best that they could and still didn't get the same opportunity, that it really shook some of my basic foundations and what I thought sort of the American work ethic in America was all about. I think it was an important thing and I think it was again, life altering. Speaker 1: So now when you--you went there what year? Your--what year in school was this? Speaker 2: I went to South Africa in 1991 which was the year that [Nelson] Mandela was released from prison. Speaker 1: Okay. And that was--you graduated though in--? Speaker 2: 1991. Speaker 1: 1991, so that was your last year. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: So-(simultaneous) Story_ID: 179459 Speaker 1: What are you thinking you're going to do at this point? Speaker 2: I knew I was coming to work in business and I knew that I was specifically going to be working at Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois]. I had had the very unique opportunity to work at the firm while in college as a summer intern. And [HM] John Rogers [Jr.], our chairman, had pursued me after that point and said there's a job available for you at any time you're ready to go. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that summer experience that you had here? You talked about how you first met him and the recruitment and how people sort of played a match and how that resulted in you going to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]. But let's talk about that summer here. Speaker 2: The summer here was great. It was-- Speaker 1: And give the year. Speaker 2: The year was 1989 and I was between my sophomore and junior year at Princeton and I had the opportunity come and work at Ariel and specifically worked for John who then held the title of president. And my job was very undefined and it was more or less doing whatever he needed to get done, special projects, correspondence, tagging along on things. You name it I did it in the very traditional sense of an intern. I remember one day he came and he said I lost my key ring. Will you go and get me one? I remember one day he came in and said you know I need to write a letter to this, that or the other person on whatever issue and I would sit and draft these letters and come back to him again and again and again and ask him to, you know if it was the right tone or the idea was exactly how he wanted to convey it. I worked on a big event that he wanted to have for new--for the people who helped recruit students for Princeton, which was a debacle. He told me to do an event for all of these recruiters. There were about thirty of them in Chicago [Illinois] and he said Mellody, there's a new restaurant, I think it's called Bice [now closed, Chicago, Illinois]. Do it at Bice. So I said okay I'll do it at Bice so I go to Bice and this is like my first event. I pick out the menu, the whole thing. You know it turns out Bice was a fancy restaurant. So after the whole thing was over, John--the bill comes and it was like, I want to say $2,000 and John nearly falls out of his chair. He was like, I was thinking like you know hamburgers, which was very funny because I'm not a person who likes fancy food at all. I like very, very simple food. But it was just, I guess I got--the moment took ahold of me and I went a little bit too far. But all of the people from Princeton thought it was the most generous, wonderful, best event that they had been to in a long time. So it was fun. Speaker 1: And you developed a reputation as a great event planner? Is this the--? Speaker 2: Well you know it's very funny. Our joke around here is if we weren't in the money management business we could be concierges, we could do event planning, personal shopping, you name it. We sort of have all those functions-- Story_ID: 179460 Speaker 1: Tell me what was Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois]? Who was here at the time? What was the firm? Speaker 2: Small, the firm was very small. The firm at the time I was here this--that summer probably managed I want to say somewhere in the neighborhood of $1.5 billion. Maybe that summer there were fifteen people working at Ariel, fourteen, fifteen people at the most. And it was very--it was fledgling but [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] had a stellar reputation particularly amongst people in Chicago [Illinois], just someone who was thought of as being a wunderkind, that he was very smart, very focused, had an original idea, had original investment strategy and that was very much how I thought of him and how he was known even before the firm had really gained any prominence. It had you know the "Slow and Steady Wins the Race" theme and the "Patient Investor" newsletter. So the early underpinnings of the brand were starting to be formed and it was really great to see that in that early formation of the firm. At that point the firm was six years old. So it was still by any accounts, in its infancy. Speaker 1: But it had passed one, it had passed several watermarks? Speaker 2: Yes. You know it had been, you know it wasn't in a situation of most businesses failing in the first year. We had real traction. We were profitable. We had real clients and the firm was building. We had a track record which is really important in our business. So all of those things yes were there but that is not to say the future was assured by any stretch of the imagination because everyday was continuing to prove yourself, continuing to establish yourself and there was always the opportunity reputationally to have a tremendous setback if you weren't fastidious about the management of the business and the projection of the brand and the reputation. Speaker 1: Now what--describe who was here at the time. Who were the key people within the firm and what was--and you're an intern at this point so I mean what was that, you know experience, like and how many other interns were there? But let's start with who was here? Speaker 2: Who was here, we had-- Speaker 1: The critical people. Speaker 2: The key people, many of whom are still here. John's assistant Lynn Wyatt was here at the time. I sat next to her in a little cubicle that summer. Our trader, Gary Leon was here, he's the longest running Ariel employee. He's been here for over twenty years and our firm is only twenty-one years old. There were just a number of people who were here who were just in the trenches doing the work every single day that you know a lot of people who know about Ariel maybe don't know that our, a core part of what makes Ariel what it is and who are the lifeblood, I call them the heart of the firm, the soul of the firm. It was really, just a really industrious, hardworking, very young group, very scrappy, very determined. Just, you know fun. It was truly entrepreneurship, you know, in plain view. I mean there was no question about it. Speaker 1: And what about--so how many other interns were there? Speaker 2: Oh, how many other interns. That summer I think there were three of us. So-- Speaker 1: Did anyone end up here besides you? Speaker 2: That summer, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. And we do have one other intern from later years who now works at Ariel. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179461 Speaker 1: You said--now after your--after that year that was the year between your sophomore and junior year. The junior, what about between junior and senior year? Speaker 2: Junior and--between junior and senior year, I went and worked at T. Rowe Price Associates [Baltimore, Maryland] and there I worked for a portfolio manager named Jack [John] Laporte who manages a very famous fund called the New Horizons Fund. And it's funny, I got my job at T. Rowe Price as a result of Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] being a very large shareholder in T. Rowe Price which is one of the most prominent mutual fund companies in America. And [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.], approaching this portfolio manager who owned some of the same stocks that we do at Ariel or did at the same and saying to him, I've got this terrific intern at Ariel as John told me, as reported back to me by John. She would be great at T. Rowe Price. And John always says that his motive was to get my trained by T. Rowe Price so that by the time I came back to Ariel, I will have had that experience of working within T. Rowe Price and seeing how a big mutual fund operation works. Speaker 1: And how did that experience differ for you? Speaker 2: It was night and day but not because it wasn't as rewarding and exciting. It was just small company, fifteen-ish people; big company hundreds of people. Small company very young scrappy very diverse; big company much more seasoned leadership less diversity, very established. Small company, you're working around the clock people do whatever it takes; big company, well-defined roles, very focused as opposed to jacks-of-all-trade, which are very common when a company is new and really sort of getting its traction. But still the actual work was very interesting, different. I was in the research department so it was working in the stock picking area, in the study of the portfolio, its results, how--why we were doing well, why we weren't doing well. I was the first undergraduate intern they had ever hired. They'd only ever hired graduate students to work at T. Rowe Price so they were--I was a little bit of a fish out of water in their minds but I loved the work and I worked really hard at it. Story_ID: 179462 Speaker 1: Were you, at that point, sort of committed to having a career in the financial services industry? I mean were you--was that what you were thinking because I'm still trying to juxtapose this international relations, you know, major. Speaker 2: Well after Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] I knew, I always knew I was going to work in business. After Ariel I knew I was now going to work in the investment management business. I actually found it very easy to reconcile my study of international relations with my work in investment management because a big part of my studies were economics-related. I did a lot of work--I took a lot of math when I was at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]. For a while I toyed with being a math major and the whole thesis of international relations and public policy at Princeton is problem solving and practical applications to major world events which is no different than running a business everyday, thinking about portfolios, thinking about having to be fast on your feet, thinking about practical solutions as opposed to pie-in-the-sky kind of solutions. And then we all know, business is very political. So in public policy, you have you know political situations you have to deal with but in business you have the exact same thing. And so to me, there were a lot of lessons, there was a lot of symmetry there and I felt very prepared to tackle all that came that was unexpected in my business life. And as I tell people who work at Ariel all the time, the one thing you have to keep an eye on particularly when you're an entrepreneur, there's no manual. And the one thing that you study in international relations and public policy, there is no manual. How do you recreate South Africa in a post-apartheid environment? You know there's no book you can go to and just look it up. Story_ID: 179463 Speaker 1: You know [HM] John's [Rogers, Jr.] recruited you. You know you're coming here [Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois]. What is your position when you start? Speaker 2: My title was marketing and client service, that's it. My position was to work on special projects in the marketing department specifically projects related to the growth of our mutual funds. At that time our mutual funds were sold by broker dealers around the country and John's goal was for me to know the most significant sellers of our mutual funds like the back of my hand. Speaker 1: And so when did you start? So was someone, did you report to someone at (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes, I reported to a director of research--director of marketing excuse me, whose name was Darice Wright [ph.]. Speaker 1: And so what were you setting apart because this was still--and that whole thing, Darice had been, she had been here since the--? Speaker 2: She had been here from the early beginnings of Ariel. Speaker 1: --early beginnings, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, not the very beginning but certainly she had been here for a number of years. And by that time I should note I was the, I think I was the eighteenth employee of the firm at that point. Speaker 1: So now what was the plan and what did you come into and what were those years of the firm, you know, just to give some context with it? Speaker 2: What was the plan? The plan was to grow the mutual fund business. The plan was to establish Ariel as a leader in small and mid-cap value investing, which is still the plan. And the focus that I had was to help in the branding of the firm. Speaker 1: And so tell us about what plans got put in place to do that because this is 1991, '92 [1992] that we're moving into. And what were the things--I--is--was it around this time that you start doing the, you know, the ad campaigns and I know there had been--but I remember like the Northern Trust [Corporation, Chicago, Illinois] ads and I mean there were--I saw more ads coming out. Speaker 2: The ads really started to come in, they trickled out then, trickled. We had a partner in our mutual funds at that point called the Calvert Group [Ltd., Bethesda, Maryland]. Our funds were called the Calvert Ariel Funds. They were responsible for all the distribution. We were responsible for all the stock picking. My job was to be a liaison between Ariel and Calvert so (unclear) a real live person in our firm that would always be responsive and ready to answer any questions that they had. The plan was to try to continue to distinguish the Ariel strategy from all of the thousands of mutual funds out there so that included everything from advertising. That included the quarterly letters that we sent out to our clients that I would write with painstaking detail and really write in a way that would make them user-friendly and also make them something someone would look forward to reading, that would not be sort of the pablum that some people have really gotten used to about well the market went up this much and you know as a result interest rates did this and the dollar did this. We wrote stories about stocks, stories about our lives, stories about what affected us, stories about where our investment strategy was rooted. And as a result of that, the letters start to really gain a following. The strategy was also to reach out to the press to make sure they were aware of Ariel and what were all about, and so that meant everything from making sure to send them things that I thought would be of great interest to them, be aware of all of the mutual fund and business writers out there who wrote about the investment management field and personal finance, be aware of all the writers. If one of our stocks got taken over, I would make calls to the Wall Street Journal, the [Chicago] Sun-Times, the [Chicago] Tribune and say we own that stock. If you need anyone to comment on it, we'd be happy to comment on it for you. So the strategy was to get the Ariel name out there as much as possible. The strategy was also to be very focused in that effort. It wasn't a scatter-shot approach, it was a very, these reporters I need to know better. These sellers of the mutual funds I need to know better. These key influencers--at one point we decided all of the major black leadership in this country we wanted to go and see and let them know who Ariel was. We were not there to ask them for anything we just wanted to tell them our story, that was it. And when we'd read about any successful African American, we'd write them a letter. John and I would go in tow and we'd say we're not here for anything. If you have some advice for us that would be great, but we just want to tell you who we are and why we're trying to change the whole investment management industry for African American participation and not only on the business side of investment management but also the participation in terms of being investors-- Story_ID: 179464 Speaker 1: --Mellody what of those meetings stand out for you? Speaker 2: One that I remember vividly which actually I still get the joke and I'm seeing him on Thursday when I'm in New York [New York] was we went to see, [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] and I, [Richard] Dick Parsons when he was the head of Dime Savings Bank [of New York, New York, New York]. And we had read a story about Dick Parsons in Black Enterprise magazine. John's mother who had been in the Republican administration for various presidents had been aware of Dick Parsons and I remember we asked John's mother if she could put in a call to him so that we could meet him because he had been very involved in the Nelson Rockefeller administration. And John and I went to see him at Dime Bank. I remember one of the things from the article is that his favorite food was bacon which to me was just the funniest thing. And I remember meeting him and he's a giant. I mean he's so tall but he's not in any way heavy, he's a, you know a thin man. And I said well how can you eat all that bacon and look like this? And he just thought it was hysterical that that was like my takeaway from the article. And I remember us sitting down with him and just feeling like I had met someone special, like knowing it. When we walked out we were like just such a quality experience, such a quality discussion. He was very interested, so thoughtful, so encouraging and still is. I mean still just a terrific person. Story_ID: 179465 Speaker 1: Do you find--did you find things that were disappointing that you learned about--? Speaker 2: Oh sure. Speaker 1: Okay, can you talk a little bit about that? Speaker 2: I remember going to see one leader who was the son of someone very famous and just being--I was like, oh my god, I can't believe it. Like the person just--I don't want to say it was their own fault. They were just, we could not--they couldn't focus, they couldn't communicate, and it was all about them. And I remember thinking, oh my god, this is a great lesson on what not to be, and I remember thinking how sad it is that this person is this lacking in confidence because everyone comes with such a huge expectation of what they'll be like. I remember having another meeting with someone where they were very dismissive to us, very. And--including they got a call in the middle of the meeting and abruptly ended the meeting and said my assistant will show you out, like mid-sentence and this is someone we still see. And I remember thinking [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] and I, it was so, like we didn't even understand. We thought there was a mistake or something. And I remember us getting up and like kind of standing around the hallway thinking maybe we were going to be escorted back in a few minutes and they were like, no he's done. And I was just like oh my god. And we both laughed and it was again, note to self, never treat someone like that, never. There's no excuse for it, none whatso--it wasn't this is an emergency or please forgive me, or I'm so sorry to cut this short. It was, okay we're done now, thank you. Like we were in an audition for a movie role and the director just cuts you right off because you're not right for the part. So those were a couple that I just, I mean I'll never forget them. Story_ID: 179466 Speaker 1: Now we--I want to also put this in some historical context. This is--you--and to talk about what the challenges were from the firm's [Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] perspective even though you were doing well as a firm. You had, here you have the black community, the African American community that you are trying to educate, even among the higher echelons of that. And then you have the white community you know that you're approaching or your, you know the people who you want to you know manage their funds. And so I'm just wondering how you went about, you know, dealing with both of those you know separate communities because from a mutual fund perspective you know you're dealing with you know as everyone was trying to get the money of the average person, you know or the person (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes, exactly. Well "David versus Goliath" is the way that we characterized it. We were this speckle. I mean I called us a snowflake in the universe versus the giants that were out there, well-established brand names. We knew we couldn't spend against them in advertising or anything like that so the huge challenge was how to break through the noise and the clutter where again there were thousands of mutual funds. So that was the number one challenge. Secondly, there was this whole issue of wanting to educate our community, feeling a responsibility to educate our community about the importance of saving and investing, but at the same time not turning off the broader community to Ariel as an investment opportunity for them. One major black entrepreneur told us "you will never be successful if you market yourself as a black investment management firm." And we had no plans of doing that because one, that's just not how we think about defining success. We want to define ourselves around our investment strategy, not our color. But at the same time we knew that we wanted to do some targeted marketing at areas that we felt were one, untapped and desperately in need of our expertise so that we could help in the wealth creation of our community and ultimately the narrowing of the wealth gap that exists between black and white America. So there was no question about that. But that was a challenge trying to straddle that fine line that existed and talking to people that had never heard of you before, so that was hard. The other thing that was a challenge was the one thing about our business is, you can't control the stock market. So out of the gate in the early years of Ariel we did very, very well. And then there was a period in the mid-nineties, mid-nineties [1990s] where we had a terrible time and we lost half of our assets. We went from $2.2 billion down to $1.1 billion. That was enormously difficult and it was probably the hardest time in my professional career. You know the only good news out of that period is it happened to me very early and the other part of the good news there was as a result of having to have the stamina to survive people firing me basically everyday, firing our firm everyday or firing us through me, that the firm became my firm too. I fought for it so hard it became my child. And [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] always jokes, he's like I didn't think anyone could love Ariel more than me. And he's like and you are crazy, you do. And it was because of that period I was fighting for us so hard everyday that it was suddenly like in my blood. And there was, it--there was no way I was ever going to leave this place. I knew that at that time. I was defending it with such passion. Story_ID: 179467 Speaker 1: You came in, in 1991 and Darice [Wright] stayed how long? And then-- Speaker 2: I don't remember how many years she stayed. Speaker 1: --was it not, but was about two or three-- Speaker 2: She left after a few years, yeah. Speaker 1: Two, okay two or three. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And then did you move into her position? Speaker 2: Yes, I took-- Speaker 1: I just want to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she left and she started an art gallery. So she decided she no longer wanted to be in the business, which is not uncommon in the investment management business. It's such an intense effort. A lot of people opt out and do things totally different. Our head trader I remember left Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] after over a decade at the firm and opened up a children's bookstore. So that's not uncommon at all. Darice left, she started an art business and I was kind of the only person to pick from. And [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] says, well I guess you're director of marketing. And I remember at the time thinking wow, this is exciting but also at the same time thinking, oh my gosh, I better do a really good job. A lot is riding on this. Speaker 1: So you, with that you had worked with her. So what were the things that you wanted to accomplish at that time you know being sort of the director of marketing and not having--I mean what was your base of--? Speaker 2: I had a very, very, very simple strategy, excellence at everything. That was it. I didn't have any big, huge tagline or anything like that. I wanted the turtle to become known for excellence and that was it. And everything we did very much back to how my mother used to tell me as a kid, be the labor great or small, do it well or not at all. I would agonize over all sorts of decisions not in a way that would make me make the decision slowly but in a way that would make me always push everyone, is this good enough, could it be better? The other thing that I said then and I still say now, we should be able to put our name over anything that we produce at Ariel. And if another company could drop their name into our brochure, our office, our shareholder letter, whatever it is and people not think anything is odd about their name being there, it's not special enough and it's not Ariel. That anything that we do, when someone would try to put their name in it would be like why is this company stealing Ariel's whole motto or the way that they write about things or the way they do thing that it would be so clearly Ariel? Those were the things I was thinking about, but excellence was it. That I mean I would write our shareholder letters, John would joke it would be like I was giving birth. Like it would take me, I would do all-nighters at Ariel. A paragraph would take me three hours because I would sit and weigh every single word and think about how the context and how it could be interpreted. And I just spent so much time thinking about our reputation during that period and to me it was very simple. We wanted to be known as being the premier firm in our space, small and mid-cap value that was it. There was nothing pie-in-the-sky, gee whiz, no new widget, no newfangled idea here. It was just to be really, really good at what we did and how we articulated what we did. That was it. Speaker 1: Now in that whole process though, what was--was there anyone advising you or were you--was this a natural skill and talent? Speaker 2: Well I had a lot of help so there's no question. This was not a one-man band by any stretch of the imagination. First and foremost I had John to lean on all the time. He was so good and patient with me in those early years. I mean he gave so much of himself I can't, I still can't even get over how patient he was. He was excellent. And he would just, he would soothe me for lack of a better term. When I'd get myself all worked up he was this calming influence all the time. He would tell myself to give myself a break. He would be the first and still is-"you're better when you're rested. Sleep in today." And of course I could never do it. But he would just--it was having that voice of reason was incredibly helpful to me and still is. I mean he still serves that role for me. He knows how high strung I can get-- Story_ID: 179468 Speaker 1: So you were saying that-- Speaker 2: Who helped? Speaker 1: Right, who helped? Speaker 2: So outside of [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.], a host of other people were very supportive. John had given me such a good training ground for reaching out to smart people and getting their, seeking their advice and counsel and ultimately building relationships with them. And I remember at the time John made it very clear to me, he said you know when you meet new people, especially people that you think can be very thoughtful and helpful to you as you ponder problems and issues, you don't want to ask them for anything but advice, that's it. You're not there to ask them for their account. You're not there to ask them for anything but their advice because that would be way more valuable to you than any fees you're going to get off of business you actually get for them. Don't waste those chips. And so I had the opportunity and I still do very actively to reach out and build relationships with people who have been just gifts in my life, gifts. I think that's the only way that I can describe it. And there's a--I have a little Motley crew of them. John jokes with me all the time, of people that have been just tremendous. They've been tremendously successful in their own lives and they've just been very responsive to me personally. And I don't know why that is; I'm so grateful for it. I feel so lucky to have their friendship. But they've helped bring me along and they've given me those hard discussions those talking-tos when you need them. So it hasn't been all patting me on the back and telling me I'm terrific. Sometimes it's been, now I got to tell you something you don't want to hear about yourself. Hard stuff where you go away, you get a little weepy, you know. all those sort of things. So it hasn't always been about you know pumping up Mellody at all, sometimes very much taking me down a few notches. Story_ID: 179469 Speaker 1: Now Mellody in the whole, so you have this group of you know advisors that you had the lessons as [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] saying that you know build, basically build relationships with people. And in the process let's take us to nineteen--let's see nineteen--can you take us through the process here? Your process here at this firm [Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois], you know I mean the steps? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So you were you know Director of Marketing-- Speaker 2: So I was Director of Marketing, I was a Vice President at that point. Ended up being promoted next, I don't remember the year, to Senior Vice President. There'd only been I think at that point one other Senior Vice President at Ariel. And then from there my role started to change very dramatically. Speaker 1: When you became senior vice president? Speaker 2: No, just as--I was evolving. John had really turned to me as a go-to person to get things done on whatever topic. All--it could be everything from him having to write a recommendation for someone to us trying to figure out a complicated issue and benchmark ourselves to someone, to us studying an issue to something related to a philanthropic effort that John was having, fundraising. I was this sort of untitled Chief of Staff kind of person for John whose job was to figure things out. Find homes for where things would have solutions. Story_ID: 179470 Speaker 1: At the same time one of the major business decisions that we made at my very strong urging was we separated ourselves from the Calvert Group [Ltd., Bethesda, Maryland]. And this was unprecedented in the mutual fund industry for two operating mutual funds to be extracted out of an operating mutual fund family and to then stand on their own. It had never been done before. We bought out our freedom from the Calvert Group. We went to them through our board and said you know we think it might be better for the funds to be managed and marketed by one organization. The board of course having the ultimate responsibility to make that decision, the ultimate say in what would happen to the funds. They decided that bringing them and coordinating that effort all through Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] since we were the stock pickers and the fathers of the investment strategy made the most since. It was at this point 1994. At this point I was twenty-four years old and that summer, which was the--okay, the part performance period in pulling the funds out of Calvert happened at the exact same time. So we pulled away when we were entering a difficult performance cycle. So in the course of the summer we had $400 million in mutual fund assets at the time. In one summer we lost $100 million in assets. And every day [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] would say "I can't believe this is my whole life's work just gone," like just draining away. Every single day we'd see all these redemptions. And I went through this period that summer and I remember it like it was yesterday. I almost feel like I have odd flashbacks to it like a war veteran would have. That summer the only thing I could eat was Mrs. Field's mandarin orange muffins and I only ate one every single day. That was the only food I could keep down. And I, by the end of the summer I weighed like ninety pounds. I was so upset the whole time, I knew we were doing the right thing but I was just in such angst because it had been my idea and as we're losing all these assets, I knew it would work out eventually, but obviously you don't think about having the difficult performance period at the exact same time. And I'm just wondering, it's not a question of if, it's a question of when and I don't know when "when" is. And so just sort of getting through that period was all I could think to manage. And I remember during that period telling John, I said John--this was in, you know at this point it's like July. I said all we got to do is get to November. He says "well what's special about November?" I was like I think the worst will be over by November. So we get to November, "I said all we got to do is get to April." He's like "well what happens in April?" I'm like we just need a date to get to. If we survive to April, we've survived a few more months. So then he was like we got to April. We're still losing business. I was like John, all we got to do is get to November. He's like I'm really getting tired of these you know dates that you're just making up. And I was like all I--it's a question of longevity. Eventually the market will come back in our favor and we'll be fine. And then of course it's turning and you don't even know it. You--the performance starts to turn and because of the way performance looks where you have the periods that don't drop off yet, you're at an inflection point and you don't even realize it. And then suddenly you wake up and it's a year later from that November that I was looking forward to and the one year number looks terrific. So it was one of these things--but the three year number maybe still doesn't look so great. So it was one of these things where getting through that period was like the hardest time. We were still small. We were still trying to prove ourselves and the most important part of that time for me was learning which was something that I had--we reread everything. Every hero we have, we reread, every single one from Warren Buffet to [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. We were reading like crazy about you know having you know conviction and having patience and you know really believing in what you do. And I remember during that period the one thing I learned was that no matter how hard you work sometimes you cannot change what is going on and all you can do is wait. And there was nothing we could do but to wait for the stock market to recognize the values of the companies in our portfolio. Nothing. And all--we were like gerbils on a wheel but it wasn't getting us anywhere. But when you're feeling that down and out you need to be keeping yourself busy. And so leaving no stone unturned was certainly the mode that I was in. Calling big institutions and asking them for meetings when your numbers don't look so great and me saying when we would just get a meeting, not the client, just the meeting, the meeting was a reason to have a party. I'd run around the office when people would say they would just meet with us, I mean run like victory laps. Like we've got the meeting! And you would think we like, had just gotten a hundred million dollar account. And so it was making things into small victories that got us through that period which was great. And as I said I'm glad I had it then because now even though my office kind of calls me a depression baby. They say I'm you know like belt and suspenders about everything, very conservative in certain things, particularly as it relates to how we run our business and having plans in place where things don't go well, but the one thing that you know, I know from that period is if it happened again I know how to do it, like I could get through it. It will--you know managers come in and out of favor, it's inevitable that your style is going to be out of favor. But I know how strongly I believe in what we do. Story_ID: 179471 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the style though because it's the contrarian style, just talk about that in terms of the period you were in and maybe even the, you know the whole theory being tested. Speaker 2: Well the period we [Ariel Capital Management, later, Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] were in was a period when the stock market was rewarding the most expensive, most aggressive, fastest growing riskiest issues. Our strategy, conservative, low risk, quality, moderate growers not the people who were--we were never going for as Warrant Buffet says, home runs; singles and doubles; marathon, not a sprint. And so those kind of stocks just were left for dead. No one cared about them. Everyone loved technology. Everyone loved exactly what we didn't do or buy and yet we kept saying in stocks in our portfolio like Clorox Bleach, name a number two competitor. Who doesn't have it under their kitchen sink? You know interest rates go up or down that doesn't affect that you're going to buy bleach. These mundane, wonderful businesses that don't have to have a cure to cancer or what America is all about. And eventually America in terms of Wall Street will recognize the value that they have and come back to those stocks and ultimately as the market started to get more rational as you move towards the late '90s, [1990s], the mid to late '90s, [1990s], our type of stocks started to come back. Then we went to the bubble of EBay and Amazon.com and dot-coms in general and it was during that period that again we were tested. But we were, I remember a friend of mine sent me a baby dinosaur and he said, "That's what you are." They said you're stuck in like a whole nother time. People aren't going to make money the way you invest. If you don't buy the Internet stocks you guys are going to just be left in the dust. How sad that you're so young and don't understand and you're buying these boring businesses that no one cares about. You know, Clorox is never going to grow as fast as the Internet. And again we went and reread all the principles, we re--I remember an article we read by Warren Buffet where he said railroads revolutionized American business and if you had invested in a railroad company, you would never had made any money. The same is true of airplanes, the same is true of so many things. So yes the Internet was going to be something to revolutionize America but it doesn't necessarily mean it's a great investment. And so I have my baby dinosaur still on my desk as a reminder of why you don't buy into conventional thinking, why it's very, very important to be contrarian, to be willing to think independently and to go against the grain as long as it's founded in very rational decision making. Story_ID: 179472 Speaker 1: I want to go back to one point and that was the splitting of your mutual fund from Calvert [Group Ltd., Bethesda, Maryland] and why you said you know you knew you were taking a risk. You had, you know you had thought of the idea but how did it come about? What was the, you know the--? Speaker 2: Impetus? Speaker 1: Yeah the impetus because you were you know--here, the benefit was that here you were at the beginning a start up mutual fund and you were backed by--the benefit is that look here we are backed by the Calvert funds you know credible and all of that. So what was--why that decision? Speaker 2: The decision to split from Calvert was very simple. I felt very strongly that the only way to build a brand was to have one message and that the challenge that we had is when you have two companies you have two different messages and ultimately it leaves the consumer confused. So my idea was if we were going to really be able to preach patience to talk about the turtle, slow and steady wins the race, that had to be done with laser focus. And we couldn't have another company's own initiatives, own messages mixed in because it leaves the consumer with no set understanding of what they are buying. So I thought at the end of the day it was in the best interest of our shareholders so that they would know very clearly what they are investing in and what we as Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] stood for so that they could make a really good investment decision. Speaker 1: Now was Calvert's philosophy of investing also very different from Ariel's, I mean at the end of the day? Speaker 2: They, you know, they had different themes. They were known for socially responsible investing which was a part of our investment strategy but that wasn't--if you said to me, Mellody what do you want Ariel to be known for in one sentence? We would say value investing, small and medium sized companies. That's it. And Calvert would have had a different sentence. So one wasn't good or bad it was like morning people and night people. One isn't good or bad, they're just different. Story_ID: 179473 Speaker 1: Well what did Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] learn though from Calvert [Group Ltd., Bethesda, Maryland] in that you know that sort of partnership? How did--what did you learn about the mutual fund industry? Speaker 2: Well I mean the, you know I think the benefit was we learned the mutual fund business from being actively engaged in it and we would not have had that opportunity at the point that we entered that relationship on our own. When we started working with Calvert we managed a hundred million dollars. There was no way we could go off and start a public mutual fund at that point so that wasn't possible. We learned all the rules and regulations and all the things, this is such a highly regulated business. We learned so much during that period and we also learned the importance, we learned a lot from the companies in our own portfolio. What we do at Ariel is we buy companies that have very strong brands or franchises that are the number one or number two at what they do, i.e., you can't name a number two competitor to Clorox. So watching those companies we would take lessons back and say look at how McCormick spice [McCormick & Company] is so successful. Look at how McCormick is so successful--I mean Clorox is so successful. Dial soap, you name it. That--those are the lessons we were bringing back and saying we want to be as well run as well of a brand, as well, as so clearly understood as these giants in American industry that happen to be small companies. Clorox Bleach is not Coca-Cola. McCormick Spices is not Microsoft. So we wanted to have that same sort of brand and we were learned a lot not only from Calvert, not only from studying our competition in the mutual fund industry but also from looking at the companies that we invest in. Story_ID: 179474 Speaker 1: During this time when you are, you've branched off, enduring the difficult time period you talked about, were there other, any other lessons learned during that period and what do you think, you said we focused, you know I focused with a laser focus you know on the goal and sort of sustaining. But were there other things that happened during that time, seeds planted and things that were very critical to success one--that once the success day came around? Speaker 2: There were so many lessons. That, those few years I think became the bible for the rest of my life. And there were a ton of examples. For instance, you go into a really tough client meeting, tough. Clients, you know, when performance isn't good they almost get mad at you like when people--sports teams lose, and it's not intentional but you of course take everything so personally. And I remember learning during that period, if you're explaining you're losing. When you start over-explaining how things were going you are losing the argument, you were being defensive. You're trying to convince them. And there were sometimes you just wanted, less is more in terms of what you said, that was one thing that I learned during that period. Another thing I learned during that period was I thought I had all these really personal relationships with some of our clients. At the end of the day for them that was business, they--I had to get over the personal aspect when I got disappointed and they let us go and toughen myself up and not feel so rejected personally. That was very important. That did not make me I don't think, callous but it just, it left a seed that is implanted in me that will allow me to have a little bit more I think resilience if it were to happen again. You learn this was something I learned that I think about now, even where you're just trying to grin and bear it and you're trying to exude confidence and, and comfort your customer, they can see right through you. They know when you're not doing well, when you're upset, when you're worried. And sometimes it's better to just say that, you know this isn't going well. It's not lost on us. We're working really hard at it. We know that. But it's going to get better. As opposed to, things are great. You know that's just not right. And the other thing I learned during that period, [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] had always said that he had heard this from [HM] John Johnson, people know when you're doing well. They also know when you're not doing well. And there's that whole just sort of, I call it, it's like chatter. You know like when you think about it with terrorism, the chatter happens and people want to just like have a conversation about you. And now when people entertain me or try to engage me in discussions about entrepreneurs that are having trouble, I always say I'm always on the side of the entrepreneur. I have no interest in this conversation and I do it in a way that it doesn't make them feel bad, like I'm cutting them off at the knees but I want to extricate myself from that kind of conversation 'cause I know it was said about us. I also learned desperate people do desperate things, and there was a period when we learned some of our competitors called our clients and said well Ariel isn't doing well you should hire us. Not knowing how loyal some of those clients were to us and saying do you know what these people are doing? And I said we will never be vultures. Looking at firms that are having a hard time and looking at their client list and saying well we have the same strategy. We could go in with better numbers, never. Never will I do that, never. Story_ID: 179475 Speaker 1: Mellody, don't you think there's also some truth that [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] at the time that he started Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois], you know this was not an area that a lot of African Americans were in and it looked maybe easy. So you had a--Ariel had created a lot of competitors out there, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so who were the main competitors you know that were sort of out there that had sort of come up in the purview, you know in that time period? Speaker 2: It's really interesting I want to take the first part of your question first about it looking easy. The one thing, anyone who works in a financial services industry it's very interesting, we have like an unspoken knowledge that this is like one of the hardest businesses you can work in. I mean it really is. And it's a business you know I often joke I'm like we're in--sometimes I, I mean I have all ways of saying, I'm like time to make the donuts, you know. Or you know sometimes I feel like I'm literally like on an assembly line because it's just so tedious and hard and long. So this part about it looking easy, I think people think well you're just picking stocks and I mean just thinking about companies and that's easy and great. And at the same time I always tell people you have someone come up to you and talk to you about their kids' college savings, their retirement money, their money they're going to use to buy their first house and not have that just weigh on you. I mean it just weighs, it's their future and they're entrusting it to you. And it's no different than I think physicians feel about peoples' you know, bodily health. We have their financial health that is at stake. You--it's like a surgeon who makes a mistake with a scalpel during open heart surgery. You know that is something that you think about all the time picking the wrong stock, not doing enough research, whatever it might be. Not articulating the strategy, communicating the right way. So that's number one. The part about it looking easy versus the actual practice itself is it couldn't be further from the truth, but specifically as it relates to--and I lost the question. The-- Speaker 1: I was saying, making it look easy and then the other part of it was the competitors. Speaker 2: The competitors. You know I always think of us as having friendly competitors. I expect the best out of everyone I meet, absolutely. I will never ever expect less. And if I'm going to be disappointed, I'll just be disappointed. I have one really good friend who is like an advisor to me. And he says Mellody, lower your expectations so that you'll just be surprised on the upside. And I always come back on him and I say but I can't have a low, lowest common denominator way of living my life. I just can't do that. I have to go for the highest common denominator. So I expect the most out of our competitors. We have really wonderful, friendly competitors. The African American community, the companies at the time that were very prominent, NCM Capital [Management, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], run by Maceo Sloan [Maceo K. Sloan] in North Carolina; Brown Capital Management run by Eddie Brown in Baltimore [Maryland], those would be two at the time that were you know thought of as being in--a couple at, for a time they were bigger than us. You know we had been the first and then they got bigger and--but there were people that, they were doing their business in a different way than we were doing it. They had a different business model but they were certainly out there and those competitors have changed today. You know Eddie Brown is still there. Of course NCM is still there and there are more. MDL [Capital Management] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] or there's just a host of firms now, I mean there are so many. But in those early days it was just a handful. Story_ID: 179476 Speaker 1: So you come out of this period about 1997 you said 19-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: --okay, 1997. And what is the key thing that took you out? Were there, was it--do you remember the account that you got or--? Speaker 2: I remember two things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If I say overall what got us through it, we did not change our investment strategy. The worst thing you can do is then change your investment strategy during a period of poor performance. Managers who become weathervanes just get whipsawed so we just stuck with our conviction and that worked beautifully for us because all the stocks that had been the ones that had done so well ended up suffering a really tough period and our quality wonderful consistent businesses were the ones everyone knew you could count on. Smuckers Jelly is not going away but how many dot-coms did, right? So that was number one. The other thing that helped us get through it is our team stayed in tact. We had no turnover. Our senior people stuck it out. All of our people stuck it out. We were all owners of our business and we were vested. We had a vested interest in the success of the entire enterprise. So when people saw this team is just there. They're not going anywhere. They're not going to better offers or anything like that. That really proved a lot to our customers. Account specifically that I remember, I remember when we got hired by United Airlines sort of at 1995, during the middle of the difficult period. And I remember [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] and I went and pitched United, their head of pensions, Dave Dykstra at the time. And I remember he had called with some follow up questions. And he said--oh I remember in the meeting he said you know "I'm looking at these numbers and I'm wondering why should I hire you?" And I said to him and John was even kind of surprised. He looked at me kind of crazy. And I said "if I could jump over this table and grab you by the lapels and pull you towards me and convince you why we will be successful I would. But I know that's not appropriate." And he was like stunned. I said we're going down with the ship. I said "we are not giving up on this business," and they hired us. And it was, you know the--we ended up being one of their best performing managers because they did what we do, they bought a manager when it was out of favor just like we buy stocks when they're out of favor. Buy low, sell high. You know it's a platitude but very hard to practice in theory. I mean very hard to--in theory it's easy to understand, very hard in practice. I also remember us getting hired by Chevron Texaco which at the time was just Texaco. And it was the same sort of thing where they called us back after John and I made the presentation in White Plains, New York and they were asking me all these questions. They were like why should we hire you? And I just, again I was so strong in telling them why we were going to be--I said no firm is going to work harder for you. No firm is going to want this business as much as we want it. No firm is going to be as diligent as we are going to be. No firm is going to be as responsive to you. We are the firm you--that should work for you and we convinced them. And those two just stand out in my mind at the time. And then clients started to come and then when we started to get clients we'd have special lunches to celebrate getting hired. I remember we got hired by ComEd [Commonwealth Edison], we had a "light" lunch and I remember we got hired by--we used to have these themes around all the clients that hired us. They were hysterical but they were great and we--just celebrating those little victories started to help us a lot. And I also remember one other thing during that period, unlike some of our competition who would say we--our minimum account size is $10 million, we would say we'll take any amount. We're going to show you what we can do and we're going to be confident you're going to give us more. And that has always remained our policy at Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 179477 Speaker 1: So ComEd [Commonwealth Edison] came on, Chevron Texaco or Texaco came on-- Speaker 2: United Airlines. Speaker 1: --United Airlines come--came on and then what else happened? Speaker 2: I mean it just started to go from there. I mean we just started to, the clients started to build. I mean it just--we dropped from you know at a peak in 1990, let's say three having fifty clients, we probably dropped down to twenty-five or twenty clients when we went down to $1.1 billion and today we have 250. Speaker 1: So now you became senior vice president shortly after that, during that period and you said at that point you know even the world opened up for you. One, you had stayed the course. You had really become a real trusted advisor you know here within Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: Yes, I think so. Speaker 1: And so--right. Speaker 2: I don't know want to put words in the mouths of my colleagues. Speaker 1: I'll say it. And then, and so this--so what--when you were made senior vice president was there any job description that went along with it? Speaker 2: No. It was your typical small business. It's like it was just more of the same but just with a different title and no there was--you know we weren't about a lot of fanfare. It wasn't that kind of thing. It was more about getting the job done, recognizing the contributions of individuals. [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] had always been very clear with me early on about his intentions for me at Ariel, very clear. And I remember we went to see in keeping with our theme of reaching out to people who we thought were very smart, the head of a very successful investment management firm in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] called Miller Anderson & Sherrerd. Jay Sherrerd [John J.F. "Jay" Sherrerd] was a very prominent person in the investment management industry who also went to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and much older than both of us. And Jay, the only time he could met with us and this is in keeping with how we would do anything to see certain people we thought could help us have a better business. He was on a train from New York [New York] to Philadelphia and he--his assistant said if you want to go ride the train with him that might be a good way to getting his time with him. We said absolutely. We rode the train with him from New York City to Philadelphia and I remember being on that train very early in my career and John saying Mellody's going to be president of Ariel one day. And I almost fell out of the booth like little seat you know on the plane--in the train. And I remember thinking like oh my god. And Jay Sherrerd even--I'm like I'm a kid-- Story_ID: 179645 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson. I'm the interviewer. Scott Stearns is the videographer and -- (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, oh your names, can you give me your names? Speaker 1: JARED RUBENSTEIN: Jared Rubenstein. Speaker 2: Jerry Rubenstein. Speaker 1: Jared. Speaker 2: Jared Rubenstein is observer. Speaker 1: CHRIS WATERS: Chris Waters. Speaker 2: And Chris Waters is observer and Scott Stearns is videographer. I'd like-- (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. I'd like to start out with you giving today's date and giving your name and today's date? Speaker 2: Today is June 28, 2004. My name is Mellody Hobson. Speaker 1: And can you just spell your name for us again? Speaker 2: Yes. M-E-L-L-O-D-Y H-O-B as in boy, S-O-N. Speaker 1: Can--I want you to give the location. It's The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan Avenue. Speaker 2: We're at The HistoryMakers' offices, 1900 South Michigan Avenue in Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, great. Story_ID: 179646 Speaker 1: Now when we last ended you were really talking about you know we had sort of just gotten over the difficult year and that year was what? Remember the period that you said you, you know waited, I mean you were--the company [Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] was having a very difficult time. Speaker 2: That was in the mid-90s, [1990s], yes we had a very difficult time when our style was out of favor. Speaker 1: Okay. And I'd like to pick up from that point. And I'd like to review with you seminal things that were, that happened that were sort of important building blocks to take the company to you know where it is now. And so I'd like to you know start right after that you know when things start sort of easing up and you became sort of in favor. Speaker 2: Well it happened very slowly and the one thing about what we do in terms of investing in the stock market, you know it's one good week, then it's two good weeks, then it's a good month, then it's a good quarter, and it sneaks up on you. You don't exactly know that it's happening until you look back and you see a year of good performance and then suddenly the three-year number looks good, better and then suddenly the five-year number looks better. And then suddenly people are becoming more interested. So it wasn't where we woke up one day and we said the worst is over, it was just a gradual climb back that every single day you felt like you were getting your sea legs. You felt a little bit better about how the portfolio was doing but also you felt a little bit better about the business prospects that we had in front of us. And people were starting to be more accommodating about seeing us, more interested in the Ariel story. But it wasn't just like a switch that turned and suddenly you were winning. And so one of the things that I've mentioned before, that period, is it's an incredibly humbling time when you're going through it. There's a lot of deep reflection because you're working extraordinarily hard and there's nothing you can do but wait. But also as you start to see things turn it's a time of great enthusiasm. Speaker 1: And I remember you talking about the one client that you got you know and how you had this big celebration in the office and-- Speaker 2: Well it was very interesting. We started to pick up business and it was very slowly. And we decided because we'd gone through this period where we had lost business for a while that every time we got a new client we'd have a staff lunch and the lunch would have a theme. And I remember that we got ComEd [Commonwealth Edison] which is the public utility here in Chicago [Illinois]. We had a "light" lunch and we had all of these sort of themes that were hilarious and really terrific around our new clients that were somehow tied to their business or their state or their city that they were in. It was a great way of fostering enthusiasm. It was a great way of reminding ourselves that things were going better and it was a great way of putting the past behind us. We were celebrating that we had turned a corner and it was us. It wasn't about celebrating with the world it was about a very internal celebration. Story_ID: 179647 Speaker 1: And talk about the organization [Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] at that point. Who are the important people within the organization, you know that are making things happen? Speaker 2: Well I would say in our view everyone's really important and everything's making things happen. And the way I've always described it to people when you're at work in a very small entrepreneurial culture, every single person is critical, mission critical to the success of the organization. And we needed everyone's full effort, full attention, 150 percent effort in order to be successful. If you ask about the most senior people in the firm in terms of titles, clearly [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] at the time he was president. That was the title that he held. Eric McKissack was senior vice president and vice chairman of the firm I should say, not senior vice president I think at that point. And then we had a number of other you know key people internal CFO [chief financial officer] operations that sort of things. But clearly, the two sides of the business that were incredibly important were marketing and client service to get clients and keep them happy and then the portfolio management's part of the firm to get--to achieve excellent results so that clients would have an interest in us. Speaker 1: Now what was John's role vis-a-vis that you know everything--and Eric's role and your role, can you sort of delineate those a little bit? Speaker 2: Our roles were actually pretty well-defined and it's something that has become even more defined over time. John's role was probably at that time, he was the quarterback, the person who was sort of driving the plays. And not only as it related to the investment management side but in terms of the firm wide management. With that said, John has always been an excellent delegator. He's the person, he gives you the ball and you can run with it as far as you want. And so he gave a great deal of autonomy to people like me and Eric so that we would feel full and total accountability and so that we would also understand that the successes or failures that we had were very much a part of our own contribution and very important to the future of the firm. Eric was serving in the role of manager of the Ariel Appreciation Fund which was our mid cap product and the Ariel Appreciation Fund strategy. But that strategy was still very new for the firm and generally when clients get very interested they need to see a five year track record. We were just starting to get to that five year track record at that point. So Eric was very focused on stock picking and very focused on helping in terms of the marketing that we would do to perspective clients as did John. My role was try to help continue--helping to continue brand Ariel, helping to brand Ariel. And that was everything from all of the written communications, dealing with the press, trying to get people to meet with us, potential clients, really thinking about sort of the overall reputation of the firm and how that reputation could grow and help us to achieve even greater things. Now that is not to say I did that on my own. We had very excellent people working with me and they carried the water on a lot of the major, major projects so I was there as an active participant but I did have a very strong point of view about the turtle being omnipresent with everything that happened with Ariel, very strong point of view about slow and steady being a theme that was not just about stock picking. It was not just some catchy, hokey slogan but something that we all demonstrated in terms of how we were building the firm, how we were leading our lives, etc. And then often times, I also had a role of just making sure things got done. So I was sort of this unofficial kind of chief of staff to John where he'd sort of hand off something and my job was to bird dog it and make sure that I could check it off the list. So I had a very odd set of skills in that I was creative but also very detail-oriented which is something that doesn't often happen within one person. Story_ID: 179648 Speaker 1: Can you talk about some of the things like, let's go back to the turtle and the slogan, that was the turtle on--I mean that was a slogan that you had--I mean that [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] had originally come up with. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that because if you go to the firm [Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] now there are turtles all over the place. Speaker 2: We're obsessed with turtles. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We are obsessed with turtles. I was in a department store the other day and one of the people in the department store knew that we collect turtles and there was this new turtle there. And I was like you didn't call me. There's a new turtle! John originally came up with patient investor as the tagline for a newsletter that we put out in the very beginning of the founding of Ariel and it was a way of just building interest in the firm and being able to mail out our track record to people to show them how we were doing. And it had this very, almost childlike drawing of a turtle and a hare on it originally and then he went out and found someone who I think for $125.00 or some just tiny amount of money drew the turtle that we have that holds a loving cup. That turtle got a face lift in the mid-90s, [1990s] and went to another artist to really update him. It was actually the same artist that did--used to do the drawings in the Wall Street Journal with that sort of dot matrix look. And so the turtle got reinvented. The turtle in the beginning was an extraordinarily controversial logo because we had the turtle on our newsletter but the Ariel logo for many years was a gazelle because they--an Ariel is a gazelle and it had its you know, antlers and everything. And right when I started at Ariel in 1991, 1992, John said, I think we should have one logo and it should just be the turtle. And I remember I went out to all these design firms and I said we need to update this turtle and people would mock us. They were like, it looks like a ninja turtle and it's not a serious enough logo for an investment firm. And it just really doesn't have the right patina for serious investors and we think you're making this huge mistake. So we went out literally, I think we hired five firms because we asked them to draw turtles and none of the turtles were resonating with us. And if you'd walked into our old office at 307 North Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] on the tenth floor, we had turtles pasted up all over the office of turtle drawings seeing which ones we were getting used to and none of them--we couldn't get excited about one of them. So we ended up going back to our old turtle and redoing it and we just said you know what, we're going to be independent thinkers and we're going to do this as our logo and that's just that. And we'll write Ariel in a very elegant way with the R having a really pretty swoosh underneath but we're going to have the turtle as a logo. And at that point when we made that decision then we became hardcore about turtles. And it was not something we spoke of, now we do, but it was just sort of well, the turtle is our mascot. We started incorporating it in speeches. We started to write about it quite a bit. I started to make reference to the fact that Aesop wrote the fable in 550 B.C. and it lived such a long life and most people knew the story showing longevity, showing timeless value, showing old-fashioned values for a firm of very young people. And ultimately everyone just gravitated to it within the firm, and we have all sorts of little rituals. People join the firm, I try to find them a distinct turtle to buy for them for their office to start off their collection. We have a mentor/mentee program within the firm that we call the hatchlings and they get little turtles coming out of an egg. These, all sorts of little, neat things that we've done around the turtle that has become, it's not just a mascot it's a way of life at our firm and it's only a visual depiction of the way of life that we've all embraced. Story_ID: 179649 Speaker 1: Can you talk about that though, the way of life? I mean can you just expound upon that? Speaker 2: Sure. I mean there are some very, very clear signs of it. One is most of us have worked at Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] for a very long period of time. It's the only job I've ever had and I've worked there for thirteen years. We have people who have worked at the firm for twenty-one years, as long as the firm has been in business. And we have just scores of people who have just been able to demonstrate what we call stick-to-it-ness. They go a place and they've decided they're going to plant roots and build a career and that's very, very rare in today's society. The statistics show that the average person will have eleven jobs in their lifetime and when you think about that, you think about the contrast with--and on most of those I should say jobs that they have in their lifetime occur very early on in the career. Job hopping has become every common in America. You don't have the stories like you used to of someone working somewhere for thirty years retiring with their pension, that's just not the way our society works. One, it's global, it's more mobile. There's just all sorts of things that have changed peoples' willingness to stay in one place for so long. But when you look at Ariel you see just the opposite. And I said, as you know, from the very beginning when I first came there I said I'm going to work here for the rest of my life. And that was some much of a--somewhat of a daunting revelation that I had but I certainly felt it at the very beginning. And when you have that kind of commitment to an organization, it changes how you think about everything. You are--there--nothing about me is complacent and yet at the same time I don't have to be in so much of a hurry at Ariel because I know it will come. I know I'll be there. It doesn't have to happen today. Now of course we all want everything to happen today but if it happens tomorrow, if it happens in five years, if that's getting a customer, if that's financial reward, if that's titles that have occurred along the way, that's always been something that I've been able to be very patient about because I wasn't going anywhere. And it makes you just think differently, act differently and you know that's just one very small example within our firm of how we think about patience. We've had the same office for eighteen years, the same office building. When we moved it was like you know a big deal. I joked it was like you know mom and dad moving out of the house into a condo you know where you're, you have so much stuff that you've accumulated and so much a way of life and become a creature of habit. And so that was just another example, patience, long term. I was just dealing with our, the people who represented us with our building in terms of real estate and they were talking to me about something in terms of negotiating with a building and signing a new lease and they were like, well you know you probably will get the best deal if you go for ten years but we're not recommending that. And I said "well we're not going anywhere," so I said "you can sign twenty years if you want I'm totally happy with that. I'm--we're committed to being here. This is where we're going to be." And he said "well don't you need to check with someone and the rest of the team?" I said "trust me, this is where we're going to be officing for a very long time." So it's just lots of examples like that, that makes your life so much simpler. When you don't--you know that's one less thing for me to worry about. Speaker 1: What's interesting about that is that it's a young group that you know has this sort of long view of the world that's sort of antithetical to how you would view youth, you know, on sort of quick pace and things like that, that you've taken sort of a slow and steady, methodic approach-- Story_ID: 179650 Speaker 1: I want to ask you back to the marketing and the approach and the client service and you know your team of advisors. Those--what were things that you felt you did very well? Speaker 2: I felt that I communicated very well and I felt that I both in the spoken word and in writing. I always you know you always try to figure out where your, your towering strengths. And I would say that those were my towering strengths. I could communicate an idea that was very complicated in a way that you could be a Ph.D. or you could be someone who never ever knew one thing about investing and understand and you wouldn't feel that someone was talking down to you or someone was talking over your head. I think that was something that was incredibly helpful to us. I think the other thing that I did very well during that period was not to feel that I had to be constrained by what other firms were doing. And I think that that's where youth helped and that's where not having any experience helped. And that's where I was constantly in a why not mode. Instead of people telling me you can't have a turtle as a logo, [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] and I would sit there and say well why can't we? And they were like well Dreyfus [Corporation, New York, New York] has a lion and Merrill Lynch [Wealth Management, New York, New York] has a bull, they're fierce. And you've got this lowly turtle that looks kind of, it's kind of fat and you know turtles connote slow and people want to make money fast you know things like that. So I think that communication and that willingness to go against the grain to be an independent thinker were things that I did very, very well. And the last thing I have to say and maybe this is, it sounds weird that you would say you did this well, I worked really hard very well. I didn't get frazzled. I wouldn't get undone. I never burned out. I didn't wear work on my sleeves. I tried to be very elegant about that and very non--just not to be overbearing with people about how I was working. And I think that that made people comfortable because they--it wasn't a competition. And at the same time they could--maybe I was helping inspire and bring them along. Speaker 1: So talk about that. I mean what were your hours that you were working and having continued to work? Speaker 2: I always just, you know I worked all the time and still do. But you know I've heard Warren Buffet say, "if you love what you do, it's not work." It's just you know it's what you do. What were the hours I was working? I mean gosh I would get to the office at, if I got there later than 6:30 that would be like you know something happened. And usually I was the first person at the office. I'd open up the door, put the papers out for everyone and then turn on the copy machines, you know I just had like a little routine in the morning which is hilarious. And then I'd work into the evening when I was writing our quarterly letters. I'd pull all-nighters. I'd literally just work the whole night. I'd see the clean-up people at night. They would like, bring me food because they were worried about me. And then we always worked on Saturdays, always and John and I would do sort of debriefing and thinking on Saturdays. And then Sunday I always dedicated it as my writing day where I tried to work because Saturdays there were more people around the office so that was a little distracting. People were always sort of asking about things or wanting to caucus on issues and so you couldn't just sort of think uninterrupted but Sundays got quieter and so that was my think uninterrupted day. There were a couple of us who were stalwarts on Sundays and we'd just sort of work--you know on a Saturday I'd work four or five hours but on a Sunday I'd work most of the day and I felt like I got a total leg up on the week by getting that work done. And it allowed me to organize my day, time, week extraordinarily well. Now what has changed is of course my life demands on me have changed dramatically and so the hours are not necessarily always in my office. I might have dinners, meetings, things like that. I spend a lot of time on airplanes getting to places. Now the weekends are, I desperately need the weekends to catch up on mail, on reading, on writing, things like that. We write a lot of letters to people constantly showing appreciation, gratitude you know just all sorts of issues. And so I need uninterrupted time to write. Story_ID: 179651 Speaker 1: What were the things that you did, I mean you know it's interesting because I've heard that you were, you know, a hard worker in many ways. And yet at the same time what's sort of startling about this is that you have such belief in the mission and the organization and you knew, you said immediately this is where you wanted to be not sort of wavering. And you said even during the difficult years you just sort of beared down and was like we can make it, we can do this. Now the question I have though is I mean all of this is exciting, the firm is coming--their competitors we've already talked to in the other interview that there were you know competitors that had sort of come in this, you know sort of this period and you know sort--whether you call it copy cat or whatever or you had spawned those. But what were the things that you know that you felt maybe you did not do well in this you know this period of time and the lessons that you learned from that? And I'm talking about probably nineteen--, like '93 [1993] to '96 [1996]? Speaker 2: Yeah, there--the list is so long I could spend hours on the lessons, long. And a lot of them I've had a lot of opportunity to reflect on over the last decade. And there's just a lot of things I think I personally could have done differently and better. And I'm grateful that we succeeded in spite of some of my gaffes along the way. The number one thing I think I could have done better is I think there were times when I was so focused on excellence that I could have shown more compassion to people and that's something that I really worked extraordinarily hard on in recent years. And I had a couple of moments of truth where some people that I respect tremendously who had never worked with me before obviously saw some things and had the courage to tell me how they thought I could be a better person. So that's something that I won't forget and I try to always, always, always remember because I feel badly about it. And that doesn't have anything to do with, you know, tirades or anything like that. There was no abuse or anything like that. I just, in hindsight I look back and I say yeah, everyone could have left the room, the meeting feeling a little bit better, you know. That would have been a better way to lead and manage. And so that certainly was one of the things that I learned that I could be a better person, a better manager, better leader, just everything. I also learned during that period when things are really bad, you can't pretend they're not. You know [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] once told me that he went to a speech that [HM] John [H.] Johnson gave and he said you never have to tell people how well you're doing. Well the flip side of that when you're not doing well, when you try to pretend that you are, that will come back to bite you as well. And I don't want to say I was cavalier or you know or happy-go-lucky or misleading, but I think that there was real pain being felt and my first thought was to not pretend that it didn't exist but to deny it and to try to move on, maybe quicker than we as an organization needed to. And I think people who were interfacing with us saw it and I probably wasn't recognizing that they did. And so I think if I went through it again I would be a lot more direct with people. This is a really hard time. We're trying the best that we can versus you know things are okay. You know they're coming along. You know those kind of statements which are not necessarily I think the kind of intellectual honesty that I think the situation demanded. And then last but not least, I think when I look back and think what I could have personally done better during that period, I think that I probably could have rested more, because I was so at my wits' end to make sure that we did well that I just, I burned the candle at all ends, both ends as they say. And I kind of wore myself out, but I never would acknowledge it. And it was only me and my head having to deal with the issue. And you know John was always just very, he was so excellent about everything. He was always like sleep in tomorrow. Don't come to work. You know that sort of thing. You're better when you're rested. And I just kept saying no, I have to be here, almost like I was on watch or something. And I don't know, I think you know I think you know for as much as I would be better about telling other people to take time off, I'm sure they were feeling the need to keep up. And so I probably wore us out a little bit during that phase. Speaker 1: You mean the organization? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what period are we talking about? Speaker 2: I think that was the mid-90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: Mid-90s [1990s], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Story_ID: 179652 Speaker 1: Now can you take the '90s [1990s] also and sort of separate I mean put them in periods as it relates to the financial, you know financial services world? We look at that--I mean there are you know political things. We had two different presidents. So what was happening you know if you sort of would take you know--? Speaker 2: Well we had the longest uninterrupted bull market in stock market history beginning in the late, basically the mid-'80s [1980s] going through the '90s [1990s] and into the early zeros. The late '90s [1990s] was the period of dot-com mania, go-go technology investing, extraordinarily aggressive investing, fledge--every, you know you were hearing about thirty year olds who were becoming millionaires because of their stock options, a time of extreme executive compensation. So it was a very heavy period in the stock market, very heavy. And yet as you've already acknowledged we have this boring, mundane, old-fashioned investment approach. And so at that time people thought we were dinosaurs. I mean they just said you're basically going to go the way of the buggy whip because firms like you won't exist. What do you mean you don't buy internet stocks? What do you mean you don't have Amazon in the portfolio? What do you mean you don't think that the Internet is going to change the world? So it was a time where you were defending your position quite a bit in terms of us. Speaker 1: And that's an interesting position to be in and I'm just wondering how you avoided that? I mean I know it didn't fit your investment. You know that the dot-com didn't fit your investment philosophy but people were breaking, I mean, strides with all kinds of philosophies just because no one wanted to be left behind. Speaker 2: Right, and that was just the antithesis of how we think about investing. It is the antithesis. We do not believe in group think. We do not believe in being a weathervane, following a crowd. We think independent thinkers are the ones who achieve the best investment results over the long term. And so I have to tell you during that period where we got a great deal of pushback particularly you know in the mid-90s [1990s], we were resolved, we were going and reading history and re-reading history, and we were reading about all the great inventions that revolutionized our country, railroads, airplanes that were never great investments. And so you know if you think of today about airplanes, cars, automobiles, at one point there were 200 car companies in this country. And we know of course now there are just what, the big three, basically. So at the end of the day we kept saying we are right without being heavy-handed about that. We're right because we're looking at history, not because we're trying to be, you know pound the table on something like that, just so that we don't lose. And it's just a matter of time now for our strategy and our way of thinking to be proven and the question is can we wait it out? And that goes back to the turtle. Story_ID: 179486 Speaker 1: Okay, so during this period, you know what I had asked sort of off-camera was, who was supporting you? What financial writers or theorists was, you know were you sort of following then? Speaker 2: We were looking back to history and great writers from Ben [Benjamin] Graham who had written the--Graham and [David] Dodd is one of the bibles of value investing. They wrote a book called 'Security Analysis' which is something that all value investors read. It was written back in the 1930s [1934] so we were re-reading Graham and Dodd. We were reading a lot of Warren Buffet's letters who has been one of the greatest investors of our lifetime and very much a disciplined value investor. We were reading David Dreman. David Dreman wrote a book called the 'Contrarian Investment Strategies' which was about going against the grain. And he starts the book by talking about the tulip bulb mania that happened in Holland hundreds of years ago basically where tulips would bid out to this crazy price. And then we were reading a lot of just current thinkers. We were reading a Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] professor Burt Malkiel [Burton Gordon Malkiel] who wrote a book called 'A Random Walk Down Wall Street' which talked about markets being efficient and that stocks reflecting all the news that's out. And so these became just treatises that we would read and quote in our quarterly letters as reminders to people of nothing ever being new. And you know there were people who would combat our kinds of statements and say this time is different. And what we would try to show is history has proven this time is never different. Speaker 1: And in that, in your process of your philosophy, were there people that challenged and said well things are changing and you know this is a cyclical change that we have not seen before? Speaker 2: Absolutely. There was a huge school of thought there that said this is a, again this time is different. This is a--the U.S. economy is now different. The way that business will be done in this country is different and as a result of that different businesses will lead the day. Story_ID: 179487 Speaker 1: And in this--I want to ask you who were your [Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] main clients, you know, I mean, I'm sorry, investments that you had at that time and did they change during this period? Speaker 2: No, and that's actually the thing that's very funny about us. I'm writing a quarterly letter right now to all of our shareholders and it's going to show our longest running stocks. And some of our stocks we've owned for over fifteen years. And so there were some of the same stocks that we owned then, we own today and that's everything from Clorox [Company, Oakland, California] to DeVry [Education Group, Downers Grove, Illinois] to Northern Trust [Corporation, Chicago, Illinois] to McCormick [and Company, Baltimore, Maryland], the spice company, just these wonderful, all-weather businesses that have very little to do with sort of what is the economic picture of the world. And more to do with wonderful brands that dominate a niche where the customer goes back again and again. And as I say in many speeches that I give, I ask people to name a number two competitor to Clorox bleach and no one can. And when I tell them that if interest rates go up tomorrow does that change your decision to buy bleach? If you lose your job tomorrow, does it change your decision to buy bleach? Fifty two cents a quart, not a big decision purchase. You're not saying to yourself, I'm going to feed Little Timmy this week or we're going to buy bleach. Perfect kind of Ariel stories, very consistent, very predictable, wonderful businesses. And one of the tests we often give ourselves when we think about these businesses, we always ask would we want to own it forever? And we say if you could personally own Clorox would you want to have it? And we feel more excited about that than we do if we say if you could personally own Amazon.com, would you want to have it? Story_ID: 179488 Speaker 1: Now how may you evaluate your prospects? I mean how did Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] get to Clorox [Company, Oakland, California] and you know make that assessment? Do you go make visits, do you, you know just read the annual reports, is it a combination? That's-- Speaker 2: All of the above. We go and visit the company. With Clorox our analyst who follows that stock, Franklin Morton whose followed it forever, he's been to the R&D [research and development] facility for Clorox that many people have never seen. And he described it to me once, he said Mellody, imagine walking into a warehouse with hundreds of washing machines going at once. He said it's an unbelievable sight to see. So visiting the company, sitting down with the management team, looking eye to eye to them, with them, making sure that people, that you feel that you can trust, that you feel are always going to be straight shooters with you, that demonstrate their own version of stick-to-it-ness that aren't professional managers that hop around from job to job. We also go and ask anyone that we can to shed light on the company. We want independent verifications. We don't want to just accept what management tells us so we often will research two companies in the same industry just to hear the companies talk about each other. We often will find former employees, current employees, we'll ask an existing portfolio company if they can shed light on a company that we're looking at. For example, with Clorox, when we were researching Clorox, we would ask the people at Longs Drug[s] stores who sell Clorox, what's it like to work with the Clorox people? How's the product selling? Tell us about their promotions. Tell us about them, do they pay on time? You know all those sort of questions become wonderful data points for making a very significant investment decision that will affect peoples' lives. And then of course we read everything that's written on the companies. And we at Ariel subscribe to over 150 periodicals so we get everything from Supermarket News and Sprinkler News [unable to verify] to Time and Newsweek and USA Today. So our reading is a very important process for us to be able to determine if this is a business that we want to own, to be able to assess this business in the current marketplace, to be able to asses this business in the current economy. Story_ID: 179489 Speaker 1: While you're doing this work cause you had, you described we have a, basically a research department [at Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and we have you know our stock pickers that are dependent on that. And that was, was that divided between [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] sort of Eric [McKissack] or--? Speaker 2: It was, yeah. But John has always been sort of the coach you know. He was the person who was the father of the investment strategy. He's the person who has really been--you know I always describe it as being the keeper of the flame around the strategy. He's the person who--stock picking is more art than science. It's not about math columns adding up. Stock picking is more about someone sitting with a canvas and deciding to put together that picture. That picture is a portfolio. You have to have that genius thinking about what that picture is going to look like. That person has to have the picture in mind all the time. That person has to be the person to make the really hard decisions. When the stock is--bad news is out on the company and the stock is cratering, they have to either decide we're buying more or we're waiting or we're selling this issue. And John is that person who can sort of get to the crux of the issue and make the big decision. And it's so easy to be a Monday morning quarterback on it, to look back on yesterday and say oh that's what I would have done. And it's so different when you are pulling the trigger on billions of dollars and it's peoples' kids' college education and their retirement money. It's a very awesome responsibility and it takes someone with a lot of invest--intestinal fortitude to do it. But that person, typically a portfolio manager, is more of a creative person. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179490 Speaker 1: Now can we just talk a little bit about, [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] did during his interview but the whole value investing and where it sort of fits within the overall sort of investment philosophies that are out there. But why that and you know what were even it's sort of origins? Speaker 2: Well value investing again [Benjamin] Graham and [David] Dodd wrote about this back in the 1930s. However, it goes back to the beginning of time. If you think of just sort of basic bargaining that goes on around the world that went on when Jesus was walking the earth, people always wanted to get a better price for things. They were negotiating, they were bartering, whatever it was. Very few people want to pay more for what something's worth. I don't know those people. The only place that it seems to happen is in the stock market when people hear something is going up they want to buy it instead of buying it when it's cheap. So value investing is an age-old theory. When you buy a house there's a list price and you say okay I offer you maybe 10 percent less than list, 15 percent less than list, 20 percent less. Well it's the same idea when it comes to stocks. We look at what businesses are worth and we say we want to buy them when they're selling at 40 percent discount to what they're worth. And that's our way of doing it. Some people do it and they want a more significant discount. Some people want a less significant discount. And the contrary, the other investment strategies out there are, there's growth investing. And the way that I describe this to make this really simple, I always describe value and growth investing in terms of something we all understand which is shopping. And I always describe this in terms of people that I know. My mother [Dorothy Brown] is a classic value buyer. No matter what something costs, she wants a better price. So if she goes to Neiman Marcus she will go up to the sales person and say "this button is loose. Take off 10 percent." And the sales person will say "oh I can run it up to alteration." She says "no, no, no, take off 10 percent." Her idea is I've gotten something that is more valuable for less than what its worth. The opposite of that is a growth investor and that when you think about a growth shopper, that is a person who actually takes pride in something being very expensive. Now we know people like this. The first--I have another family member before they can tell you hello, they'll say these shoes cost $350.00, and the idea there is that they have something that everyone else wants and so that's why it has even more value than what they paid for it. Now the problem with both strategies, sometimes you'll buy something for a value which isn't really worth what you think it is. So an example of that, my mother might come home and say I went to a garage sale and I got this shirt for $3.00. And I'll tell her, but mom, wide collars went out in the 1970s. You could have just thrown that $3.00 out of the window because now we have new wash rags. You know this big, old-looking shirt isn't something that's very functional. So that's when a value is--that's when you bought something that's not worth what you even paid for it and you thought you got a bargain. The other side of that in growth investing where the pitfalls are, you get involved in a fad. So the Internet was a fad for a while. The way that I liken it to shopping is I often joke with people, when's the last time you heard someone tell you they bought a timeless bell bottom suit? Doesn't happen. And so there are these fads that people get caught up in that don't, aren't, don't have ability to be sustained. And maybe you might time it right, but the value is actually elusive. Story_ID: 179491 Speaker 1: Now do you think in your writing of the newsletters [for Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] and having that task you learn more about the business? And you said something and I've heard it said about you that you had a skill set to be able to explain complicated concepts in simple terms. And I've heard that said about you Mellody in that in your presentations that you've given you make things very clear and very easily understood so I'm wondering, how did you get there? Speaker 2: I read a lot and I still do. I just studied particularly in the early years. I wanted to make sure that I really had a very firm foundation on the key tenets of our investment strategy. And then once I started to do that, I started to think through how to explain it in a way that would make sense. And the great thing about it is, you know Warren Buffet often says, again quoting the great investor, that if you can't explain it to a six year old, you don't understand it yourself. And so I'd often see where I would get tripped up myself and try to find practical solutions for things that were difficult to explain and things would just come to me all the time. Like, oh my gosh, I have a new insight about how to explain this. But it certainly wasn't something that came just you know it wasn't like certain people are really funny and they could just like tell a joke out of nothing. Mine was more something that I worked at and then once I started to find that things were resonating, I found other ways to push the envelope in some of these explanations. Story_ID: 179492 Speaker 1: I guess I'm trying to also understand what the role of the newsletter, what it played in your sort of makeup? Did you understand--? Speaker 2: Huge. Huge. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Learning to write to our customers was perhaps one of the most defining task that I had within Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] and one of the ways that I think really became able to come into my own. So I think the newsletter in giving me confidence and allowing me to speak with authority, it gave me all of those things because I was doing all this research all the time. So when people would say things that just didn't make sense I could say that just doesn't make any sense. Or did you know this, that, or the other hopefully in a way that wasn't being a smart-alecky know-it-all but just sort of grounded in fact. And so that one, made my age dissipate. People became less concerned about my god, she's so young. And it also I think made them know I was very serious about this work, that I wasn't trying to be--you know you can, especially when it comes to anything that people perceive related to money or economics, it's like talking to a doctor sometimes. That they're talking in a lingo you just don't understand. And so you for--you give up even trying to understand them. And so if you wanted to try to just speak gibberish and snow people, I see people do it on TV all the time. And so I said I don't want to be one of those people. I want to be someone who again, it's grounded in fact and I will, when things are not being spoken appropriately, be willing to stand up and say this isn't right. But the only way I could do that was by reading. Speaker 1: And learning. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which never ends I mean I still, we're still doing that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179493 Speaker 1: Now in this whole process, so you're marketing, client services. I want to go--one ad that you guys [Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] had. It was all, it was the three of you [Mellody Hobson, HM John Rogers, Jr. and Erick McKissack], you know sort of. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I wonder, I want you to talk--cause that ad had been used for years. But you know how did that ad come about? Speaker 2: It was very interesting. We had engaged Burrell Communications Group here in Chicago [Illinois] to do the advertising for us and they had never worked for a financial services firm. We were a tiny speck of a customer for them because they were used to working with Coke [Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and you know AT&T [Dallas, Texas] and all these huge Fortune, not even 500, Fortune 100, Fortune 10 type companies. But [HM] Tom [Thomas J.] Burrell did us a favor which I am so grateful for and he said we'd be willing to work with Ariel even though we weren't going to be doing big, multimillion dollar ad buys and things like that. And we went through this whole thinking about what image should we project? And our source where we were advertising initially was Black Enterprise magazine. And we said one, we think we need to let people know who we are without it being heavy handed. So nowhere have we ever written at Ariel that we're a minority owned company, ever. And mostly because we think that is not material to the investment decision that a person would make. At the same time through our knowledge of our own community we knew our community has felt on the outside looking in of the financial world mostly because we don't feel like there are any people that look like us. And obviously that's not surprising because there's so little diversity in this industry. So we got the idea for a picture and initially we said well we'll just put John's picture because he's the most recognized face within Ariel in the ad. John was very uncomfortable with that. John said I don't want to be in the ad by myself. And I think it would be nice to show diversity of our organization, you're a woman, Eric and I think that you know, I think that we would come across as a stronger, the whole is greater than the sum of the parts. So we ended up deciding to do the picture with the three of us. Speaker 1: Now but, you know the jackets are--I mean and that's why I'm just wondering who thought of that? I mean I'm just-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I had a lot to do with what the picture was going to look like. And obviously in all of the brochures and marketing materials of Ariel initially I had a very strong voice. Now we have lots of people at the firm who drive whole processes and there's no approval by Mellody or anything like that. And they've you know again taken it to another level which is the way it should be. But in the beginning we wanted to appear to be very relaxed, comfortable, not uptight, not what you thought about Wall Street, not slick. We were--I was wearing a, I remember a white shirt with a red skirt. I mean I was twenty-five maybe you know nothing about us was fancy. No one had cuff links on and suspenders or anything like that, bold pinstripe suit. It just wasn't our personality. And we were like--John was on a stool and I was sort of standing and Eric was standing and we just said we just want to look like us, not posed, not you know overly made up, big blow dried hair, you know the whole thing. We just said we want people to see the essence of who we are and it will-that, hopefully, comfort will resonate with them. And I think that it did. Speaker 1: So were, what were peoples' response? Maybe you've answered that. What were they were--? Speaker 2: Well it's interesting. In Black Enterprise a lot of people said oh I didn't know Ariel was a black company. And that was you know, enlightening 'cause we were anywhere building a brand from nothing. No one had ever heard of us. Maybe people in Chicago at the most who knew John and Eric. But really then didn't even think about us having mutual funds. They thought we only managed big, institutional portfolios where you had to have a lot of money to invest with us. And I remember those early ads we just kept pounding away, just $50.00 a month and you could get started, trying to get people to get in the habit of saving and so the reaction was just very, very positive. And it was interesting, we tested--we didn't want to be perceived as people who had these egos where we needed to be in an ad. So I remember we did a series of ads without the picture just to see you know how they would work and they didn't work as well. So we put the picture back. Story_ID: 179494 Speaker 1: Now you used--now when you went to majority publications was there any discussion about maybe we should have it without the picture? Speaker 2: It's very interesting you say that because we got some advice from people who are famous black entrepreneurs and they said white people won't invest with you. They just, they won't give money to black people. And we just rejected that. You know we just did. I said I just, I, you know I'm expecting more from the world and I, if I'm going to live with rose colored glasses and blinders on, well that's just the way I prefer to live. But I want to try this and see if we can get this to resonate with everyone because at the end of the day in our business the thing that is so wonderful about it, there is a score everyday and people know how we've done and you can't BS them. And so the results were going to speak for themselves. But at the same time the best brands that have ever been built have created a bond with the customer. That's Sam Walton's ubiquitous presence at Wal-Mart. That's other just great, great brands where America falls in love with a brand. Like Coke [Coca-Cola] is America. McDonald's is America. When you think about Ray Crock, Ronald McDonalds, there are these endearing characters. And so I kept saying we've got to--particularly in financial services where there is considered, it's considered scary, it's considering very impersonal. There's a just a reticence in general with financial services. We've got to personalize it. Story_ID: 179495 Speaker 1: So you have the ad campaign [for Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] going. What were the other critical things that got done that were part of your marketing plan? Public speaking? Speaker 2: We were speaking all the time. We were doing, I mean it was hilarious. We were going to like peoples' investment clubs with three people in their living room on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] and I on a Saturday. I'll never forget this, or the doctor who asked us to come and speak. We got there and it was like three people. I was like what are we doing, like we're desperate. But you know it's like that old E.F. Hutton you know statement, you build trust you know sort of one investor at a time, that sort of thing. That's what we were trying to do. So we just would go anywhere people would invite us, that was number one. Secondly, we started to spend serious money on sponsorships, serious money for us at that time, more money than we could actually afford. We said we'll start in our own community, we'll be Chicago's mutual fund family because a lot of the mutual fund companies in Chicago are owned by outside organizations, organizations outside of our city. And so we did things like we sponsored Ariel Mutual Funds Hat Night at the [Chicago] Bulls game. Fifty thousand hats given away with Ariel Mutual Funds on the back, walking bullboard--billboards which we thought were terrific, besides the fact that we could entertain a hundred customers at the game and they did little teaser commercials leading up to the game the week before saying who the game was sponsored by. And I remember it was so great. Someone called us and they said, they said that New York Knicks game is going to be sponsored by Ariel. Is that the same company as you because it almost seemed unbelievable that us as a little company would be sponsoring the world championship Chicago Bulls. And I remember at the time the sponsorship cost $40,000 and it was like a big decision. Like I was worried to death about it and worried how are we going to maximize this? How are we going to really get all of our money for it? And we did these incredibly fun invitations when we invited people to the games. And the invitations we customized, have our turtle [Ariel Capital Management's mascot]. So we invite a hundred customers or prospects and we had for instance the turtle once as Michael Jordan in the, you know split jump dunking as a turtle and he's-- we had the turtle holding a basketball instead of the loving cup. We had the turtle dressed as Dennis Rodman with the hair and all the colors and tattoos, hilarious. But again it was this idea of, how do we stand out? How do we be unique? You know how do we do this differently? So sponsorships, we sponsored the Chicago [Sport and] Social Club [Chicago, Illinois]. I don't know if you remember that. They used to have the beach front volleyball and we would stand out there believe it or not, in like a hundred-degree heat during volleyball games and give away Ariel Mutual Funds water bottles. Just I mean just in t-shirts, dripping sweat, all of us standing out there. It was like all hands on deck. And we just sponsored a lot of also just other really creative, different things and slowly, slowly people started to say are you--they started to put two and two together, they'd see the ad, they'd see the Ariel Mutual Funds hat night. Chicago Social Club, speech here you know and it all slowly started to come together, slow. Speaker 1: When you say slow what do you mean slow? Speaker 2: That means years. Years, I mean there was no point where we were like oh my god we've done it. I remember my original goal was to have $1.5 billion total in the mutual funds and we told our board it would take us you know five years to do that. And at the time that I made the, had set the goal we had $300 million. In one point, $5 billion if you assumed an average account of $10,000 was going to be 150,000 investors. That was like all of America to me. I mean it was just so many people and that seemed like a really bold goal. And then when we surpassed it we were all like, hey I guess we need a new goal. And now we're at $6 billion in mutual funds. I mean it's just--when I look back at $300 million and $1.5 billion being the goal and people, our board kind of like, okay you know before I retire maybe you'll get there, that sort of thing. It took a long time. Story_ID: 179496 Speaker 1: --it's interesting also and I think you need to address this. In the, at--in your marketing to the African American market, you were essentially trying to create a market in many ways. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And so you touched a little bit on it you know saying we went down the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and we presented to three people but can you just address that a little bit more? Speaker 2: We had a very definite strategy to market Ariel Mutual Funds to African American investors. Our theory on this was not that they would buy us because we were black. We rejected that notion because this is a serious endeavor when someone's giving you their hard earned money. Our theory was they would buy us because no one had ever marketed to them before. No one had ever educated our community on the importance of saving and investing. And since we were going to be first out of the gate and since we were going to be educational in nature, not sales oriented, that that would allow us to build a very terrific reputation and relationship with our own community. We were very distraught by the fact that we did surveys with Charles Schwab and Company and found that when you asked African Americans who made over $50,000 a year in household income, do you own stock or stock mutual funds? Fifty seven percent of us said that we did in 1997 versus 81 percent of our white counterparts. And that led to a tremendous wealth gap between black and white America and it also had huge repercussions for all society in terms of us not being able to retire comfortably. So we saw this and we still continue to see this as being more than just about Ariel picking up a customer here and there. This is--I joke with people, this is a mission. I'm like an evangelist on this topic, that we've got to make sure--we are in a unique position to make sure our community is investing on par with our white counterparts. And if we do that then we will have changed the paradigm in this country on wealth creation. And we will live to see the day hopefully where our community has grandmothers retiring and going to Florida to the beach, spending more time with their grandchildren and things like that versus what we see right now largely in our community where we work until we die. Speaker 1: And the six billion, how does that split up you know sort of ethnically? Do you have, I mean-- Speaker 2: We don't know. Speaker 1: You don't know? Speaker 2: Because you don't ask about race on an investment application. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So we have no idea about--I only have the anecdotes. I have people who write us letters, who call us. We had a shareholder meeting this year to celebrate--last year to celebrate our twentieth anniversary. We had 500 people attend. Some big companies don't get 500 people, big--you know publicly traded companies. And I said to [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.], I actually got up to give the presentation in the beginning and I got all choked up. I mean in front of all these people. And I said to John, I said it has to be the most diverse shareholder meeting ever because we had all these African Americans who were there. And these people were coming up and saying things to us like I never would have invested. I never invested before. They were telling us what their initial investment was and what their account was now. Some people brought their kids to the meeting. I mean it was like overwhelming. And the thing that I came away with was we were making a dent and this word of mouth in our community is so powerful that I just knew we were on the right track. Speaker 1: And was there any time you doubted it? Because I mean you were creating a market as opposed to--you were creating, trying to create interest in a market in a community that didn't understand so you were educating and trying to get them to invest? What is the--what was the time period? Speaker 2: We started the--focusing on African American investors starting in 1997-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --as a strategic, concerted marketing effort. Affinity groups from National Black McDonald's owners to the National Black Journalists. Speaker 1: And do you have any sense about when you were starting to make some headway in that market? Speaker 2: I think we really started to make headway in the late '90s [1990s] and the early zeros. Speaker 1: So like 1999, 2000, 2001? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 179497 Speaker 1: Now in this, when you start taking over, Mellody, more in terms of you said it just happened but you were sort of the go-to person and then you know things that probably [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] didn't want to deal with. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Like running-- Speaker 2: I got the crap (laughter). Speaker 1: So can you talk--(laughter). So can you talk about what, you know what things you were taking on internally? And I, and I'm wondering how you--cause it's not as if--I know you were doing the newsletter [for Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] but you were still out there you know and so you're managing internally and you're sort of an internal/external person but-- Speaker 2: Yeah which is very hard to do. The things I was taking over, I was taking over hard issues that we just had to figure out like sometimes it could be a business decision a staffing issue, space issues, community relations. You know it just, political sensitivities that you had to keep in mind and trying to be--initially I was just a sounding board for John and then it became well why don't you go and think about this and then come back to me with some ideas? That was initially and then just doing a lot of writing. I mean I've been doing this writing for a long time so it wasn't just about the newsletter and our quarterly reports to our clients, it was about sort of, you know a client would send you a really hard letter and you'd have to send, you know go back to them in writing. So it just, it ran the gamut. I mean it--I know it's not a real clear and easy answer but it was sort of a multitude of things. Story_ID: 179498 Speaker 1: Well what did you learn? It's one thing to be doing sort of marketing and client services. It's another level of things when you're running things. And I guess I want to ask you what you learned out of that process that even probably prepared you for assuming the presidency? That's--do you see what I mean? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. The most important thing I learned during that process is running a business is really hard and it's easy when you take on that I'm an employee mentality to be a critic. When you're in the role of having to find solutions you take on a different level of responsibility and accountability. And I think that was an excellent preparation for having to ultimately then set the, help set the tone of the organization. So during that period I sort of mellowed a little bit. I wasn't so fussy about everything because I started to see that just, it wasn't so black and white and everything didn't just take being a you know this quick thinker who is sort of on to the next thing. Then you have to stay and figure out well how are you going to get that one person on the team where they needed to be to buy into the idea? And how are you going to get this client who maybe was teetering on the edge to be comfortable with this change or you know there--it became a lot--there was a lot more gray introduced to my life during that period and that helped me sort of start to think about how to navigate issues, landmines, problems. And also it helped me to think about how to not get bogged down where you couldn't make a decision. Speaker 1: And that period was from what year to what year? Speaker 2: That period was really a lot of the 90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: So really you're-- Speaker 2: Like beginning in 1993, '94 [1994]-- Speaker 1: 1993 you start-- Speaker 2: --I was really starting to take on a different level of work. And it became much more judgment oriented work versus just doing a project. And that's the nuance, I mean that's the difference. You've got to add a critical opinion to shape an organization. And I knew I was sitting there and actually having an effect, so you know you ended up being so much more--I became more deliberate about things. Speaker 1: So how with this sort of unofficial sort of position, not you know, officially announced but sort of as something that just happens, how were you able within the hierarchy to really manage people who you know were older than you in some cases? Speaker 2: You know what I think the thing that helped me tremendously was the work ethic because I was willing to do any of their work too. Not in a way that stepped on them but it was like do you need help? And if you wanted help then I would--they could give me the work and they knew they were going to get quality back because I was never going to give them schlocky work back. And so I was trying to create this sense that I was indispensible to them. Not that I was there to interfere, push them out or anything like that. And I think that's where people were very comfortable with me. Speaker 1: And in that, what were some--I mean you talked a little bit about it but the lessons that you learned about managing, that would sort of hold you. You said you know on--I've had a lot of thought and there were some things I did I was too intense. You know I mean I could have been more passionate about people or more, you know have more compassion. But I'm just wondering what other things you sort of learned about running an organization like--? Speaker 2: And I learned--I mean again the lists are so long. You know I learned--I still haven't learned this lesson. I, I mean I can tell you my natural instinct it comes out and [HM] John's [Roger, Jr.] always telling me the merit of the argument doesn't matter. It's how you win. And my natural tendency is to want to win. And so it's not winning at the expense of someone but I will impose my strong personality on a situation in a way that maybe creates too much of a win/lose scenario when I should be better at creating win/win scenarios. Now I see that a little bit more because I need everyone to be on board. But I didn't see that in some of those early years and I just was like, but it's logical. But I'm right. You know that sort of thing and John would look at me and say it doesn't matter if you're right. It doesn't matter. You're right but it doesn't matter. You get the, you know sent to the corner. You know you're the one who's actually the least effective in this meeting right now even though you're totally right. And this person who's totally wrong gets the gold star. And that was like hard for me for a long time, really hard. Speaker 1: Because you were an achiever. Speaker 2: And I just sort of assumed--you know the other thing that I had to learn was varying degrees of confidence that people have and how that affects their work and their rapport with their peers. And that if their confidence is lacking you can, they can be so vulnerable in a way that you aren't really taking into consideration. And something seems like a no, nothing comment to you can be so biting to them. And because I didn't have that kind of--the, you know the other thing I--you know John jokes about this. I don't need lots of reinforcement. I always joke with John, that's because I'm the last of six kids and I didn't have anyone giving me attaboys. And so I really--I'm indifferent to that kind of thing so I had to learn to deal with people who need to be sured up from time to time. That didn't--and learn that that didn't make them weak. That just, they needed that. That was a lesson and there's nothing wrong with it and it's important to show appreciation and it's important for people to get what they need to feed their soul because it's more than just the paycheck. Story_ID: 179499 Speaker 1: Now I want to take a little detour. I'd like to talk about the campaign you headed up for Bill, you know with [former U.S. Senator] Bill Bradley when he was running for [U.S.] president. And it goes back as I was looking at your interview, you know that he had interviewed you, you know for Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]. So-- Speaker 2: He had been a part of me getting--right. Speaker 1: --you made the team. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Sorry the team, cause he asked well what does a you know high school student-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --think about--so I want to ask you how that came, you know how you got involved in the campaign and you know what role you played? Speaker 2: Well we met as I mentioned when I was leaving to go to Princeton and then during the Democratic National Convention that was held in Chicago [Illinois] in 1996, I was in my office working really late at night. It's like 8:30, the phone rings and I answer it. There's no one around, I'm just you know, I don't know what I was doing. I answer the phone and I hear "Mellody, it's Bill Bradley." And I'm like you know a little undone. I never forget this because I stood up because I felt I needed to stand up to be sort of at my full attention. So he said you know I've retired from the [U.S.] Senate and I want to have like a really great thank you party during the Democratic National Convention. And I thought that you could be the person to do it. And the thing is you have to raise all the money and you got to figure out how to do it. And we'll help you a little bit but I'd love to have it at Michael Jordan's restaurant because of the basketball thing. So I was like, okay fine. So this is like you know it's 1996, I've been--I'm five years out of college. I have to raise a hundred thousand dollars for a party. And we ended up having this phenomenal event that we called Hoopla and we had 2,300 people RSVP. And Michael Jordan's restaurant did not originally want to give us the whole restaurant because of the convention and it was a destination, location, and I had to talk them into giving us the whole restaurant. So we took over the whole restaurant. We had people calling and RSVPing like Bianca Jagger and Joe Klein who wrote Primary Colors and all these people and I'm like overwhelmed, I mean literally like we're running this out of little Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois], you know all these like you know people calling and trying to raise the money and everything. But the party was co-chaired by Phil Jackson who of course was running the championship Chicago Bulls as the coach and it was a great party. It was just like one of those nights I'll never forget. It was a great party. And Bill Bradley was so happy and I remember how happy he was about it and that for whatever reason, our relationship was just sealed from then on. And so then when he went to run for president he called and he said--and we you know would see each other from time to time, things like that. He said, "Mellody, I need you to leave Ariel and come work for the campaign." And I said well we're going to have to have a conversation cause I didn't want to have this conversation on the phone. He says well I'm flying through Chicago. Meet me at the airport. We'll get a room at one of the airport conference rooms and we'll sit and talk about this. So I met him at the airport and I said "I can't leave Ariel. I said I just can't. I said but you won't even know I don't have a full time job with you. I'll work both jobs and I'll work for you as a full attention for no money but I'll do it on all of my down time, off hours. I'll figure out a way to get both jobs done." He says "well I need you in two roles. I need you fundraising in the Midwest and I need you sort of helping with ideas about young people, African Americans, things like that." So I said okay fine. So our first event was in Chicago. We borrowed on what we had done before. Phil Jackson came in to be the--he had just left to go to the [Los Angeles] Lakers. He came in to be the honorary chair. We rented out the Sheraton Ballroom and we had the announcer from the Bulls announce the event, and it was really great. We raised $1.1 million--sorry, $1.6 million in one night and we had about a thousand people. And it was a, just like one of those great nights. The defining moment for me that night was that, unlike the Hoopla before I was just background, making sure everything got done. I had to speak at this event and I told the story about how I met Bill Bradley and what he meant to me. And I got all these letters afterwards of, you know you're a great speaker. And Bill Bradley started crying while I was talking about him and it became like something that everyone remembered. And from there we did another event in Chicago that we borrowed again called Hoopla except we had hall of fame basketball players come and play--you--we charged the crowd to shoot against the pro. We had eleven hall of fame basketball players from when Bradley was at the [New York] Knicks. And then we just, I went and did events in Detroit [Michigan], I did events in Minneapolis [Minnesota], St. Louis [Missouri], I helped in New York [New York] and then I did a little bit of traveling with him when he was on the campaign trail. And mostly towards the end of the campaign they decided he needed some of his friends around him just to make him happy and just to be there to just, for no reason but just to sit there. And so I went on the northeast wing with him which was great, riding in the car, the whole Secret Service, the dogs, the whole thing and it was just a great adventure. Story_ID: 179500 Speaker 1: That experience educated you in what ways? I mean 'cause you had not been really politically active at that--? Speaker 2: I'd always been very interested in politics because I majored in international relations and public policy and Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] had always been very active in the community in terms of politics. What it educated me on was a number of things. One is I learned how--I should rephrase this from what I was going to say. A lot of people are not very generous. And I said I'm never going to be that person. And it took me back to my original hire, being hired at Ariel where John told me to write the check. People who have lots of money that would make me jump through all these hoops for a thousand dollars. I mean like, crazy. Like well maybe I'll have a lunch and I need his platforms and this, that and the other. And I'm like stroking, stroking, stroking because I'm like this is for the country and the greater good. I've got to keep my ego out of this. So that's one of the things that I learned, the importance of being generous, supporting your friends. I also learned how things get done. I mean it was amazing to watch because a lot of the people who were raising a lot of money at the time helping to raise it, I was dealing with and coordinating and interfacing with were some of the major CEOs [Chief executive officers] from Chicago [Illinois]. And it was just amazing. John Bryan I remember when he came--he called me one day, he's like well I got a check from the CEO of XYZ corporation and I got Michael Jordan's check and I was like oh my god, like it was just unbelievable to me. You know I, I'd have the checks, I'd be like showing everyone in the office the signatures because I just thought it was so neat. But I just learned a lot about who people had a lot of respect for, who people responded to, why, who had a really light touch and who just made your life miserable. You know in a role where I was trying to serve them, I was trying to be their staffer or they were just very either condescending or difficult or just hard on me for no reason versus other people who were just appreciative and thankful and felt like I was helping them. And then that just sort of gave me a mindset of what I wanted to be like. I didn't want to be that sticky widget. I wanted to be the person who was easy to be with. And because I had spent so much time with these people, so many calls, so many visits to their office, I just--like my whole world got opened up to power in the true sense. Story_ID: 179501 Speaker 1: What--do you remember the date of the Hoopla event? Do you remember-- Speaker 2: It was in, I--no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was in like--the first party that we had in Chicago [Illinois] was in the first quarter of 1999 and then the second Hoopla, that was in the summer cause we had it at the [Chicago] Historical Society [later, Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois] and it was hot. It was I think in August. Speaker 1: Now, cause I remember actually being at that Hoopla event. It's interesting to hear all the background behind that. Speaker 2: And the Hoopla event in the beginning, the one with the-- Speaker 1: At Michael Jordan [Michael Jordan's Steak House, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Oh the one at Michael Jordan's? Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Oh no, that one was in 1996. Speaker 1: That was in nineteen--okay '96 [1996]. Speaker 2: Nineteen--that was during the convention. Speaker 1: So you're saying there were three Hoop--? Speaker 2: There were two Hooplas and then one big party at the Sheraton [Grand Chicago Hotel, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so 1996, okay. Story_ID: 179502 Speaker 1: Now you were--how did the [MBR:] Minority Business Report come to be? Speaker 2: I had been asked to do their show just to come on as a guest to talk about the stock market. Speaker 1: Do you remember what year that started? Speaker 2: No. I'm sorry. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: And then--it all like runs together. And then [HM] Don [Donald J.] Jackson called me and said would you be willing to be a regular? And he said you know we think it would be great. And I said you don't even have to pay me. I think it will be a great place for me to learn. And I'd absolutely do it. And I would go there on Thursdays and tape like a three to five minute segment and you know a take, you know leading up to it. You know all in I probably spent an hour and a half, two hours on it and I thought it was great. I think they felt like they got some expertise they didn't have and I got to hone some of my skills. But I didn't know where that was going. It wasn't like I had some grand master plan on this. I just kind of thought it would be fun. And I was lucky to work at a place like Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] where you could do things that you thought were fun like help [former Senator] Bill Bradley run for president and go and do the Minority Business Report. And of course it felt--it spoke to one of our core audiences, African American investors or potential African American investors. So in terms of lining up with the missions that we had and the focus it seemed like a no-brainer. Story_ID: 179503 Speaker 1: Back to [former Senator] Bill Bradley, you were disappointed when he lost [the 2000 Democratic U.S. Presidential nomination], right? Speaker 2: Oh gosh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a sad day. Yeah I describe that as a bad breakup. I was so sad. [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] and I were in New York [New York] when we, you know we're all there and he lost that sort of Super Tuesday and I just couldn't stop crying. And John kept telling me it's not fair for him to see you cry. He's having a hard time on his own. He shouldn't have to look at you with tears. And I would have to turn away and have John sort of like you know engage me in conversation so I could kind of bat away tears 'cause I was having such a hard time. And I just was so sad for the country because I knew that we had this person who was just so brilliant and so good and had all the right ingredients to make us a better place. And I was just sad that America didn't see that. And I was also disappointed because I was thinking could I have done a better job, could I have talked to another person, could I have done more to raise more money? And that was bothering me. Speaker 1: Do you think you would have ever, had he won would you have ever taken a leave and been part of the administration? Speaker 2: You know I said at the time no, and you know everyone said well if a sitting president asks you to do something you don't say no to them. I don't--Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] was like my lifeline like you know E.T. you know when he was connected to Elliott. Like leaving it would have killed me. I don't know why I just couldn't do it. I couldn't entertain any notion--I wouldn't even let my brain go there. You know that said I thought we were going to win. Like I never once thought we were going to lose, never. It's just sort of like how we were working with Ariel. I never for a day considered that we weren't going to be the nominee--that he wasn't going to be the nominee. But when it came to like having to put my arms around well what did it mean when he was president, I just didn't go there in my own mind cause I felt like I'll deal with that when I have to. Story_ID: 179504 Speaker 1: Now 'Good Morning America', can you talk about that, how that came about, how that came to be? Cause there was a, there's a period of time between '[MBR:] Minority Business Report' and 'Good Morning America', right? Speaker 2: I had been doing 'Minority Business Report' the whole time. Speaker 1: The whole time, okay. Speaker 2: And Diane Sawyer perhaps had seen me on the cover of Working Woman magazine. They had a story called '20 under 30' that runs in their June issue every year and I was selected as one of the twenty under thirty and they put me and another woman on the cover, Christy Jones. And she saw the article. Now the thing that is extraordinarily funny is that I was going to The Field Museum [of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois] annual gala. I left work early and I was at home and I had gone down to the lobby to get a cab and I was wearing like a long dress, the whole deal. And my cell phone rings and this woman says, "Hi, I'm Linda Frankel. I'm Diane Sawyer's sister and she saw you in Working Woman magazine and she's doing this story and she wants to use you for the story. She's doing a story on what women wear who are in business. And she said it's not a cute story, it's a serious story about the considerations that women have to make in order to be taken seriously in the work place. And we think you might be an interesting twenty-something. We're going to have a twenty-something, a thirty-something, forty-something, fifty-something. And we're going to look at these generations and see if there's a different point of view." And so she said "tell me about your personality when it comes to dressing?" So I was like oh you know I'm telling her all these sort of like interesting things. I'm like you know my theory is I'm twenty, you know at that point I don't know what I was, twenty-five, twenty-six. I said and if I get it wrong people will just say she's young and I'll be able to get away with some things that maybe aren't always quite right. Maybe the skirt's a little shorter than it should be. I said but at the same time I'm also very practical about looking appropriate. So we talked about that and they came out and followed me around for a week in Chicago [Illinois] going to all these events with me seeing how I handled my wardrobe from serious meetings with our clients to I had to speak to kids at the Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois] to--at a party that I had in my house to a big event. And this--Diane Sawyer ended up never doing the story because Prime Time Live got canceled because she went to 'Good Morning America'. And like, so I got the call saying it's never going to hap--it's not going to happen. We taped all this, it's not going to happen. So I was like okay thank you. It was so nice of you to consider me. I've never talked to her or met her or anything like that. So about three weeks later someone calls back and they said Diane actually watched all the footage just because she wanted to see it. Even though the story is never going to air, she wants you to come to New York [New York] to meet her. So I was like okay. So I flew to New York, I went to see her. I sat down with her with no expectations. I thought she'd maybe say thank you for letting us intrude on your life for a week and sorry it didn't work out and sort of kind of put a nice face on something where maybe she thought I got really excited about it. You know you start telling your friends and family and it's not going to happen. Long story short, she said I watched the tape and I think there's something there. And she said I think you could like be really good on TV talking about money. And I said, "well what makes you think that?" And she said, "I just do." And she said, "what if we have a conversation with the powers that be here at ABC?" And I was like okay. And she said you know--I said well you know I have a full time job like I'm not interested in going into TV full time. She says okay, "I'll make this work if you make it work on your end where you can do both?" And they ended up calling me, we worked out a contract and I ended up starting to work for them. And I've been--my contract is now in its fourth year. Speaker 1: That's a Cinderella Story. Speaker 2: It's a little bit of a Cinderella Story although at the end of the day maybe I felt a little bit like one of the stepsisters because I got into Working Woman just because of hard work. That wasn't you know, that wasn't about you know, you know--no, I guess I felt like Cinderella yes, not the stepsisters. Yeah it was just hard work and then it got recognized and it was really neat. And she's one of these all time great people. She's a person like you'll never know. And now I know why you know cream always rises to the top, why she's one of the best journalists, not just women journalists, but journalists in the world. Story_ID: 179505 Speaker 1: So you came back and you said to [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] or Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois], I have this opportunity. What was his--? Speaker 2: John was like wow. And John was very funny. He's like I've always wanted to be on 'Good Morning America' or the Today Show ['Today']. Just to be a guest. And he was hilarious about it. It was great. He was great. He's like go for it. Speaker 1: And that whole process, now you had--this is if you go back and look at your interview. You had hosted a program as a kid. Speaker 2: Yeah I know. Speaker 1: And so here you are, you know on major, you know, TV doing this and that other thing that I think interest is that Diane Sawyer made this happen. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: You know and you don't even think that maybe she had that ability to do that? Speaker 2: She's extraordinarily hands on. She's extraordinarily good to women. I just met with her last week again, and she's always trying to help me think about how to be better. And I am so grateful to her. I always tell her time with her is a gift. It's a gift. It's like I'm opening a package at Christmas and I'm so excited because pearls of wisdom just drop out of her mouth and I feel like I'm just better for the experience. She's just amazing. Speaker 1: So what are the, some of the things you've learned from her then Mellody? Speaker 2: You know what's really interesting, she once told me one day I was having a hard time on something. Well I'll give you two--the first show I did. I'm like knew, there are like a hundred people on the set of 'Good Morning America' all running around doing stuff. I've never done this before. And I had a hard time that I had to finish the segment by because the show would automatically go into a commercial. So you're fighting time as a new person and you're not disciplined yet about how to answer questions quickly and all sorts of things. And after I finished she stand up--she stood up and she said everyone give Mellody a standing ovation. And she said and now I'm going over to give her a hug. This is in the middle of the show in like a two minute commercial. And I was like the idea that you have that kind of sensitivity to a person. That's [former Senator] Bill Bradley at the table saying "what's it like to be a high school student?" That's you know so many times John with me and I was like I want to have this as just a natural instinct to know, this is really hard. This is the big leagues. She's a kid. I've thrust her into the deep end of the pool and I've asked her to swim and now I'm going to know to reassure her that she did a great job because there's no way she could know. It was amazing. There was another time I was having a really hard time and it just so happened I'd had this very tough meeting before going to see her. She'd asked me to come and see her. And I had this meeting where I had given this speech to a women's group and the speech with a certain segment of the group did not go over well. And they thought that I was aggressive, a ball hog, pushy and they sent someone to tell me who was a very, very senior woman in this country over lunch. And I was kind of undone by it. I was grateful that she had the courage to tell me but I was then questioning and second guessing myself because some people just love this speech and other--this group didn't like it at all. And this woman felt that I was too personal and I was a little too flip and all sorts of things and I took her very, very seriously. After this meeting it so happened I had this meeting with Diane Sawyer. So I walk into the meeting and she's like you're not your normal sparkly self. What's up? And I didn't say anything. I'm trying to like grin and bear it 'cause I'm like this is a valuable amount of time she's giving me. You're supposed to be chipper. And she's like Mellody, it's forced. And she's like you know, "Mellody well let me ask you a question while you decide if you're going to tell me. I have to give a speech to the women of the Lehman Brothers [Holdings, Inc., New York, New York] this week. What do you tell women when you give a speech?" I come undone. I was like "I don't know. You don't want to take advice from me about what to tell women on Wall Street." I mean I--like the flood gates open. So she's like--so I tell her what happened. So it's like you know some of these women liked it and the other women didn't. And this is what she said to me. She said "Mellody it sounds like you read the audience wrong, which is very important. And she said that audience was much older than you. And they need to know that you've suffered and you did not exhibit any form of suffering." And she said people, you want people to want to hug you. You want them to like you so much that they want to be around you. She said, "it sounded like in that situation you created distance between yourself and this audience. And you've got to ask yourself do you do that in any other ways in you life." And she said, "When I spend time with you I feel a very sensitive soul." She says, "But I want you to always remember you got to figure out how to capture that for lots and lots of people to feel." And I was like--and she's like you know the thing that she said that I always thought was brilliant. She said you know, "Mellody, Oprah is one of the most successful people in the world. She flies around on Gulfstreams and we all think she suffers. And that's why she's so loved." And that changed me right there. I was like, note to self. And it's not about being you know, not yourself. It's not about wearing your heart on a sleeve, anything like that. It goes back to that compassion, putting yourself in someone else's shoes, reading the audience and that was just, you know that was the right thing to say. And because--then she told me, which was where she's so gifted. She said "Mellody, she said this is the great thing, you're learning this at like thirty-two." She's like I was like fifty-two when I learned it. She goes and that was like a real kick in the pants-- Story_ID: 179506 Speaker 1: Tell us about you assuming the presidency of [Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois]--and how that came about? Speaker 2: You know it was really something that had been coming for a long time and it wasn't a big event. There weren't a lot of bells and whistles to it. We knew we were working towards that goal for many years. It had been discussed with the board of directors. They felt that I needed to be at least thirty years old before I took that role and it ended up happening when I was thirty-one. And you know the idea was, I'd earned it from their perspective I think and the idea was that it helped the firm to have more than one face and that you--we were limiting our growth by being so closely tied to only [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.]. So it was a very concerted effort to try to make sure that people understood Eric [McKissack] was there and I was there. Peter Thompson, Merrillyn Kosier [Merrillyn Jean Kosier], people who were really leading major initiatives within the firm and tremendously responsible for the firm's success. Speaker 1: It's so interesting to--because here you're thirty-one and a lot of times--you know and John is, you know he's in his forties right, early forties at the point that that happens. Speaker 2: He's eleven years older than me. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: She was forty-two. Speaker 1: Forty two, so it's hard to think of succession planning, I mean-- Speaker 2: But John always did. This is where he's just, he's not--you know this is not your grandfather's Oldsmobile. John is just a different thinker. He was always thinking about how to make our business, how to keep the business sustainable. And because he studies companies for a living, he had so many places that he could look to see what worked and what didn't work. And because he sits on boards of companies, he also had that purview. Owner/founder mentality how that grows into a large organization that becomes a publicly traded company. And so he was always very focused and very clear in his own mind. I think I probably, you know if he had anything to do with it, I probably would have been president earlier. But the board said she needs a little bit more experience under her belt and at the end of the day that was the right thing. Story_ID: 179507 Speaker 1: But the--so you said it was a, you know it was a, it wasn't a big event. But how did things, were, did things change at all or have they changed since that time period? You've been-- Speaker 2: The thing that changed was my responsibilities did not change. My responsibilities grew but they didn't like, I didn't have suddenly like a major shift they just have continued to grow. My accountability is much higher obviously because the buck stops with the president and the CEO [chief executive officer]. I mean that just, you know something goes wrong you have nowhere to look. You know there's no looking over, there's no finger pointing. You either put the people there. You either gave them their direction. You either let them do what they were doing. You are responsible ultimately and I always feel that way. The only other thing I think that changed was it took some pressure off of [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] because he wasn't having to be everywhere all the time. What we found was when we didn't have the president and he was the person who held the president's title, anyone else who went it was like the B Team. And it was like well the owner, the president doesn't think it's you know, that we merit them coming? And so then you just had more bench string. And then we had time for the others within our firm who were really establishing their own reputations who are now executive vice presidents, who now sit on the boards of Ariel Capital [Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] and Ariel Mutual Funds. Peter [Thompson] and Merrillyn [Jean Kosier], for them to establish a reputation within Ariel. So we are all sort of maturing and growing up together but at the same time we were doing like a baton handoff. It was almost like a relay. So the baton went to me, then went to Peter, then it went to Merrillyn and so that we were starting to grow the presence of the firm in the country and particularly in the Chicago community beyond John. And I used to talk about that and people would think I was being very aggressive or sort of like you know trying to step on John and I would say no this is just being practical. We want to have a real institution. John embraces this theme. He's the one promoting it. He doesn't want it, all of the center of the attention and the buck to stop only with him because that's too much pressure on a person. Story_ID: 179508 Speaker 1: So and what are your plans then? You--the one thing I see in a sort of a precursor to you answering the question is that you have worked so closely together that you, it seems, I mean not that you think the same but you're on the same path. Speaker 2: We have very, very, very similar values. [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.] and I rarely disagree on ethics, on values, on general tone, very seldomly disagree. We have very different styles and all of the people within Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] are the same way. We just have the most heterogeneous group of people you've ever met. They just aren't like people you know. And it's like a box of crayons filled with all these colors. We are just a--it's--that's what makes it fun. So in lots of ways we are very similar. In lots of ways we're so different because we don't think exactly the same way all the time, I think that makes us a better organization. But around our core beliefs, we are in sync. I think that's what helps it to work. Speaker 1: So what are Ariel's plans for growth and what are your plans? Speaker 2: Our plans for growth are to continue doing what we do but better. We believe in being a focused organization that's one of the key tenets of our mission statement that we have at the firm. And we think that an expert is someone who knows more and more about less and less. We want to be experts. And we think you, once you accumulate knowledge you do something over and over and over again you get better and better at it. So we are very, very simple. I often joke that because neither of us went to business school we're not good at five year plans. We just don't think like that you know. I'm thinking about if you build it, they will come. If we have a great organization, people will come. They will want to do business with us and everything will take care of itself. Employees will want to work here. They will be proud to be owners in Ariel in terms of the shared ownership that we have of every single person in the organization. So it's a very, very, very simple business strategy. The great thing about that also is, again, our minds aren't cluttered by having to figure out all sorts of new things. We're starting--not starting new subsidiaries at Ariel. We're not doing things that bog you down in time and attention and money. We're focusing on honing our craft and we think that that will pay dividends for our shareholders, no pun intended and for us as employees of Ariel and as investors in our business. In terms of me personally, people are always amazed that I say this is where I'm going to be. This is what I want to do. I'll be doing it for a long time. I'll be answering these same questions the same way ten years from now. And I don't feel the need to sort of have this sense of what next in terms of some big, huge, grand scale cause I see the what next every single day and every single minute at Ariel. And I see tip of the iceberg in terms of what our firm is versus what I think can be. And I often talk about this idea of dreaming wide awake. Can you dream in vivid color about what your future can be and use that as a road map for getting there? And that's what I'm trying to do. And it's not about having to look to see where--how the grass is greener across the, you know on the other side of the fence. I'm not about that. I'm about just loving this pasture that I'm in and trying to figure out how to make it better and that's what I'll be doing. And having the luxury, the wonderful luxury of still having the ability to pursue other things like Good Morning America and to be involved in lots of great community service work that I'm really proud of and to be able to do fun things. Story_ID: 179509 Speaker 1: You had talked about the competition facing [Ariel Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois]--and what is your strategy for dealing with that competition 'cause you said you know it's not just good to be here in this moment, we have to always grow. Speaker 2: Right, that's the quote I use, even if you're on the right track you'll get run over if you just sit there. The idea is just to, if you're good at what you do, the competition will take care of itself. I actually, I don't spend a lot of time looking over my shoulder. I don't feel like we have to do that. I feel like we're charting our own course. And so I'm not so--I'm concerned about the competition from the perspective of I want best practices. I'm not concerned about the competition in terms of they're going to come and take away business from us. Speaker 1: And, but out of that--okay, you're not concerned about that. You're saying you're not concerned about people taking business away. But what is harder, that's what you had described, it's harder? Speaker 2: What is harder is living up to expectations. What is harder is not disappointing people. What is harder is having much greater demands on your time and energy as you have more people within the organization that you have responsibility for, more customers that you have responsibility for, more shareholders. What is harder is keeping the intensity, not burning out. I read a story in the New York Times recently that said success is a process. I don't think the process gets easier over time. I actually when people ask me about success I say "I don't think we're there." And that's because my standards are very high. I'm not trying to sound like aw shucks, we haven't done anything, that sort of thing. It's just because I think that process just isn't done. We're still in formation and I still think we have a long way to go. Story_ID: 179510 Speaker 1: Now speaking of you know a ways to go or a path, you have had, some people would say a meteoric path, some people would say. But I'm wondering at this point where you are in your life, you know we typically end the interview with you know two questions. One, what do you want to be remembered for? And I want to ask you that. Well you're so young maybe we'll come back some years later. But what do you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: I'm really idealistic and I want to make the world a better place and I don't have any way of thinking about how to make it concrete. I want to be remembered for making life better for people. In our work we get to do that because we help them have more financial security and to me that is a noble profession. In the other work that I do in the community and things like that I feel that I've been put in a unique position to effect change. I don't want to waste this opportunity. I want to live full potential and I want to be remembered for being a good person who did good things in society. Not how big Ariel [Capital Management, later Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois] is, not how many employees we have, how much money we make, not you know where we lived, what we wore, anything like that, just saying that you lived a life that made other people lives better. And I've had such excellent examples of that where I've seen people where I tell them just your influence on me, you could die tomorrow knowing that you've done a good job. [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.], Diane Sawyer, [former Senator] Bill Bradley, so just if you just take your moments in history with me, you've done a good job. If I could have people who feel similarly, I've done a good job and I'm happy as a clam. I could--happy as a clam, be done and ready to face whatever eternity is with a great sense of satisfaction. Story_ID: 179511 Speaker 1: One other question, what does--you are--how do you perceive yourself and how do you think people will perceive your life in many ways? And I say that from the standpoint, someone would say she's an African American. She's a young person. She's a female. I'm just wondering when you look at where you started and the family you came from and where you've got to and where, and the great future you have ahead of you, how would you, how do you think people categorize yourself or how would even describe yourself? Speaker 2: I think people see race first and I think it will be--I'll be dead before that changes. I think people see sex second and that's you know I just can only respond to how people will react to me around those two things. And I think thirdly, I think when people describe me they would describe my intensity. They'll say she's very focused. You know she's very driven, she's very smart. You know I hear those kind of--that kind of feedback. Those are generally the themes that I hear. I think people also perceive me, I think you said it. I think they think I've--it's like been really easy and I just sort of like ended up here and it's all been great you know. And that you know there was no struggle. And you know at the end of the day the most important thing to me is for them to perceive me as hopefully being a good person you know that's first. I want them to think--you know that's how I think people think about [HM] John [Rogers, Jr.]. I think people say John is such a good person and I think that's like the ultimate compliment. I think that's really hard to achieve. But you know he's done it and I have him as a role model to watch him. That's what I would like to be first and foremost what comes to mind for people. She cares about other people...