 Story_ID: 8527 Speaker 1: This is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Geoffrey Holder, G-E-O-F-F-R-E-Y, H-O-L-D-E-R. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Port of Spain, Trinidad, 1930. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: That's the most difficult question to answer. In my past, well, I put "artist" because it covers everything. Speaker 1: All right. So you are an actor, you're a visual artist, you're-- Speaker 2: Well, I do a lot of thing (inaudible), yeah. Speaker 1: --All these things? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If you're going to be in the theater, if you're going to be in there, you have to know all of the arts. If you have one art, then you should know all of the others because an artist is someone who sees things and he has to--let me put it this way: without the artist, we wouldn't know where we came from. Before Christ, before Jesus Christ, there were men in caves who took a stone, and because they saw the antelope, they drew on the wall those antelopes and the bears and the buffaloes or whatever they had at that time. They didn't go to school. They didn't go to Art Students League. They didn't get a Ph.D, but they saw that and they were curious and they documented it, and because of that, we knew where we came from because without the artists, forget it. Speaker 1: Now sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today? What day is today? The 17th? I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Sixteenth. Speaker 2: Sixteenth? Sixteenth of April of 2003. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in my home, which is my studio. You're into my world. Speaker 1: In New York City. Speaker 2: New York City. Story_ID: 8528 Speaker 1: Sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Food? I can't answer that. I wrote a cookbook. It's called 'Geoffrey Holder's Caribbean Cookbook,' and being born in the Caribbean, I'm exposed to every kind of food: French, Spanish, Portuguese, African, Indian, Chinese, because in Trinidad, everybody is mixed. We have all those different people down there and we all cook differently. So food is just more than meat and potatoes. It's curries and herbs and seasoning from different parts of the world. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Color? Blue I love because blue is, is, is--is pure. I am red and I am orange. I am a Leo; I am fire. I love all the colors because I use them. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Paris [France], Haiti, Mexico, anywhere where there's pure art. Haiti, I adore Haiti. Mexico, I adore the painters. Paris? All the great artists are there. Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "We're all born mad; some of us remain so." (laughs) That came from [Samuel] Beckett's 'Waiting for Godot.' I love insane people. They're not really insane; they're the sane ones because their mind runs riot. It's alive. It's wild. It's alert, you know, to the average man who is dull and dreary, you know, who is nine-to-five, it's a bore. The curious mind is what, you know, and we are considered insane because we are artists. Story_ID: 8529 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history. How far back can you trace your family? Speaker 2: History? I don't know. I'm not interested; not really. I know Holders came from Barbados. My brother knows that very well. He knows where, but, I'm--you know, on my father's [Arthur Edwin Holder] side. On my mother's [Louise Defrense Holder] side is French, Martiniquan, you know. I'm not-- Speaker 1: Are there any stories that have passed down through your family about what your ancestors were doing during the 19th century or anything like that? Speaker 2: Well, no. I know my grandfather, the French one, was an artist. He used to paint for the, you know, he was an artist, full painter, and my mother was an artist--wasn't an artist, she loved to paint. My mother was a magical lady. Whatever she touched was brilliant. Now my father is the best. He supported whatever we did, so I'm very fortunate. But, no. Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: No, they were already dead. Story_ID: 8530 Speaker 1: Now tell us about your father. Can you give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name was Arthur Edwin Cecil Holder. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you spell it, please? Speaker 2: Arthur, A-R-T-H-U-R, Edwin, E-D-W-I-N, Cecil--how do you spell Cecil? C-E-C-- Speaker 1: I-L-E? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Maybe without the E. Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother was Louise Defrense, D-E-F-R-E-N-S-E. Speaker 1: When was your father born and where was he born? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: When and where was your father born? Speaker 2: My father was born, I think it was 1895, Port-of-Spain, Trinidad, and my mother was 1900, Port-of-Spain, Trinidad. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, tell us about your father. You know, what kind of father-- Speaker 2: My father was an incredible man. My father was a salesman. He was a marvelous man. Everybody adored daddy. Daddy has charisma. Daddy had power. He was very powerful. He was a Libra, rare balance, and he had great pride with his kids, and he met my mother--my mother went to a dance with her sister, Tante Belle, my aunt Isabelle. We call her 'Tante Belle'. And my mother saw my father dancing and he was always very well dressed and dapper. My mother was very gorgeous and very elegant. And what happened, she said to her sister, "Well, I would like to dance with that man. Look at him dance." So my aunt went and asked him, "Excuse me, mister, my sister would love to dance with you." My father said, "Why, sure." So he asked mother to dance and mother and daddy just danced all night because he was very good on his feet. He manipulated my mother all through the dance floor and never stopped. So no wonder I'm a dancer. Story_ID: 8531 Speaker 1: And they [his parents, Arthur Edwin and Louise Defrense Holder] got married and they had their first boy, Boscoe. Speaker 2: Can you spell his name for us? Speaker 1: B-O-S-C-O-E. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's his name, but his real name is Arthur, Arthur Holder, Arthur the second. Speaker 2: It's a nickname. Speaker 1: But they liked the name Boscoe, so he grew up with being Boscoe Holder. Very successful, very fabulous man. During the '30s [1930s], nobody had money. Daddy was very bright and had vision and he says, "I'll bring a piano into the house." We bought an enormous piano. He said, "If you bring an instrument inside of the house, the child will crawl to it," and Boscoe crawled to the piano and began playing the piano, and dum dum dum dum. Daddy says, "Ah, my son has talent." So he sent him to learn to play the piano, you know, academically, and then he had another son named Kenneth, and Kenneth played the violin. And then there was Marjorie. Played beautiful. She looks like my father--very dark, very beautiful eyes. And then there was Jean, Jean is--and then there was Geoffrey, little old me. So what happened, I grew up in that environment, and Daddy encouraged it, and why I love my father--and I say that with all the pride in the world--he never told us not to do it, and that's very unusual for a man in the Caribbean in that period, in the British Caribbean, to have two sons as artists. He couldn't care less whether we were doctors or lawyers, or what have you, like everybody else. And he supported us, whatever we did was fine with him. And I love it because to be born in the British Caribbean--and I say the British Caribbean, they have no respect for the arts. Academia, academia, academia, you know, and they have no respect for the arts. They have respect for cricketers and footballers, but not the artists. And Daddy went over that and he was the best. Sent me to the best school: Queens Royal College [Port-of-Spain, Trinidad]. And our house was the center of the storm because if you have one talent, all the other talents fall in place. Boscoe is a pianist, and what he will do, he'll come to the house and hear the way you speak. He'll say, "Man, you can sing. Sing for me." And he'd play and he'd pull it out of you, and all of a sudden, you'd see these people who didn't know they had a voice, hearing themselves for the first time. He did that to a lot of people who became very big stars: Edric Connor, Mona Baptiste, (inaudible), Cecilie Fort . All those wonderful people in Trinidad, you know, used to come to the house and they all sing and dance, and by this time I'm growing up and I'm seeing this happen, and then the people of Trinidad are physically gorgeous because of the racial mixtures. When an Indian and an African get married it's called a 'dougla'. Then there's the Chinese Creole, Chinese and black. Spanish and black. Black people mix best with everybody. French and black, you know. So that you have different shades of black, different people. So he would play the piano and they would dance--and then he opened his own dance group, his own dance company [Arthur Holder Dance Company], and as I child, I saw that happen in my house, so I just, like a monkey, followed everything he did. Speaker 2: Now you got involved when you were seven years old. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I began then. He threw me on stage. Speaker 2: But I want to go back maybe and ask you about your mother. I asked you about your father. Speaker 1: Well, let me get into mother. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah. Speaker 1: Let me get into mother. Boscoe asked mother how to draw a face, and in three strokes, she drew it for him. Mother could have done anything. Mother was an excellent seamstress. Designed clothes, sew it. She was a Gemini: very fashionable, very dicty lady. Could cook better than anyone else. Mother could have done everything. So to have a mother who is that brilliant and a father who is supportive, we couldn't miss. You know. She was not just a little housewife, no, no--no, no--no, and she got that from her father, who was a full artist, you know, in big buildings they would always ask him to do. So we got it from both sides and supported from both sides. And then Boscoe's company was very successful, and then in, I think it was 1948 he left Trinidad to go to England with his wife, Sheila Clark, and they went and took their son, Christian Holder to London [England], and he formed his own dance company there and this company was made of young students from the West Indies and Africa who were studying in London because where is he going to find black folks in London unless they were West Indians and Africans? And one of them became the Prime Minister of the Bahamas [Sir Lynden Oscar Pindling]. What was his name? It will come back. I forgot his name. Maybe it will come back. Speaker 2: I think I know who you're talking about (inaudible). Speaker 1: Two years. It was a couple years ago, yeah. Speaker 2: Neville or something like that? Speaker 1: Yeah, it will come back to me. And to make extra money for his education, he danced with Boscoe, and a lot of people like that. Boscoe did English movies like 'Sapphire' and choreographed a lot of movies in London, and brought up his son Christian, and his wife Sheila, and they all did their thing in London. By that time, I took over his company he left in Trinidad. Story_ID: 8532 Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Well, it's all related. That's the only way I could say it. Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: Because the sights and sounds and smells all have to do with my home and my environment and my creative environment. Sights, was seeing my mother [Louise Defrense Holder] sew costumes and seeing Carnival every Carnival time, you know. You know, and going out to the beaches with my friends, skinny dipping as a child, when away from school, and painting it as I do it. But I was very insular because I used to stammer. You know, I had this speech impediment. I could not speak. And I was dyslexic, and when you're dyslexic, the teacher thought that you were a dunce and that was incorrect. They were the dunces. They didn't know about dyslexia, but a dyslexic person is somebody who can see beyond. We see ahead of everybody else. We can read body language. We see things way in advance. All the letters go around, play games with it because we are anxious, and I used to stammer on top of that, so I was very turned in verbally. And I remember when we'd stand up and read in school, and I'd be, "I-I-I, g-g-g-g." The teacher would say, "Next," so I never had time to read, and they had no patience. Now that was an ignorant teacher, not an ignorant student. It bothered me very much and I just withdrew, but I could paint, I could dance, I could see, and I could do. God has a nice way of balancing things out. A deaf man can see quicker than the average guy. A blind man can hear better than the guy with two eyes. You develop something else. Body language: I could tell whether you're angry. Not from what you're saying because it's easy to lie. We all lie anyway, but your body's telling the truth. We would know that. We call it "street smart." And it really bothered me and it bothers me today because a lot of people around the world think a lot of people are ignorant, but they're not really. So many times it could be dyslexia. "Oh, he doesn't know," but he knows. Story_ID: 8533 Speaker 1: A child is an incredible human being. From the time you are born, you're born with all the knowledge you're going to have. You're born with a hell of a lot of knowledge, and if your parents can see that and trust you, he will know what you really want to do, what you're curious about, and place all the instruments there for you. Not tell you, "Well, you have to do this and you have to do that, and I want you--I didn't have it and I want you to." No, no, no, no, no, no, no. The child knows what he wants and the child will drive you up a wall because he knows what he wants, and if you don't stop and listen to that child, that child will leave home and go somewhere else to get the knowledge and you may not like that person, and he may be ill-informed and get into bad company. So parents have to stop and leave their personal problems aside and listen to the children. The biggest playground for a child is the museum. When my wife traveled all over the world and I had to stay home and take care of my kid and do my work at the same time, if I had a business lunch, it would be at the Metropolitan Museum of Art [New York, New York] and I'd take my son . He was four, five years old, but he saw his father conducting business, so he's watching us, learning. And he would be a part of the conversation. We brought him in. And then after lunch, he'd say, "Excuse me, daddy, I want to go to see the mummies," because he liked Frankenstein and the Mummy. But he was learning about Egypt and he was learning about Nefertiti and Cleopatra. He was learning about another world. You know, all the worlds are there at the museum, we don't have to fly off to Italy. Go to the museum and see the whole world there. You want France, go see the French Impressionists. You want Russia, likewise. We come back, here we go again: the artist. We can stay here, but without the artist--I am a fighter for the artist, but a child is--they're very sensitive. I don't talk down to a child; I talk to a child and that child knows exactly what you're talking about and he's very articulate. Some of the words he may not know, wouldn't understand, but--and you look at his body language, you could see where he wants to go, whether it's sport. I feel that every child should study dancing. If you want to be a lawyer, study dancing. Why dancing? Why acting? Lawyers act. And if you dance, you know exactly the kind of walk you need in that courtroom to save a human being. "Ladies and gentlemen, this man is innocent. Ladies and gentlemen, he did not kill his mother. He did not kill his." It's all your body language, and the way you throw your voice could save a man's life. You don't have to be a ballet dancer or a ballerina to learn how to walk. Just learn to dance so that you know how to walk straight into an office and get a job. My father [Arthur Edwin Holder] always tell me, "Geoffrey, don't go looking for (unclear) there. You must take it with you." So when they walk into a room, let them know that somebody's there. Not with attitude, but with a presence. Use that presence. If you want to be a doctor, a surgeon particularly, play the piano, and if you could play the piano, I can crochet your heart back, your body together, when I have to mend you. The arts are very, very, very important. So I always get up on a soapbox because it's all I know within the arts. Story_ID: 8534 Speaker 1: When you were being raised, you had-- Speaker 2: All that exposure. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All at my house. We had the best. Speaker 1: You had the nurturing of your parents and you-- Speaker 2: And my brother [Arthur 'Boscoe' Holder] and the environment and the books he left behind for me to open like a little boy. Couldn't read it. I could read, but not enough. I'm a picture man. All these photographs, paintings, and in the paintings I saw things. When I read a paragraph, or maybe one line in a sentence, that one line is a piece of choreography. One line is a painting. One word is an image and that image I want to photograph; I want to do something with it. Speaker 1: Yes sir. What was the name of your grade school? Speaker 2: My school was called Queens Royal College [Port-of-Spain, Trinidad]. It was really a high school. It was the best school in Trinidad. It was wonderful to be there. I went to school with V.S. Naipaul [writer]. A lot of these guys were in my class. Speaker 1: He's a famous Indian writer. Speaker 2: Yeah. He was very dull. Well, number one, if you're a writer, you know, you observe everybody, checking everybody out, you know, and what happened is that he never participated. Of course he was of a different culture; he was Indian and they have their own world--hold. Speaker 1: Now, was the name of the school Queens College all the way through? Speaker 2: Yeah. My school was called Queens Royal College. It was a Victorian building overlooking the savannah and the botanical gardens. Very beautiful building. It was heavy for me because I was very, very shy, very withdrawn, and I had one friend, Carlton Clark, whose father was a doctor. He was the head of sports. He was wonderful, Carlton Clark, because Carlton Clark's father liked music, and he's died. He's from Tobago. Dr. Clark's from Tobago. And Carlton had a lot of records of Marian Anderson and Paul Robeson, and he would lend me those records and I would borrow it and play it on my little grammaphone while I paint. I would leave school, after school I would come home and paint. When those guys were playing football, I was home painting, and after painting I would dance, you know. Football and sports was a bore to me, you know. And we liked music, so we hung out together, and we still talk the same way, you know. But it was very important for me. I was a loner. I was very shy. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in school that took an interest in developing your talents? Speaker 2: Nobody there--nobody helped me. Some of the teachers saw my talent because they saw me perform, but they were very in awe and very, you know, very struck by it, but they never mentioned anything. Only one teacher who said one thing, he said--to one guy I was talking to in school, you know, when I shouldn't be speaking. I used to go to see the movies and every time I saw a good movie, I would come home and tell you all about it, yak, yak, yak, yak, yak, yak, yak. And one teacher saw me talking to this guy and he said, "Rambleen, don't listen to Holder because when he becomes a great artist, you'll be a dunce." I'll never forget that. And I didn't know that he thought of me as such, you know. I was fifteen, sixteen years old at the time, but I don't forget things--when people say things like that. "Well, I didn't know he thought that." Story_ID: 8535 Speaker 1: You know how I began to paint? I was sickly as a child and when I stayed home I used to listen to mother [Louise Defrense Holder] tell stories to her friend next door, the neighbors, and mother was great story--mother was magic. Great storyteller. She'd see 'Romeo and Juliet,' and she'd talk about Romeo and Juliet and what Juliet wore and how Romeo took the dagger and stuck it into his heart, and I was a little boy listening to mother tell all these wonderful stories. So I was always a dreamer, and one day I was bored. I had nothing to do. It was a rainy day. It was during the war [World War II], 1945. I found some old shoeboxes and I cut them into small pieces and I stole my brother's [Arthur 'Boscoe' Holder] paints--Boscoe began painting. He was a very successful painter and he had belonged to the Trinidad Art Society. I stole his paints and turpentine and I began to paint. I did like five or six little drawings and I was proud of myself--age 15. I took his paintings off the wall and I put up my paintings with thumbtacks just so that I could see them, and he came in and he smelled the turpentine and he saw all his tubes of paint with my thumb marks and he went berserk. Ran me around the room with a whip. And here we are hiding behind mother, you know, "Don't hit me. Don't hit me. Don't hit me. Don't hit me." And he was furious because it was the war and he couldn't get those paints coming into the island from England or from America. But he said, you know, "Don't steal it," you know. "They're not bad, you know, but don't you dare steal my paints anymore." So he called the head of the Trinidad Public Library and, "Come and see where Geoffrey lives," so the man came and he brought another man with him, Dr. Cecil Marquez, who was visiting Trinidad at the time from the Harlem Hospital in New York, and Dr. Marquez bought two or three of those paintings. I was fifteen years old. I made like $17.00, and my mind, my head went bam. My ego went up because I'm a professional. I sold my painting. And I vowed that every year I would paint and I never stopped. Story_ID: 8536 Speaker 1: You started dancing when you were seven. With all your brothers? Speaker 2: I was dancing when I was seven because, you know, whatever. I was like a little monkey: monkey see, monkey do. I saw Boscoe [Holder] dance and my sister and I, my sister Jean, my little sister, we used to imitate Boscoe and we did the Suzie Q. [a dance step], da-da-da-da-da, way down south in Birmingham. We'd dance. And Boscoe used to say to us, "Come on stage," and he says, "We're going to do this Lindy Hop. And then I'd like you two to come on, then I will." Yeah, it's all right. So he said, "Come on stage and do this set." So I went on stage and voila. I jump on stage, and Jean and I, two little kids, seven years old, dancing. We stopped the show because no one expected that. Every child needs a chance and that compensated for my shyness, you know, I could dance like nobody's business. I had a teacher--he was a nasty man, nasty man--in one of my schools, which was Tranquility School. I was seven years old. The day after I danced on the stage--it was a boy's school--said, "Ah ha, we have talent in this school and his name is Geoffrey Holder. Will you stand up?" In front of all these boys I had to stand up. He said, "Geoffrey Holder, come up here." We wore short pants then, you know, and socks up to here. "Show these boys how you danced on stage last night." Well, I was frightened. I began to cry. "Hoo hoo, wah wah." He took his cane and whipped me on my legs. Bam! "Show them. Dance. Dance like you danced on stage." I will never forget that. All the boys laughed. All of it made me withdraw. I went home and I never told my father [Arthur Edwin Holder] because my father might have said, "Okay Geoffrey, no more dancing," or turn around and go to the school and beat the hell out of that teacher; Mr. Best was his name. And I found out why he did that. He was jealous because I stopped the show and he was a frustrated ham. Story_ID: 8537 Speaker 1: I was a little surprised at the subject matter of the dances that you all were doing. You were doing African American dances, and--? Speaker 2: Well, the dances that I was doing, for instance, a lot of it was from the folklore of Trinidad, from old material, you know, from Shango, from bits and pieces, from India, which is dougla because we have one-third of the population of Trinidad that are East Indians, so we do all the dances with them, you know, and then you have the American influence: jazz, Lindy Hop, da da da da da, you know. People travel to Trinidad and a lot of Americans in Trinidad who lived in America, so we were exposed to everybody's culture. People make a big mistake about the Caribbean. They say, "All of you, we are so different." You know, St. Thomas is Danish, Guadaloupe, Martinique, and Haiti, French, totally different. Barbados, Jamaica, Trinidad, British Guyana, British--was called British Guyana. And I don't understand Jamaicans because they don't sound like Trinidadians. They sound very Welsh. [Imitates Jamaican accent]. It's all singsong, very Welsh to me, you know. We're not alike. The difference within the French West Indies and the British West Indies is that--and I adore and respect the French very much. Americans are not friendly, you know, they're nosy. "Hey, how much money you make? Look, I bought this car for my wife! What you doing here?" They mean well, but. The French are not like them because they're not nosy. They leave it to your own space. They are very--what's the word--they don't know you very well, so they're not pushy like that, and they would respect your culture. Napoleon [Bonaparte] lost the war with Toussaint L'Overture, right? He didn't destroy the Africanism of Haiti. He didn't make the Haitians feel inferior with their religion or their culture. He lost, so he left, and the Haitians have kept up their folklore and their art. Not like the British who would make you feel inferior because you don't speak the language properly and your Gods are devils. What they did, they sent the missionaries all over the world to brainwash everybody, you know, "But this is right and this is wrong." Please. Story_ID: 8538 Speaker 1: And the Haitians still have their folklore very, very, very rich. I am very, very pro-Haiti because when I left Trinidad in 1950--when I went to the first Caribbean Festival in San Juan, Puerto Rico--I was invited. Trinidad did not pay for me to go there to represent them. I was not a footballer or a cricketer and we were not cricket team. We were just dancers. The Haitians, their government sent--the government who had no money--sent a whole planeload of Haitian dancers and musicians to Puerto Rico with their folklore, and when I saw them dance, I went berserk. They know who their gods are. They know Ezuli. They know Damballah. They know Ogun. They know Aguay. And in Puerto Rico I saw a character dance, a man dance this strange dance. His name was Baron Samedi. A dance by a man named Salistan, Andre Salistan. No, [Salnave] Philippe-Auguste. No, that's a painter. Salistan. And he did this strange dance and I asked this lady who was from Texas, who knew the folklore inside out, her name was Catherine Randolph, my dear friend, "Who's that? This man is strange," because the man was painted half white and he was black. Wore a tearcoat and a top hat. He was very erotic and very strange, but very, very spooky--she said, "That's the God of Life and Death. He meets you at the crossroads. His name is Baron Samedi," and I was floored. And the dance is called Banlas. So I learned that dance he did and I put it as part of my repertoire years later. You see, I wouldn't have found that in Trinidad because those who knew the folklore of Trinidad kept it to themselves. They didn't share it. And in Haiti there are books on it, literature on it, music on it, and their painters blew my mind. Hector Hippolyte, Andre Pierre, [Salnave] Philippe-Auguste, their art. You go to Haiti and you look up at the ceiling in the cathedral, the Catholic church, and you see Jesus Christ and the Virgin Mary and see Damballah and Ogun and Aguay, all of their African gods with the Catholic gods mixed, but they have not lost that, and that, to me, is incredible because we're all--we go to the opera and we're so snob--hear ballets about Greek gods and Hermes and Apollo, and da, da, da. The Haitians have theirs, which is pure African, and the operas and ballets being that we, you know, the French didn't take that away from them, but we don't have it in Jamaica, we don't have it in Barbados, and we had a little bit of it in Trinidad, but was never really encouraged. Of course, the Jamaicans, they have Rasta. Now have Rastafarians, and that's fine, but the art for me is very important and you can only have art if you know who your gods are, whether it's Jesus Christ, Damballah, Moses, Muhammad, you know. It comes out of that. Speaker 2: Well, the Rastas created their own god, basically. Speaker 1: At least they made a little effort. Speaker 2: I think that's why they're more creative. Speaker 1: You understand, and a very important, very important part that all these things bring into our psyche and our lives and our beliefs and our, you know. A woman in Trinidad, she wants a boyfriend, she should wear blue underwear or wear something blue. Blue is Ezuli. Ezuli, gods of love. Blue for luck. War is red. Ogun. You know, a red handkerchief. Fire. All that folklore is divine and I love that because when I travel, I look for the folklore of the place, look for the folklore of Mexico, of Iran, of Turkey, you know, of Italy, you know. In Rome, Jesus is not Jewish; he's Italian. So says Michelangelo. Look up at the ceiling in the Vatican. They're all up there naked. Naked! They're painted by an Italian man with a model who was Italian. In Spain, he's Spanish. El Greco paints him Spanish. You know, folklore and the art and the da da da, fascinating. Story_ID: 8539 Speaker 1: When your brother [Arthur 'Boscoe' Holder] left for England, as you said, much earlier, that you were then in charge of-- Speaker 2: I took over because somebody challenged me. I'm a Leo, king of the beasts; don't challenge me. R-r-r-r-rum! I roar. I was working on the docks. I was a clerical assistant. I told daddy [Arthur Edwin Holder], "Save your money from school. I want to leave school." I was eighteen. He said, "All right, boy." I love daddy. Every time I talk about daddy, just makes--"Whatever you want." So I got a government job in the Port Services and all these boats would come in and I'd be stamping bills of lading and the things like that. And the money I made there was seventeen dollars a week. It was to buy paints and fabric to make costumes, and I took whatever group of people my brother had. We come in there with--took it over. And my boss says, "Oh, Boscoe's gone to England. That's the end of the Holders. No more Holder dances." I said, "That's what you think." He was Chinese. Mr. Aliong was his name. And what happened, I formed this company and every--twice a year I would give a performance with the company, and the success of that--a dear man named Donald Bain, who was the head of the Trinidad and Tobago Tourist Bureau, told me, "Geoffrey, there's a woman coming to Trinidad, her name is Lisa Likas (ph.), to look for the talent here to take them to Puerto Rico for the Caribbean Festival." That's how I got out--through Don Bain. Not through the government, through Don Bain, and we went to Puerto Rico and was very successful. Story_ID: 8540 Speaker 1: Now in '52 [1952] you met Agnes de Mille. Speaker 2: Well, what happened, we were so successful at the [Caribbean] festival, we were invited back. We had to leave at the end to go back home, but they wanted us to come back to perform at the Hilton Hotel, the chain. So that was my big success. So my dancers, I took a smaller company. There were fifteen of us. I brought it down to six. They left their government jobs and they left their wives to follow little old Geoffrey Holder, who was then twenty-two. Gave up that to follow me. And we went back to Puerto Rico to perform. It was Christmas of '52 [1952]. And then from Puerto Rico we went over to the Virgin Islands--a part of the deal--and while I was there I met a wonderful woman named Elda Childebrand (ph.) and her husband Louie Childebrand. He was heavy in politics. He was a judge and she was head of psychiatry. She was a wonderful woman. And we were successful and she said, "Agnes de Mille," who did 'Oklahoma' and all these great Broadway musicals, that she was the queen of Broadway choreography, "is in town. I would like for her to see your dance." So she invited Agnes de Mille in her living room and we got there and we begin dancing up a storm. Said, "Oh my god, I would like Sol Hurok," who was a great [dance] impresario, "to see this company. I will arrange it." And on the strength of that, through a lot of politics, we got a visa to enter New York City. We came to New York City and we auditioned for [Solomon 'Sol'] Hurok. It didn't work, but two months after that, I went to see a show of Martha Graham, 'The Modern Dancer,' and I only had eight dollars in my pocket, but I was dressed to the nines in my tuxedo and my hamburg. It was opening night, very sharp, and I went to see this performance, and then after that I was stunned. She did ballets on Greek tragedy. Two months after I went to an audition, and the man I was auditioning for, his name was Arnold Saint-Subber, who had a big show called 'Out of this World,' and 'Kiss Me Kate,' and he said to me, "I saw you at Martha Graham's concert, but I thought you were a basketball player. I thought you would have been wonderful on stage next to Janet Collins," who turned out to be my wife's cousin. "I'm going to Haiti. I'll be back. I want you to be in my next show." I was just arrived, you know. So when he came back he said, "The show is 'House of Flowers'." The writer was Truman Capote. The composer was Harold Arlen, who wrote 'Over the Rainbow,'-- 'Somewhere Over the Rainbow,' 'The Wizard of Oz,' and the star will be Pearl Bailey, and I would like for you to play the Duke of Darkness." I said, "Who?" "The Duke of Darkness." "You mean Baron Samedi?" He said, "Yes." "Well, I know his dance." I begin dancing like--the same dance I saw in Puerto Rico of a Haitian god. He went crazy, and that's the dance I did. The show opened, it was very successful, and in it I met my wife, Carmen DeLavallade, who had just come in from New York and joined the show when the show changed choreographers from [George] Balanchine. I did my own choreography and [George] Balanchine did the general choreography, and when [George] Balanchine left, they brought in Herbert Ross and Herbert Ross brought in Carmen DeLavallade and Alvin Ailey to be other principle dancers. And I saw Carmen DeLavallade and I proposed to her four days after I met her. Speaker 1: Did she say yes right away? Speaker 2: No. She said, "I'll think about it." I said, "I'm not going to rush." But when she came to New York, in months later, she saw the paintings on the wall that looked very much like her. We talked about her family and my family. She said, "Might be a nice husband." So forty-seven years later, here we are. I've been very fortunate because that show--I got rave reviews. And then after that, Carmen replaced her cousin Janet Collins at the Met [Metropolitan Opera House, New York, New York], who was prima ballerina of the Met, and Carmen was the prima ballerina after Janet. And the next year the choreographer was sort of mad at me, for making Carmen pregnant, we got married. "Who's going to do my 'Aida'?" I said, "Throw me on stage. Dress me up like Carmen; I'll do it." He howled. He said, "I have an idea. I'm going to put you on stage and we're going to shock the Metropolitan Museum--Opera." I was an African king with a white baby and caught dancing this grand ballet. We did it and it was sensational. He choreographed it beautifully and I got rave reviews for that, and out of that, I realized everybody began asking me out. "Is it because I got a good review in Time magazine that you're all invited me out?" So I took my unemployment check, and I had a press agent, and that's how people began to know my name. Otherwise I would just be a little dancer for the, you know--you have to tell them who you are. So I'm glad I was clever enough to bring that. Story_ID: 8541 Speaker 1: And then as I grew up, incredible things happened to me, you know, because I listened. I believe in messengers. If you're curious, people whisper things in your ear that opens your head. Like, I didn't know I had something to say. I was always very shy until I met a man named William Dufty. William Dufty was the greatest. He wrote Billie Holiday's book 'Lady Sings the Blues.' Years later he got married to Gloria Swanson. And he was a dear, dear, dear friend. He was a writer, and I had met him once, and he came to my house and we were talking together and the man had listening eyes. You know when some people talking to you and they know--you know they're not listening. But he would hear and the more he looked at me and the more I heard myself speak, and I was pulling things out of my subconscious that I didn't--that were buried there, little bits and pieces of knowledge and jokes and things. I mean he was howling and laughing. So I didn't know that I was funny, but writers do that. Writers listen. And all of a sudden I heard my own voice and I began to show off, I began to speak, and I came out of my shell. So I always surround myself with writers and doctors and lawyers who I learn from to make up for what I didn't learn in school. Your best education is after school. You know, the people that you meet. And they don't have to be famous and they don't have to be rich. They don't have to be wise and knowledgeable about what they--the point is--and what they know, and that's how, you know. Education is very important, but you get it where you least expect it. A little blind woman will tell you something. Listen. She's giving you a gift, you know. Listen to the children. You hear them and they're giving a piece of wisdom that they don't even know about, you know. We all feel that. When you know that you have a good audience, you become a ham and you begin to let it all out to get it out of your system because you have all that knowledge buried inside of you. I feel what people should do today. I like children and I like old people, very old people. Old people are now wizards and wise people. They need pencil and paper and just write their thoughts, write their past. "Once upon a time when I was young, I was fifteen years old and it was during the war and I'll never forget, Frank Sinatra was singing about 'Old Man River' and I had a little dress, and I was going off to a dance that night and I met this guy Rufus, and Rufus was not so bad." We all have stories to tell because they're telling about an era that is gone. They're historians. And leave that for your grandchildren and you leave your world for them. Leave something behind, if you write it on the wall. It's like the artists. We are all artists in our ways, you know. And you don't have to go to school to learn. When I came to New York, a friend of mine was a great artist and when I met him he said, "I paint better than you." I said, "Oh, fine." That was his sentiment. Or, "When I go to New York, I'm going to study at the Art Students League." He said, "Don't you dare." He said to me, "The only way to learn to paint is to paint. Use your mistakes. Correct your mistakes. Go. Go, go, go, go, go." I never went to the Art Students League and I paint all the time. Story_ID: 8542 Speaker 1: To do [Broadway production] 'The Wiz,' which I did, I did the costumes before, I always did the costumes before--from the time we give you an idea of a story, I have to see how it's going to look. I'm visual. I'm going to see the costume, "How's she going to look, how's he going to look and look look look." Then we all see the same thing at the same time. And the strengths of those drawings I did, we got the money to do the show. Speaker 2: So that's-- Speaker 1: It's not, well, like, "I'm going to write the script and then after I write the script, I'm going to find a costume designer, and after." We are the last on the totem pole. Speaker 2: So the costumes came before the script in that show? Speaker 1: Naturally. Speaker 2: Well, naturally in a certain world, but not--most of the time it doesn't work that way. Speaker 1: "Most of the time is a cliche" and it's, you know, you could call on the phone. Or we all sort of, I have to do the costumes to destroy the image of Judy Garland and Burt Lahr, and all that because that was such a visual, beautiful film. You can't top that. I have to take it visually another way. Speaker 2: So that makes it different-- Speaker 1: Thank you. I don't want a carbon copy of what's been done before on camera with close-ups. You can't top that, so you have to give it a whole different viewpoint. Speaker 2: So for 'The Wiz,' you designed the costumes and you conceptualized the show? Speaker 1: That's a very long story. It's a very long story. Speaker 2: Can we say that? Did you conceptualize this-- Speaker 1: Well, from the vision. It's a very long story. On the strength of the costumes, the man got--Ken Harper got the money because 20th Century Fox Golden Star (inaudible) loved my costume design and loved the music by Charlie Smalls, and they wanted me to direct costume, choreograph, and play the Wiz, and I said, "No, I don't want to play the Wiz. I'm tired of playing witch doctors and wizards and Wiz's, but I'll do all the others," and we had a big conflict because they wanted me to have a co-director and I said, no, I would not have a co-director. "I'm not in trouble. I don't need help. I need an assistant, not a co-director." But they wanted the co-director only because they wanted somebody who can help work on the script. They wanted a black man inside there who can help work on the script because it was written, beautifully written, by a white guy. That's what they really wanted, and I kicked that, and I said, "No, I won't do it." So they had somebody else and that was how they hired the choreographer George Faison. Story_ID: 8543 Speaker 1: 'The Wiz' was a marvelous experience for me, 'The Wiz,' because it gave me a marvelous opportunity for me to create and direct and use all the knowledge that I know in theater and da, da, da, da, da, because I'm really a painter who directs, who choreographs, and all of the arts are very important. They're all married because when you do a Broadway show, you have to get a choreographer, you have to get a director, you have a costume designer, you have to get a da da da. If you get all of it, then you get one great thought based on one idea. You know what I mean? So 'The Wiz' was that. I always liked that. Then I did 'Timbuktu!,' with Eartha Kitt. Of course I did the costumes, choreography, and directed. So I didn't have to argue with myself because many times the director argues with the choreographer and the choreographer argues with his costume designer and you can't afford to argue with too many, too much money up, and you're arguing on the union time and there will be actors waiting, you know? So 'The Wiz' was great for that, and 'Timbuktu!' and-- Story_ID: 8544 Speaker 1: For 'The Wiz' you won the Tony Award, Best Director? Speaker 2: Best Director, Best Costume Designer. I had--. It was the first time a director and a costume designer who's the same person got an award. The second time it was Julie Taymor in 'The Lion King,' because you know different people for costume designer, or set designer. I was a director, but you know, for once they see the costume, they know who. When you design costumes and you show it to the actor, "You're going to look like this," then it determines what walk he takes because is it a stiff collar? Or is it a slouch? It gives you body language. I gave an award the other day--I'm glad you asked me this by the way--to a lady who does all my costumes, Grace Costumes, Maria [Brizzi], and I was happy to do it because we, the costume designer, hide all the faults. We are the magicians who hides all the faults, faults of the great actors and actresses. I can make you five feet short or six feet tall. I can give you broad shoulders or no shoulders at all. I could give you a hat that would hide the size of your nose. We are the magicians who make them look good and all those wonderful little people who sew buttons and things like that, God bless them. Well, "Oh, he's a star. He looks great." He didn't design the clothes. It's the magic of the costume designer, you know, and the makeup man too. Those are the people who do it. Here we go again: the artist. The President of the United States, all of them wear makeup. They wear as much makeup as Barbara Walters or anybody else, as Madonna, on camera. See them get powder to hold in their perspiration when together on camera, they're made-up. We never stop to think of that. Their hair's well-coiffed and the costume is all perfect so that they can look--the makeup man. Speaker 1: So Richard Nixon didn't use a lot in 1960. Speaker 2: They all wore makeup. Like--who was that man? Sharfton? [Rev.] Al Sharpton. Speaker 1: Yeah. All right. He has a hairdresser, but they all have hairdressers. They're well-coiffed. But I love my profession. I love the arts and when you get inside of it, man, it's-- Story_ID: 8545 Speaker 1: When I said Americans are not friendly, we're nosy, if I had left Trinidad and had gone to England, I would have been so turned in, very proper. You speak when you're spoken to--very British. I came to America and, "Hey, man. You are tall. You should be a basketball player. What's your name? Yeah." And somebody who is shy and turned in and stammer, it's a shock. I met some friends and they invited me every Sunday to their salon. They had open houses with others. [Jacob] Lawrence, a wonderful painter. Jacob Lawrence was there, everybody was there, all the artists were there and they're talking about art, and I'm very shy. The person's name was Stuyvesant Van Veen. He was the head of the Artists Equity [Association] and his wife's name was Fran and she stammered. She stammered like me. She couldn't care less, which is wonderful. And I was apologizing for not being able to speak properly because I was very, very shy. They knew me in Trinidad as a little boy. The first Christmas I spent in New York, I was sad because I remember my mother [Louise Defrense Holder] baking cakes, I remember my father [Arthur Edwin Holder] decorating the house, and I was not with mother and daddy anymore and I had this big responsibility of all of these dancers who left their jobs and their wives to travel with me. I saw the future. I could envision these things. You must remember I'm a little boy; I'm twenty-two years old, you know. No, this time I am twenty-three because we are apart. And where my future is, I saw it, but I could see it in a haze and I had this "I am" personality, but I was also frightened. I'm a Leo; I'm a cowardly lion. Get it? Until you get me angry and then boom! You see a rage you're not ready for. So I was asked to come up to the Music Inn in Lenox, Massachusetts, where they have all the jazz symposiums and all the great minds of jazz is there, the talent. Professor Marshall Stearns and Philip and Stephanie Barber were there. But I had performed there once in a caboonk caboonk caboonk caboonk. And they were having this symposium where jazz and America, and it was a period where calypso was very--it was very popular. And having worked on the walls in Trinidad, in the hot--the goddamn hot sun with your jacket on, and you know, your suit, and what have you, and the sun is hot and the (inaudible) and things like that, see this big boat come in with all the tourists, American tourists come in, and we were a British island. We all--a tie, in the hot sun, and they come down the gangplank dressed as Carmen Miranda. All this too, you know Americans, maracas. "Well, I'm going to the Caribbean." And we would laugh at them like nobody's business. I'll never forget that and when they asked the tourists--and this symposium about, "Tell me about Trinidad, and la la la," and I thought they were going to talk about rum and Coca-Cola and all that b.s., all this stereotype thing that we had seen. It was an insult to my father and my country, and my whole back went up. Boom! And I said, "I'm sorry, you're wrong." I, who never raised my hand in school, put up his hand in New York City because something bothered him, and all of my rage. I began to speak. I said, "Excuse me if I stammer." I would whistle. And I spoke for one hour nonstop and didn't stammer once, and after that, everybody would listen to me, and I had never had anybody listen to me before. I ran to my room and I cried like a baby. All of a sudden, I felt somebody listen to me. It would never happen in school and I was young. I was like, almost had a nervous breakdown because it came out, boom, because I had something to say and I had something to defend. I was defending the dignity of my father and the dignity of my country, you know, the way I knew it. The way I wanted to--I wanted to know it, you know, to know it, and not this "When the Yankees come to Trinidad," all that b.s., you know. And you know, something very funny. No one ever knew this. The Andrews Sisters sang 'Rum and Coca-Cola.' They do not know they were singing about prostitutes. Speaker 2: Well, what's the--? Speaker 1: Now listen to the lyrics. "Rum and Coca Cola. Go down Point Koomahnah." Point Koomahnah is the beach. "Both mother and daughter working for the Yankee dollar." Get it now? Speaker 2: So the Andrews Sisters, that was a famous song that they sang. Speaker 1: --That somebody deleted from Trinidad and tried to make it his, but he didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. But it was probably a hit over here on-- Speaker 1: It was a big hit. Speaker 2: Big hit. The Andrews Sisters are white. And American. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, whether they're white or black or what have you, they were-- Speaker 2: I'm saying this for the historical records because--listening to this who doesn't know about it. Speaker 1: Well, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Just say the Andrews Sisters. Let people go and find out who the Andrew Sisters are. Because white don't mean anything. They could be Italian white. They could be Irish white. They could be Jewish white. Or because white is white is white is white is white. No. There are different whites from different parts of the world. Just like saying blacks and blacks and blacks and blacks. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: You understand? So I'd just the-- Speaker 2: Just so they understand what they were seeing. Speaker 1: Let them find out who the Andrews Sisters were. But it was not about a black thing. It was about lyrics and in those days, you don't sing songs like that on radio. Speaker 2: If you know what they mean? Speaker 1: If you really know what they mean. And hear they're talking about both mother and daughter prostituting for the Yankee dollar. That's what the song meant, but we could sing it in Trinidad because we could make fun of our own--some of the Calypso songs, man, are raunchy, you know, but it's all double entendre. But I just went off on that man and I never stammered again. And all of a sudden, I went to see a friend of mine who is a psychiatrist, Dr. Norman Levy. Bless his heart. I said, "Norman, I just spoke for the first time," you know. To settle me down, he gave me some pills just to calm my nerves down because the problem that I was broke, financially broke, and I was worrying about where the money's going to come from. I had stayed at my uncle Johnny's house. So there was money, and you know, Uncle Johnny would take care of me. You understand? But there's sort of independence, you know what I mean, and I'm patiently waiting for something to happen, like 'The House of Flowers.' It was my anxious years, but the miracle of myself speaking, And I stop stammering, and today when somebody say, "Mr. Holder, I love the way you speak," knowing how the voice got there, how the self-confidence got there, and I am somebody, I will kiss myself in the presence of God. That's all I have is me and I love myself so goddamn much, and if you don't love yourself, there's something wrong with you. You better start liking yourself now or there's nobody else going to like you, and make the most of yourself the best you can, and stop beating around the bush "Oh, because I'm black, because I cannot speak, because I cannot do this," because we always want to pass the buck. We can do whatever we can do. We can walk on water if you get inside of yourself and take that chance. Story_ID: 8546 Speaker 1: And what about singing? Now you have such a deep-- Speaker 2: "My romance doesn't have to have a moon in the skies/My romance doesn't need a blue lagoon standing by/No month of May/No twinkling stars. No hideaway/No soft guitars/My romance doesn't need a castle rising in Spain, nor a dance to the constantly surprising refrain/Wide awake I can make my most fantastic dreams come true/My romance doesn't need a thing but you." It's automatic. Speaker 1: So when did you start to sing? I mean (inaudible) talent. Speaker 2: No, it's not a talent. If you could speak you could sing because it take the lyrics. If you have a timbre, which I had, that's one thing that's moving a chord. But growing up hearing music--again, the piano in the house, the music and that--and I write music, you know. I do all that. I compose to the ballads that I do, and then you take the lyrics and find the essence of what that man is trying to say and sing with your heart. I only sing songs that I know I could have a good time with, with the words I sing, so. I don't have to sing like this to prove that I have a note and I could sing opera. But I'd much rather sing and seduce. It's all seduction. So when I get a compliment on my voice, I do that [pats self on head] to myself. Story_ID: 8547 Speaker 1: James Earl Jones stammered you know. A lot of people stammer because we are so ahead of ourselves, we want to get to the end of the book before taking it slowly, and that's a blessing. It's not a problem, and if your child is stammering, have patience and listen with your eyes and that child will calm down and take his time to speak and make his mistakes and correct himself. But if you show no patience with that child, that child will step back and "uh-uh-uh-uh-uh," because fear does that to the child. Fear is the worst disease in the world. I know a friend whose mother had cancer. I said, "Don't you dare tell her she has cancer. It would kill her before she died and she would kill you with fear." When you tell people things like that, you're not lying to them. I don't have a name for it because you put it into their head and--a friend of mine called me once, wonderful man. He had a heart attack; he got better. Then he had a stroke; he got better, taking medication. One day he called me and said, "Geoffrey, Geoffrey, I want to kill myself." I said, "Really? What are you going to wear?" He howled. "What are you going to wear?" He said, "Oh no, Geoffrey, let's stop being funny." I said, "No, no, no, no. You said you're going to kill yourself. What are you going to wear?" I deliberately distracted him. I said, "What's wrong with you?" He says, "Oh man, I'm frightened." "You're frightened. About what?" "I don't know." I said, "Man, if you don't know what you're frightened for, there's nothing to be afraid of." He said, "Talk to me. Talk to me. Talk to me." I said, "Okay, I'll tell you what. What's wrong with you is that you're suffering from side effects from the medication you're taking. There's nothing wrong with you." He said, "Oh, talk. Talk to me. Talk to me," and I talk him down and calm him down because fear was taking him over. I got down and got in a taxicab. I said, "I'm on my way, but just remember there's nothing to be afraid of. I'm coming." Zoom! I jump in a taxi. Fear is the worst thing because there's always a pill for something. There's always a pill for something and somebody is working other part of the world to discover it, you know. We are all magical people, you know. If your mother is ninety years old, that means, man, you come from good stock, you know. Take negative and make positive. Take what little you have and glorify it, you know. Story_ID: 8548 Speaker 1: Now tell me about your philosophy of art. We were talking off camera about all the great or noted political thinkers that came out of Trinidad when we were talking about Trinidad. Everybody from Roz [unclear] to [unclear] James to George Pednor to Eric Williams, all these people, and you were saying, well, you're an artist, you're not a politician, and-- Speaker 2: Well, number one, I have no soapbox to get on. I wouldn't get on a soapbox. For what? I'll get up on a soapbox for artists. With all those so-called politicians, you call, need the artist when the country is in trouble. When we are in trouble with Russia, we send Duke Ellington. They send the Russian ballet here. We don't speak, but we perform. There's no language. There are no bad words. It's all dance, it's all music, it's all common--Louis Armstrong did more for the world for the relationship with America than anybody else. Ella Fitzgerald. That music was called jungle music. It was a put-down until the French saw it and thought it was a high art, and they would put Ellington with Claude Debussy and [Maurice] Ravel. They looked at him intellectually that way. "Well, all that's black music. What about this jungle music?" I had a fight the other night with a lady, and I hate to say this. I was at some political affair, and she comes said, "We have to stop this gangster rap. You know what the children are saying?" The--the profanity the children are saying. Well, number one, don't you dare stop them because if you stop them, then you're giving them material to explode. If you leave them alone, it disappears. If you make a whole issue of it, then they want to prove that they are right. Number one, [William] Shakespeare is very bawdy. We don't know it because it's "thou," "thy," and "thee," and it's early English language. What he's saying is very funky. The great [Pablo] Picasso has the most erotic drawings you ever wanted to see that are shown in museums. You can't tell Picasso, "Don't do those erotic drawings." Freedom of expression. If we give it up, then another country will take it and manufacture it and give it to us on a platter as though it's theirs. What happened to rock n' roll? It's no longer black; it's now English. Where's Little Richard? They'll market it; we didn't. We allow it to slip through our fingers and then somebody say it's theirs. That's why I like Mr. Gordy, Berry Gordy, who marketed then Motown sound and he make it a whole world. [Sean] 'Puff Daddy' [Combs], bless his heart, he's doing something about it. He's his own boss. If not, somebody's going to market their own stuff and then you have to--please. Look at what they're trying to do with the steel [drum] band from Trinidad. They're trying to market it, and you know, take the design. Some nonsense like that. It's disgusting. They take your own culture and whip you with it and no longer yours. You cannot stop creativity. You have to let it flow and it goes into something else. Now we have rock musicals by Andrew Lloyd Webber. Where is [Willie Mae] 'Big Mama' Thornton? You know? That's how our art disappears and goes down the drain, and everybody, the rest of the world, is talking hep, "Yeah, man. Hey, man." A whole vocabulary, incredible vocabulary, that the black Americans have made out of English language. If you tell somebody they're bad, it means they're good. "Man, you are bad," means you are brilliant. You can't use the word "gay" anymore. It doesn't mean happy; it means something else. The world has changed. But I went off on this lady, you know. "Well, we have to." And then she told a politician. Don't you dare because the publicity out of that, they will just go because it's banned, then it's in. "Where did they get this profanity from?" Turn on the television, you'll get it. I can recall specific Broadway shows where they get it from. That's in the daytime. Very respected people. Story_ID: 8549 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns about the black community? Speaker 2: You know something? You know what bores me. I'll be very honest. We got--I mean slavery, slavery, slavery, slavery. My whole thing of, what about us before slavery? All we talk about, "Oh, we were slaves. Let us go." Our slavery, slavery, slavery, as though we began with slavery. Speaker 1: Now your music on 'Timbuktu!' was about black culture before slavery. Speaker 2: Before slavery, where the first university in the world was not in France, was not in England, was not in Russia, was in Africa: Timbuktu, Mali. Tell me about then and the kings and the royalty, and you know, who are they? That is what we have to write about. "Oh, well, let my people go, Oh, we have suffered so long." All right, we were still holding onto this. But tell me where I came from. We all like the movie 'Gone With The Wind,' but Scarlett O'Hara was a very wealthy, Irish girl, and then she went on to nothing and she built up again. "I'll never be hungry again," but you saw her in her glory before she went down. We don't see us in our glory here. That's my point. Get to know our folklore. Get to know our culture. Get to know it very, very well. Before Christ, during the Crusades. There are books written on that. There's a wonderful woman named Dominique Demonia from Texas. She went to Texas. I like this lady. She died, but she had a big art collection. She went to Texas (inaudible). She's French. Again, here I go again on the French. And she found that black people looked so sad there, she would like to do something to show them how grand they were. So she produced like four volumes of black people in the western art--here I go with art--before Christ. You see them in paintings, in statue, in courts, in Victorian times, before Christ. Incredible document. So that we can see where we really came from and how rich we were culturally and how we fit it all over the world because she found them so sad, and you know, you stay in the mind--So that is where my head is, you know, and that is very important. And the museum is there. That's the playground for the children. Story_ID: 8550 Speaker 1: Maybe you can give me some thumbnail sketches of some of the people you've met. Speaker 2: Like who? Speaker 1: Well, Josephine Baker is one. Speaker 2: Oh, the greatest star I ever met is Josephine Baker. Here we go again on the French. Josephine Baker is a nice, pretty, brilliant, little chorus girl. Went to France with a show and did her number, her little Charleston number, and the French went wild because it is a new dance of the period, Charleston, Black Bottom. The new music jazz, le jazz hot, which only comes from Harlem [New York, New York], where the French are concerned, during the period where everybody was in France, when France was the place to go. [Ernest] Hemingway was there. Gertrude Stein was there. [Pablo] Picasso was doing his great stuff there. There was new art. There was new books. There were new writers, the new intellects, and the new sound of music was called jazz. And because jazz didn't come from France or Europe, the French put it on a pedestal and put Josephine Baker on that same pedestal because there was nobody like her. You see, Harlem does not exist in any other part of the world. Harlem is Harlem, and she, to them, was Harlem, and today you see the French will go into Harlem because of Josephine Baker and, and, and, and [Louis] Armstrong and [Duke] Ellington. They put her on a pedestal and glorified her, rightfully so. When she performed in France, her chorus men were white. There were--when they--you have French at Folies Bergere . There were very black men around there, dancers, so they used a chorus boy. When in America, the black performer couldn't have a white man on the stage with them. It was banned. But that's different between two different cultures. They really put her [Josephine Baker] on a pedestal and there she stayed until she died. Speaker 1: Now what about--. Speaker 2: Well, why she [Josephine Baker] was great because she was an original and she was gracious, and she invited my wife Carmen [DeLavallade] and I to come to Paris [France] with her because I performed for her in New York City [New York] on Broadway. She [Josephine Baker] was wonderful. And you learn from the people you work with. She would not leave the stage until they were through playing her theme song, and she'd go and apologize to the conductor, "Man, I was off key. Forgive me. I'm sorry." Humble and the most gracious person in the world. Never forget. Carmen [De Lavallade Holder] was going to be in the show and I said, "Ms. [Josephine] Baker, I'm going to be designing two dresses for my wife," and she's there putting on her makeup [patting his face with his hand], you know, in her dressing room. She said, "Why do you tell me that, Holder?" I said, "Only because one dress is white and the other dress is pink." She said, "My dear, I can always change my wardrobe." That was her answer. Opening night in Paris she said, "Carmen, change your costume in my room," you know. Carmen is young and beautiful and Josephine was old and beautiful. You think an old and beautiful woman would like a young and beautiful woman to share a dressing room with her? [Shakes his head no] Josephine did. And said, "They're going to like you tonight just like they loved me forty years ago. I need somebody to take my place. I can't go on like this." That was a pep talk Carmen got from Josephine. That's a big, open-hearted star. That is grandeur of the highest respect because all the other ladies would have been [makes prissy facial expression]--. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Not Josephine. That's why I adored the lady. I loved Josephine. I loved Pearl Bailey. I've been blessed. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Pearl Bailey. Speaker 2: I love Pearl [laughter]. Love Pearl. The first time I met her, I was in the 'House of Flowers' and I was rehearsing my dance. [Makes drumming noises] Baron Samedi--the drum [makes drum noises] and I had my own drummers who were my dancers and Pearl walked over [makes amazed facial expression], "Man, you're going to stop the show. You're a king." Well, to me, I'm going to stop her show. Not who is that man who is going to stop the show? Big difference. "Man, you're going to stop the show. You're a king." She [Pearl Bailey] didn't have to say that. But I loved Pearl because she was a disciplinarian. "Now you come in on time. You're right here on the ball. Don't do that--." She came from another generation, a vaudevillian who was very, very hard and she was like a boss, "Don't. Don't do that. I don't want that," but I respected her for that because I was not pushy, I was laid back, and I respected her, so I got the best from her. I'll never forget, I'll never forget Pearl [Bailey]. Speaker 1: Now what about Eartha Kitt? Speaker 2: Eartha works like a pro. There's nobody like Eartha Kitt. She's a brilliant performer, you know. She could be naughty at times and she loved being naughty. Eartha likes to live up to some of the songs she sings. Because one time her character said, "You're gonna do what?" You're going to ruin my reputation," you know, when she wanted to be mischievous. (Laughs) But she is brilliant, brilliant. She's someone--see, those ladies come from an old, wonderful school of theater and come from a whole European thinking world where they become the world and they know their craft inside out, you know. They're pros. They're not instant stars based on a little publicity, you know. And they didn't manufacture themselves like some of these stars today. They're all self-manufactured. They did it the hard way and their pure talent and their pure genius went--cut you like a knife because they are all originals. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite performer? Speaker 2: Oh God, I have several. Outside of my wife, oh yes. Josephine [Baker], Eartha [Kitt], Tina Turner, Betty Davis, Odetta [Holmes]. Wonderful--I love original people, original people. Martha Graham. You know, people who, you know. I could call a lot of names, but it would be abstract, you know, and the world--well, people that I have seen and studied their craft and look at them and nothing is wasted. You know, people waste. Sammy Davis [Jr.], Bill Cosby, naturally. Those people can pick up on a line and take you somewhere else. They are magical people. They are out--they are outside themselves. They are original. Whoopi Goldberg, brilliant. The mind is like, you know, like a child. We're observing life and we're giving it back to you on a platter. There are a lot of them. When I see them I go--[makes an amazed expression]. Wonderful, I love that. Story_ID: 8551 Speaker 1: Now that leads me to another question and that's about parenthood. We were talking about being parent--, Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and we know that's very important to you. You want to talk about that a little bit? Speaker 2: Yeah. Parents. I say that your children chose you. You chose your mother and you chose your father. You wanted to be, you wanted to be born in that family. That's why you are born. You chose them because you came with everything you have and you need that daddy to slap you around and say, "Behave yourself. Stand there." And your mothers will say, "Okay," because you wanted, you wanted them to do that. You irritated them enough because you knew you wanted direction and you follow that and they directed you and you took what you want and then you got that knowledge. So you learn how to eat right, how to walk right. Build you with manners, and if you have good manners. (Unclear) The thing that you really like, whether it's horses, sports, dance, music, if you're attracted to it, you're going that way to go to it, and if they are smart parents, they will expose you to the right music if you like music, but they will expose you to every sort of music. If you like painting, your birthday or your Christmas, they should go to an art supply shop and buy pencil and paper and draw like mad, make a mess, but don't give the children's drawing away to some aunt or some uncle. Make the aunt or uncle buy it for fifty cents, for dollar, or ten dollars. Don't give your child ten dollars or fifteen dollars to buy some ugly tennis shoes. Let him earn it. But a painting from him. Buy a little drawing so he feels pride. I sold my first drawing. That went to my head. That's what happened to me when that man who bought all those valuable painting, seventeen dollars. My head got that big. Dance with your son, hold him. Fathers dance with your boy child. Dance with your girl child. Mothers dance with your girl child and dance with your boy child. I don't mean dance like this [puts arms in the arm and waves his hands]. That's not dance. Hold them. Let them know what your body feels like. Let them know your rhythm. Give them your rhythm. They want it. They will never forget you. My father [Arthur Edwin Holder], I danced with my father. I danced with my mother [Louise Defrense Holder]. My father is dead. No, he's not dead. My father is in my heart and in my heart always, but I know how my father felt in my arms when I danced with him because when he was drunk, we all danced with him. He'd come home from work drunk because he was out having drinks with his buddies, and in having drinks with his buddies, he was learning what is going on in the world that day. No talking (unclear)--. They were talking boy talk, men talk. So he had a few drinks and we were happy that he had a few drinks and when he came home, my brother Boscoe [Arthur Holder, II] would be on the piano and we all jumped on his back and danced with him. Daddy was drunk, but daddy was very strict. But today, I can feel my father's arms around me and his warmth all the time because I knew how to hug my father, not "Hello, dad." A handshake don't mean shit. Excuse my language. Give him a hug. I remember something very funny because my father was very strict. He used to give us showers. We'd have to stand there and he would soap us down, scrub us down when we were children. "Yes, daddy. Yes, daddy." And I grew to be a man and my father came here and he was ill. I was a big man, I had--and I would--he was going to have an operation and I was giving him a shower because he couldn't get and he couldn't see too well, and I took the soap and I went all over his body. I said, "Do you remember when you used to do that to me?" [Laughs] I would soap--say, "Daddy stand up straight." I said, "Now it's my turn to give you a bath because you gave it to me when I was a kid." He laughed. Parents are incredible. All people are wonderful, but you have hug them and listen to them and you listen to the old people. You have to listen to the children because the children are telling you what they're looking for. And don't say, "It's not good." Don't put your fear on kids. Trust the child. If that child want to take that thing and do something, whether he may do something miraculous with it. Children are born with magic and listen to them and you will hear their poetry, like that wonderful poem you told me about. You know, listen to the child. That child is trying to say something. Don't put them down. "(Inaudible)." Women would listen to their girlfriends who are talking crap only about an Armani dress and what dress she wore and what high heel shoes and the little child is asking you a question, "Oh, keep quiet. Keep quiet. I'm busy." The child wants an answer. Stop your conversation, ask the child what he wants, give him the correct answer and then he will go away with the correct answer, then get back to your friend. Well, if not, your child would go and ask somebody else's aunt and then get the wrong answer and an answer that would not be pleasant and take them in the wrong direction. When you have the answers--and if you don't know the answer, "Darling, I don't know, but I'll find out and let you know." Stop, take the chance and listen to what the children are asking. They are searching for knowledge. They have it. They just have to have it confirmed and you can confirm it. Don't depend on me to tell them what to drink. Ha, ha, ha, "Seven up, drink it." It might be bad for you because I told you to drink it, you're going to drink it, and if your mother tells you to drink it, "No, I don't want it because that man on television told me it's good. I want to eat Chef Boyardee because the man on television says Chef Boyardee is good." Sure he's a salesman and that man is more important than your mother and your father who says, "No, it's not good for you because you get bad teeth or you'll get too fat." So you have to listen to what the children are saying. And you know something? It's an incredible--I love this country and like my child I would spank the country like I would spank my child if the child is playing the fool. There is no reason for obesity in this country. Fat children. It's disgusting. You know why? Nobody wants to cook properly and and it's not about diet and measuring. This country, the food is all processed. There's a lot of sugar in every goddamned thing, right? So instead of cooking a decent meal for the child, you give the child two dollars and he goes and he puts it in a machine and he gets all sort of junk food because you don't have time to cook for that child. Or he goes to one of these shops and gets French fries, that's all grease and the child bloats and the child bloats and the child bloats because you have not cooked for that child. "I don't have time." Make time. And that child grows up fat, and when she gets fat, she feels like she is ugly. Here comes another, another--a big complex. She doesn't feel beautiful because she doesn't look like Twiggy. Well, if she wants to look like Twiggy and you can't look like Twiggy if you're going to eat French fries. So she spends the rest of her life on this diet and that diet and very neurotic and she hates everybody because she is fat, and if she's black, "I'm black and I'm fat," you know. Like with boys, same thing. Speaker 1: (Pause) Speaker 2: ...yeah. Speaker 1: The food is very important because--can I continue about that because people think I've gone on with what I'm talking about with food. Food and the mind and the arts and the things like the mother and father and children and all that, make up all our neuroses, and we want to pass the buck and blame somebody, blame. To be alive today is very important and you have to think so carefully, not only about yourself, but those you really love. You have to build a self-confidence. You have to learn to admire yourself. You have to learn to love yourself, but if you won't love yourself, nobody's going to love you. You have take everything you have and flaunt it and take a chance and my father gave me that freedom. That's why I talk about all these little things because I have to deal with the man on the street. I have to deal with young dancers. I have to deal with young actors. I have to deal with young students. You have a student in class, you're not supposed to touch that child. The best common (unclear) could do is to touch that child on the head. Now it's against the law to touch a child. Disgusting. And that child can sue if you touch him or her. All you can do to a child to give that child confidence, tap him on the back, tap this, and that child will be, "Oh, I'm accepted." It's a form of acceptance. Story_ID: 8552 Speaker 1: Now you've written a cookbook ['Geoffrey Holder's Caribbean Cookbook']. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You also wrote a children's book ["Black Gods, Green Islands"] way back when and illustrated it, right? Speaker 2: It was not a children's book. It's a book on folktales of the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Oh, folktales. Speaker 2: These were based on superstitions and all Caribbean fairy tales, you know. It was called 'Black Gods, Green Islands.' It was based on ballets that I had done and I had put them together, wove them together to tell stories. I like story ballets like 'Swan Lake,' like 'Giselle,' like any fairy tale, you know, 'The Black and the White Swan' [sic, 'White Swan, Black Swan]. Well, we have the equivalent in our own folklore. That's why I did those. And it was done in 1957. Speaker 1: Okay. And you also came up with a ballet called 'The Prodigal Prince,' right? Speaker 2: Yeah, we just did that. The Haitian painter. 'The Prodigal Prince' is based on a Haitian painter named Hector Hippolyte, one of the fathers of Haitian folk art, a great painter. And in the '60s [1960s] I met somebody who was telling me a story that in the '50s [1950s] when he exhibited one of his paintings at the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York]. He came in a white suit and a crown. Can you imagine a black man in a crown and a white suit at the Museum of Modern Art? That imagery just blew my mind. And this one says, "Well, you know, he dreamt he went to Africa and to earn his living he painted flowers on chamber pots. You know, he believed in everything, you know. John the Baptist moved his hand and his saint was Ezuli and the Virgin Mary. Well, that's all the libretto I needed for a ballet. A black man in a crown means he's a king. He went to Africa from Haiti in a dream. And I did it for the dance--I did it with my company first and I loved it, and then in 1968 I did for the Alvin Ailey company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] and I traveled all over the world with it, and then Judith Jamison revived it four years ago, called 'Prodigal Prince.' Story_ID: 8553 Speaker 1: You're also known for film, film roles, and--, Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --and you've been in James Bond movies ['Live and Let Die']. Speaker 2: Well, James Bond is lovely because the character I played in James Bond, who is Baron Samedi, is the same--here I go again--the same role I played in 'House of Flowers' and the same man I saw in Puerto Rico. He's like good luck for me, you know. It's like your saint is following you. Speaker 1: That's right. It's the same thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. I believe in everybody. I believe in magic. I believe in--you know, if it's destiny, you're going to get it. And I did 'Annie', I played Punjab. And I've been fortunate. But it's all a part of the same picture, you know, whether it's movie, stage, or canvas, or art, you know. Speaker 1: That leads us to a question we normally ask, but I'm going to ask you something you don't like to talk about, at least you said you didn't, when you first came in, but just you can react to it the way you want to. But so many people know you from the 7-Up commercials. Speaker 2: Nothing wrong with that because I disturbed them. I was in the hospitals. I came into their living room. I was in their bedroom telling them what to drink. Nothing is wrong with that. But why I like it is only because it was contagious and it was an opportunity for me to seduce them with my voice and not being worried about having to stammer. (Laughs) Nothing wrong with that. Speaker 1: That's it. It's the power of that voice and the personality--. Speaker 2: Well, you see, how many people go to the museum? How many people go to dance concerts? Understand. But everybody turns on television and look at the sports, and during the sports, I'll come on and sell my--I'm a pitchman. The power of the media, you know. I could be a star if I had gone out there with a gun and shot somebody. I would be on the front page of every newspaper in the world. And I'd be the biggest star and then I will write the movie of why I killed somebody, and then I said, "I want Oprah Winfrey to play Geoffrey Holder." (Laughs) You know? But the media, you know, you can't beat it. Story_ID: 8554 Speaker 1: At this point in your life, you've done so many things, so many forms of the arts, I can't think of anyone who's done more different things. Speaker 2: Well, a lot of people have done it. Speaker 1: Yeah, a few. I mean--. Speaker 2: No, a lot of people, other parts of the world, have done it. Speaker 1: Well, what would you see now as your legacy? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't look at it that way. I haven't begin to do what I have to do. I have a lot of crap to do, wonderful things I'm planning to do, and just take care of my health, you know. Take an aspirin if I have a headache. Go to sleep if I have a cold. Take care of things and just do it. The world doesn't owe me a thing. This world does not owe me one thing. I owe it to the world. Speaker 1: And this is a slightly different question. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I don't care. I don't care as long as they spell my name correctly. (Laughs) You know. That's a question nobody asks, how you want to be remembered, you know. I don't care, whatever, because everybody sees me differently, you know. You're my friend if you come into my house and I offer you a glass of water, you know?..