 Story_ID: 71716 Speaker 1: I'm the interviewer for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer today is Scott Stearns. Ma'am could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes my name is Justice Shelvin spelled S-H-E-L-V-I-N, L-O-U-I-S-E, M-A-R-I-E, H-A-L-L. Speaker 1: And what is your date and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born June 15, 1948 in Cuero, Texas. Speaker 1: How do you spell Cuero? Speaker 2: C-U-E-R-O Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a justice of the Illinois Appellate Court. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is good question, is September 26, 2002. Speaker 1: I think it's the 27th. Speaker 2: Is it? Speaker 1: Yeah Speaker 2: It's the 26th, Saturday is the 28th. Speaker 1: Okay and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my chambers at the Illinois Appellate Court, 160 N. LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois; we're on the 19th floor. Story_ID: 71717 Speaker 1: Okay, before we get into depth there are five People Magazine-ish type of questions we always ask and the first one is and they just require a short answer. What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, I think my mother's fried corn it's delicious. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red, being a Delta it's only natural. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer, I love the summer. June is wonderful and May, June and July but especially June, I was born in that month. Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh I love the Half Moon Resort in Jamaica and Montego Bay Jamaica. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I love the saying from--what is his name creator Kunta Kinte or at least the autobiographer, I'm forgetting his name, Alex Haley, exactly. I love his phrase that says find the good and celebrate it or praise it, I believe it's on his tombstone and I think that's really important. Story_ID: 71718 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your beginnings. Could you give us the names of your parents and spell those for us please? Speaker 2: Surely, my mother's name is Mrs. Lucy, L-U-C-Y, M-A-E. She was born Lewis, L-E-W-I-S, H-A-L-L and my father is the Reverend Dr. Shelvin, S-H-E-L-V-I-N. His first name is the same as mine or rather mine is the same as his, Jerome, J-E-R-O-M-E, H-A-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay now could you talk about your parents, let me start with your mother. Talk about when she was born and where she was born and maybe some family background and what she did for a living. Speaker 2: Surely, my mother Lewis as I said was born Lucy Mae Lewis was born in 1918 on September 19th and she was born in Cuero, Texas as well. Her mother was Birdie Thomas Lewis and her father is Jonas Lewis. Her mother before her was Lubirdie [ph.] Thomas and they basically were from the Cuero area which is in the south east part of Texas not too far from Victoria just about an hour and a half from San Antonio, somewhere around there. My mother was the youngest of three girls. Her elder sisters were twins; they were about four years older than she and maybe two to three years older than she. They were fraternal twins and basically stayed in Texas their entire lives and were school teachers. My mother's mother was a housewife although she was--had gone to college herself. But she was a housewife, her father was a custodian at the schools in the school system and also at their church and he was a deacon of their church as well. So they lived in a large house at 407 Bruce Street in Cuero, Texas and were considered a prominent family in the African American community of the time. They were staunch churchgoers and my father was from Yoakum, Texas which is not too far from Cuero, some twenty miles or so. His mother before him was Mamie Shelvin which is the origin of--which is where we got that name from. And her mother was Pricilla Shelvin and he was--and so I think in some Ghanaian societies as well they take the mother's maiden name and give it to one of the sons and so my father took his mother's maiden name as his first name. So he's Shelvin Jerome just as my brother Lewis took my mothers' maiden name and that became his first name and my brother's name is Lewis Hall. My parents met--my father was very active in church work. He was a young minister in the area and his--and one of my mother's sisters had customarily been his secretary in church work and she was unable to work with him on a particular summer and so she offered to have her baby sister work with him and he didn't believe she had a baby sister because he had known her and her twin for years. So she said of course I'll do it and she had him to come to the house to meet her baby sister and both of the twins were short people. So when mother was coming out of the door, he had his eyes angled half way down around where the other sisters were. She came out and that was just her waist and he kept looking higher and higher and it got better and better the higher he looked and so that was his first meeting, there she was, you know, a statuesque beauty to his way of thinking. By the end of the week, he asked her to marry him--(unclear). Speaker 1: End of the week? Speaker 2: By the end of the week and he asked her father for her hand and that was at summer and he came back that December and they got married and they've been married for fifty seven years now. Speaker 1: That's a good story. Story_ID: 71719 Speaker 1: Did either one of them have stories that they passed down about what the family was doing during slavery or reconstruction? Speaker 2: I think my mother's grandparents were--I think her father was a cowboy and his father before him, you know, was a landowner and in terms of slavery times they really did not pass on that many stories. I know from my father's mother and his mother also was a college graduate which was unusual. So on both sides of the family the mothers which would have been my parents' parents were college people. But Pricilla Shelvin had been in slavery at one time and when she came out she--they were engaged in I guess like sharecropping and then of course she--her mother before her was Renata. Actually she would come from Illinois down to Texas and she had been a slave. That's who was the slave in the family. She had--she was a business woman and so she started a--she had a barber shop and a boarding house and amassed a great deal of land and she passed on that entrepreneurialship, of course to Pricilla and Pricilla passed it own to Mamie. And Pricilla though, as I said I believe she was doing some kind of sharecropping but they would come out and work the fields and as you know it was very important to use the entirety of the family. But at one point Pricilla decided that if they were not--she would not have her children work the cotton fields but instead that she would have them go to school. So her phrase for it was--she said I'll put their cotton in their heads because she thought that school was much more important than sharecropping and raising cotton for somebody else's benefit. So that really broke the cycle in terms of--or set the standards really in terms of all of us attempting to achieve high educational goals and attempting to climb. Speaker 1: You said your father's parents went to college? Speaker 2: My father's mother went to college, my father and then all three of us, of course and then our--the only child in our family is named Lillian Hall and she's a college grad. So that's four generations--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: I'm sorry what school did your father attend? Speaker 2: He went to Bishop College [Marshall, Texas] and my mother went to Prairie View [A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and my sister went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and I went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and my brother went to Morehouse [College]. So we have the black college scene pretty well covered. My mother also went to Sam Houston [State University, Huntsville, Texas]; my father did some graduate studies at Howard [University]. Speaker 1: So your father is a Baptist minister? Speaker 2: My father is a Baptist pastor. He's pastored the Friendship Baptist Church for forty six years now about to be forty seven this October. We came to Chicago [Illinois] in 1955 from Corpus Christi, Texas where he was pastoring at St. John Baptist Church and he had pastored Pilgrim West Baptist Church in El Campo, Texas prior to that. Story_ID: 71720 Speaker 1: Okay now you're about four years old, I guess, when you all came to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: How old was I--it was '55 [1955], '48 [1948], what is that? Speaker 1: About six or seven. Give me some--Do you remember growing up in Texas? Speaker 2: I do, I remember. Speaker 1: Give us some idea of what some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: I remember, the in Cuero there was a huge tree in the front yard and there was this moss that used to hang from it and it was very dramatic looking and it was looming over in the middle of the street. I mean in front of our yard but it spread over into the street as well because it was so massive and there was a rose bush around the corner which I think mother's father had planted and saying it still bloomed. I remember the sound of the--I loved that sound of the--and I loved that sound to this day the cooing of doves, coo, coo that kind of sound across the street was basically a forest. But I--it was always a wonderful mossy aroma, smell and it was fresh smelling actually. I remember being--I don't know if you've ever been to south east Texas but I always say that in May in south east Texas, that drive there and the blue bonnets on the sides of the road and the plains--flat plains where you can see the sky or the heavens that come to meet the plains, it's just God's country, it really is, it's just a wonderful freeing, freeing up kind of feeling in that area. And so that's always been my memory of Texas particularly that part. Speaker 1: I guess you must have found Chicago a little bit different? Speaker 2: I'll say, in fact when we first moved here--I guess I was, was I in second grade I guess and we came to Chicago and this was our first time seeing snow and so we--I remember my father calling us all in to his study and he wanted to know which one of us had carved on the piano at the church "I like snow" because he knew that it couldn't have been any of the little children--the other kids because they were all born in it but it had to be one of us newly arrived Texans and of course none of us fessed up to it but I think I was the guilty party. But yeah it took a little adjustment. You would go to the store and ask for soda water and people had no idea what you were talking about. They would bring you a box of soda and they'd say you want to mix this with water, you got a stomach ache. But that was our name for--they called it pop here in Chicago at the time. It was interesting to see that it seemed like the children never went to bed, they played at all hours. Of course we lived in North Lawndale on Millard Street and that was a (unclear) park across the street, a green grass park across Douglas Boulevard. But the children seemed never to go to bed. Story_ID: 71721 Speaker 1: And when we first went to [Theodore] Herzl Elementary School and there would be a fight every day and three on Friday and you were guaranteed that. So that was a concern--troubling times in terms of education and our parents were very concerned about that which is--because I went to school only half days and they had the, I think the Willis wagons at that time too. They called them the name of the superintendent because the schools were not--could not accommodate the children. So for that reason--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Those were like portable--I mean trailers--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Exactly and that was one of the reasons why we moved to Maywood because it had an excellent school system at that time and Proviso East was one of the top schools--high schools in the country. So that was a concern because I was only going to school part-time. So we went to the, we moved to the greater Westside which was Maywood at the time. Speaker 2: Tell me about school. What was it like in school? How many brothers and sisters did you have? Speaker 1: I have one brother, one sister. My brother is Lewis Jerome Hall, he's one year younger than I and I have one sister and that's L. Priscilla Hall and she's two years older than I. Speaker 2: Tell us about school, what did you like to do in school and what kind of little girl were you? Were there any teachers or people that stood out that showed an interest--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 1: I remember at Herzl [Elementary School] there was a Ms. Kelly who used to wear Kelly green all the time. I thought she was just a beautiful person. My sister had another teacher who ultimately found out that her husband was a lawyer and that she had gone to school with my father at Bishop [College]. When we moved to Maywood our teachers were basically all Caucasian and I remember Ms. Robkey who was our eighth grade teacher. I was very fond of her because by the time I got to her classroom, of course I already knew all the poems and she instilled a big love for English literature, English language in us. I knew her work because my sister had been there two years before and so I could come in the class and immediately ready to cite the twins, 'in form teacher face and limb, I grew so like my brother that folks start taking me for him and each for one another'. That was fun, I enjoyed that. School was exciting, we were integrated classrooms. At the time Maywood was predominantly Caucasian and so but we had children from Europe as well as Irish folks and we would all come in and wear green on St. Patrick's Day but then there was a growing African American community as well and in fact on the very street that I lived Fred Hampton lived as well. Fred Hampton was in my class, he was the--known as the Black Panther and who was killed along with Mark Clark. Fred and I went to grammar school and to high school together and a funnier person you have never met. He was a natural comedian and my mother, of course did not--she taught school--my mother taught school for fifty-three years all together and thirty-seven of which were at the Lathrop Elementary School right there in Lawndale on the Westside not too far from our church. Our church was at Douglas and Homan, 3411. We kept moving further and further west. First we were at 1958 West Washington, Friendship Baptist was there right on the corner of Damen and Washington and then our church moved to Douglas and Homan and then from there we built at Laramie and Jackson. And so my mother taught school on the west side, daddy pastored on the west side. So our roots were both in Maywood and the west side. Speaker 2: Is the church still in Austin? Speaker 1: Yes, absolutely. We built a brand new from the ground up African hut and it's in the shape of an African hut and the windows are in the shapes of pyramids. The wood from the pews are from Mozambique and so that was--we were making our bridging the connection--bridging the Diaspora if you will. Speaker 2: Who's the architect then? Speaker 1: Don't ask me that. Speaker 2: Alright, he's a black architect? Speaker 1: He just died. A black architect started it, but he's not the one who, who ultimately built it. Story_ID: 71722 Speaker 1: I want to back track a little bit and talk about Fred Hampton, you said he was a comedian, I've never heard people say that before. Speaker 2: Fred, Fred, Brother Fred. He was--like I said we lived on the same street. I lived on the 400 block of 17th and he lived on the other side of Washington Boulevard which was, I guess like two blocks away from me--two or three blocks. Right immediately across the street from Irving Elementary School which is where we all went to school. He and his brother Bill Hampton was still around and his sister Delores and my mother--like I said was a school teacher but she didn't believe in making brown bag lunches at all and she would much rather give us lunch money and we would go to the restaurants and eat at lunch time. And there was a restaurant on the corner called the Maywood Sweet Shop which my brother and I frequented. And Fred would come there at lunch and start telling us jokes and he would just--I mean he didn't eat himself, he just came for the entertainment, you know, to be the entertainment. I vividly remember snorting orange soda in response to one of Fred's jokes; I mean he, he was just hilarious. Eddie Murphy had nothing on him, he was just a natural funny guy and it was just so interesting to contrast that to his image as the, you know, as the vigilant, warrior like Black Panther that the media cast him as. But I knew him as Fred--he used to have a long head, we used to call him watermelon head and I saw the play not too long ago that was at Daley College that they put on about his life and they got most of it right except they were talking about Fred was a natural athlete, not a word of truth in it, please (laughter). He was leaden, he did play basketball but then I was a cheerleader so you know imagine that. If I could be a cheerleader, Fred could, could play basketball. Speaker 1: He played on the team? Speaker 2: He played basketball, yeah in grammar school now we're talking so; in high school was when he started growing in consciousness, in black consciousness. And I remember very well he was trying--we all went to Proviso East High School and he was trying to convince us to boycott the prom because in his opinion they were not treating black athletes properly at Proviso East. He was saying that well they worked them and while it's football season they are all popular and everything but there was no commitment to their graduating from high school or really treated them less than kindly in his opinion. Subsequently, he couldn't see why they would be heroes when it was football season but there was no commitment to making sure that they were in fact graduates. And so, so we saw at that time his consciousness and he was you know tweaking us and trying to get us to get focused on the realities of what were going, what was going on at the time in Maywood. Speaker 1: Now was he part of the Black Panther party then? Speaker 2: Not at that time, he was still--he was not a part of the Panthers at that time but then subsequently when the rest of us, when we were going to college he had joined the Panther Party. He had a problem with an ice cream truck that they arrested him for and then he got more and more active with the Black Panthers. I just remember being stunned because I went to-we graduated in 1966 from Proviso East and I went to Hampton at that time immediately out of high school and I remember-was that '68 [1968]--? Speaker 1: '69 [1969] Speaker 2: Sixty--yeah I was at a rally, I was at a black power rally or an activist rally in Virginia and the word came through at that time that Fred had been killed. I remember being so stunned, I was at the back of the room and I walked all the way up to the front and said, "You must be kidding, who did you say had been killed?" and they said, "Fred Hampton" and then I spoke and talked about how I had known him and, and you know, what a really fine and very concerned brother that he was and what a loss it was. Story_ID: 71723 Speaker 1: When you were in high school did you have any idea what you wanted to do when you got out of high school? Speaker 2: Well I always thought I wanted to teach; I'm from a long line of teachers. My father had been a principal, my mother taught, his mother -my father's mother was a teacher so I assumed that I was going to--I loved English lit as I said. I thought I was going to be an English teacher perhaps on the college level because it was always understood that we would go to college. It wasn't a question of whether we were going to college the only question was where and so in high school I assumed that I was going to be an English teacher. I remember one of my teachers who was very influential. She was--a lady named Kay Lipman. She was a wonderful English teacher, good person and she lived in Marina Towers and drove a Corvette and taught high school English at Proviso East and so you know what's with this picture but I found out that she was Charlton Heston's sister, looks just like him. But she was -- Speaker 1: What was her name again? Speaker 2: Kay Lipman was her name and I think they were from Evanston or something and had gone to Northwestern, I believe. She was really a fine English teacher, very compassionate person as well and she lived large. Speaker 1: What was it about English literature that you liked so much? Speaker 2: I don't know, I guess it was always easy for me. I liked the stories but then English composition I enjoyed that too in terms of the grammatical mappings of--in terms of the tenses and the verbs. It was, I guess also having come out of an oral tradition of having listened to so many ministers in my life and listen to the way that they handled the spoken word was an inspiration. The fact that I'll never forget listening to [Rev. Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], in fact, when I was a young person and my father was one of the few ministers on the west side of Chicago that would allow Dr. King to come and speak from his pulpit at the time. Story_ID: 68856 Speaker 1: I was asking you about why you like English literature so much? Speaker 2: I guess and I'm really--I like the stories from world literature from all over. It has a certain resonance for me. I love to explore different stories and then find the commonalities between the various groups and nations because it all seemed to have parallels in terms of their literature and I found that to be very interesting. I was always, I guess active in speaking and by actively involved in speaking whether from a little girl where we would give poems at church or make statements or speeches or even on the national level at the Baptist Conventions. And so from that things just naturally segue way that when I was in high school and I competed with the (unclear) team and that we would travel around Cook County although actually throughout--sometimes throughout the state and do oratorical cuttings or slices from plays or poetry. I won best actress, actually twice at Proviso East which is doing something for a black student two years in a row because I was in two of the plays there. When I went to Hampton [University] that seguewayed into the debate team and I was captain of the debate team at my college. My sister debated at Howard [University] and I debated at Hampton [University]. Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in high school? Speaker 2: In high school? Speaker 1: Yes Speaker 2: Oh we were honor students. Our group, there were about four of us--five of us who basically hung together, I guess. Two sisters, Irma and Kathy Walker and Joyce Tucker and Kathy Meehan and we were very active in terms of extracurricular activities. Kathy and I were both in the orchestra, I played the cello and she played the bass. Kathy Walker Owens now and her sister both played the violin. Joyce Tucker didn't play any instrument but she danced and so Joyce and I were very active in forensics and we did well academically as well. We were on the college prep, college preparatory track, I guess it was called. So it was always--everything was always focused on where we were going to college. So we had a full range of activities and I was a good student and--. Story_ID: 68857 Speaker 1: Now I know when you were in school there was a lot of media coverage of the Civil Rights Movement. How did that affect you in school? Speaker 2: Well it affected me as I said my parents were very active in the Civil Rights Movement. My mother, in fact, was a teacher and yet she had the courage to march downtown. I remember very well walking with her around City Hall protesting the Willis Wagons which was a brave thing for a teacher to do since the school board employed her. My father was very active as I said he was one of the few churches on the west side that allowed Dr. [Martin Luther] King to speak from their pulpit. Dr. Stone of Stone Temple was another who was further down on Douglas Boulevard--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: Today people would find that odd, Dr. King is a hero, he's worshiped and to think today anybody in his family could probably speak at any church they wanted to or any place in the city. But in those days--(simultaneous) give us some idea. Speaker 2: That's now but back then he was considered by the powers that be--politicians in the city of Chicago as basically a pariah and a rabble rouser and an outside agitator if you will. And so he was not nearly as popular as he is now that he's gone. At the time he was--it took a lot of courage for people to stand with [Rev. Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and that's one of the reasons why to this day my father is lauded because he did have the vision that Dr. King was standing up for the rights of black folks and that he wanted to be a part of it. He, of course, was active himself with being president of the West Side Federation and with the Ministers Conference there and the Lawndale Peoples Planning and Action Committee. All organizations which he served at the helm and so we first heard Dr. King at our church at 1958 West Washington and then at 3411 West Douglas as well. He spoke from our church and I remember one day I was nosing around my father's study, in fact, and there was a crowd that was gathering and I didn't know what was going on at the time. So I'm trying to figure out what is going on and they had pulled a truck bed up to the side of the church and all these people were gathering on the side of the church. I went into daddy's study and he said Louise--so as not to confuse me with Shelvin but my family calls me Louise because we both shared the same first name. He said Louise do you know who this is and I looked and I was young but I was old enough to know a king when I saw one. Speaker 1: What year, were you a teenager? Speaker 2: I was like twelve/thirteen years, something like that and so I said you know, yes and Dr. King took my hand and he bent down, of course he didn't have that far to bend because he was a short guy himself. So he looked directly at me and I'll never forget it, he had these big, warm brown eyes and a very pleasant manner and he looked at me and he said Louise how are you and it was--I had his complete attention and it was like he was getting ready to go out and speak to thousands and thousands of people that were gathering out there. But for that moment, I had his complete attention and it just made such an impact on me. Story_ID: 68858 Speaker 1: And, then he [Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] left from there and went and talked and I never seen such a--the man could talk for hours with not one note and--not one written note--I mean it was seamless and its poetry. He would talk and talk and talk and he made such sense but it was so smooth and it brought you to a pitch and it was just--it was awesome; just to be there and to have met him on those occasions and to have witnessed that part of history. They gathered a lot of folks from the west side to go down to Soldier Field for that huge rally that he had down there and many, many bus loads came from our church from the Lawndale area. In fact, that night on the radio, we had one member of our church named Ms. Tyson, Balkan now, and she had this very shrill, piercing voice, you could hear her anywhere and everywhere and over the radio that night you could hear her voice crying "Amen" piercing through everybody else's. There's Ms. Tyson again, that's my daddy's member. But I was there at that rally at Soldier Field as well, it was an awesome occasion great memories my parents provided. So then he went to Selma [Alabama], he marched in Selma with Dr. King. We had the preachers here and Dr. Stone went down there and people from there. Dan Millet and Lou Krineberg, in fact, they were all--Lou was with the Jewish Council of Urban Affairs, Millet was pastor of St. Agatha Catholic Church at the time and Shelvin Hall and these three were very active in terms of west side politics and activities militating for the good of the people. Speaker 2: Did you ever meet Dr. King again personally? Speaker 1: I was there--present when he talked all--I think three times he came to Friendship [Baptist Church] and in fact I wrote a--when I came back to Chicago I wrote a little brochure called 'Dr. King and the West Side Dream'. It's told from the perspective of Friendship Baptist and had pictures of him speaking from the side of our church on the truck bed. So basically I was around him about three times. He had Jim [James] Bevel was with him and Andy Young, they were his front people and I got a chance to meet all of them. Speaker 2: Now your father was president of--or was part of a Baptist organization that seemed to be--what was it called? Speaker 1: The president of the Baptist General State Convention of Illinois and an organization of the largest Baptist state convention in Illinois and many years later, I guess '96 [1996]. But he's always been active and he was for thirty years a dean of the state congress of Christian education under Baptist general and then ultimately he rose to become president of the entire state convention of Baptists and he served for two terms as president of the Baptist state convention. Speaker 2: Now is this--how is that organization different from being a national Baptist? Speaker 1: It's one of the divisions--subdivisions of it. Speaker 2: Is it a subdivision of the national convention? Speaker 1: Absolutely. So therefore he as president was on the board of the National Baptist Convention USA Incorporated, I believe is the name. Speaker 2: Is this the (unclear) of Reverend Jackson, Joe Jackson? Speaker 1: J.H. Jackson, yes he used to be president of it. Jemison--(simultaneous)(unclear). Speaker 2: I know he was really opposed with Dr. [Martin Luther] King. Speaker 1: That was interesting, yes in fact King was at some convention and I'm not quite sure but he was trying to be seated as a delegate and Dr. Jackson resisted that. So King was not welcomed by Dr. [J.H.] Jackson although the people and ministers of the National Baptist Convention certainly were supporters of the civil rights movement. But J.H. Jackson was not a supporter of Dr. King. Story_ID: 68859 Speaker 1: So tell me about Hampton [University], I guess at the time you graduated from high school you thought you would become a teacher. Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact my major was English and my minor was French. Speaker 1: How did you choose Hampton? Speaker 2: Hampton [University] chose me. Well I received a scholarship. I went there for humanities institute. I had a cousin who was an English teacher in Houston, Texas and she referred my name to the chairman of the English department at Hampton and I went there in the summer after high school. Humanities Institute was like a pre-college program and then received a full four years scholarship at Hampton. I was split between going to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] where my sister was and going to Hampton. So that was a tough summer--a summer of decision. But Hampton gave me a full scholarship, room and board as well as tuition and Howard was just dealing with the tuition. My parents had three--all three of us were in college at the same time. So that was--so we tried to help out as we could in terms of scholarship. They had been saving for most of our lives for us to go to college. Speaker 1: So what was Hampton like, an who were the teachers there? Speaker 2: Hampton, Hampton--I was at Hampton in the '60s [1960s] and that was the turbulent '60s [1960s] as they like to say they did not escape Hampton at all. When we got there my freshman year, they were sitting out doing sit outs and sit downs on the grass of one of the gothic structures which was Virginia Cleveland Hall, it was a dormitory. I participated in that and it was interesting because I guess as with any revolution, if you will, it's usually the folks who can afford to--who actually are the most active because I remember that my roommate at the time who was from a poor family, she couldn't risk being put out of school. So she was-all her commitment was there but she couldn't run the risk of being put out as I said. So we sat out all night and protested what was going on and she was unable to do so. So throughout my time at Hampton I was very, very active. I initially made the Dean's List but my heart was in student government and I became president of the Women's Student--of all the women students at Hampton. I was very active on the debate team, as I said I was captain of the team and used to travel all over the country. From the south I got a perfect score and in George Wallace's town, I mean, at the University of Alabama. We would go from there and debate Harvard [University] in Massachusetts; I mean we were well represented because we were very active in terms of debating all over and holding up the name of Hampton. As I said, I was an English major and Dr. Nancy McGee was the head of our department and she was very fond of me and I of her. I did well in English. Story_ID: 68860 Speaker 1: I was very busy. I ultimately was on the student government board as well and then in my junior year, I guess that would be, we decided to take over the administration building and so that was during the time when Howard [University] and the students there had done it. At Hampton [University] we thought we had some grievances as well. Everything from the-we wanted to have a black studies program which was missing and this was a predominantly African American school. But we had no black studies programs and that was one of our demands. As you know, ministers or the religious community is very strong in the African American community but our chaplain was Caucasian and we thought that at a black school we should have a black chaplain at least. That was another one of the demands.. Of course, another demand was for them to improve the food at Hampton. So that was it and so we took over the administration building except there was one--the dean of women, she used to leave the premises; everybody else got out but Amalita [ph.] Morris said no I'm staying. So she stayed there and we'd taken it over, the helicopters were swirling around, I guess taking our pictures or whatever. So ultimately we negotiated back and forth with the administration and they conceded to most of our demands. Speaker 2: Now what year was this? Speaker 1: This was '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Well a lot of stuff happened then. Speaker 1: A lot of stuff happened in '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: The Olympic demonstration, Dr. [Martin Luther] King's assassination. Did you all have your action after the assassination of Dr. King? Speaker 1: It was--no because he was assassinated in April and--yeah I guess it would have been after that. Speaker 2: People got indignant--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: My father was walking the streets on the west side; the west side was going up in flames. My dad was walking the street trying to--he and Warner Saunders were there together trying to keep his church from being burned down I'm sure and keep people from hurting themselves. And it was, you know, it was a tense time. Speaker 2: So when did you graduate from Hampton? Speaker 1: '70 [1970]. Story_ID: 68861 Speaker 1: And when you came out of Hampton [University] did you have any idea what you wanted to do next? Speaker 2: Yes, I had gone to the Harvard/Columbia intensive summer studies program which they had for, I guess for white/black students from many different African American colleges. I was at the Columbia School and I went to the law school but our classes were in the law school and then having-meeting Ebony Magazine and reading about the legal defense fund and having met Dr. [Martin Luther] King and being involved with my parents in the civil rights movement, I decided I wanted to be a civil rights lawyer. So that of course meant I had to go to law school. So in order to do that--that's what that was about. In '70 [1970] when I was graduating from Hampton I was trying to get into law school and again the choices between Harvard [University], Howard [University] and Boston University and Boston University gave me a scholarship so I went there. Speaker 1: Now at this time your sister--was she in law school too? Speaker 2: She was getting her masters in journalism at Columbia at the time and then actually--and then she went to law school after that. So we were in law school at the same time. Speaker 1: Okay so Boston University is the school Dr. [Martin Luther] King graduated from. Speaker 2: Yeah and Barbara Jordan and F. Lee Bailey, a bunch of folks and the coldest days of my life. If you can imagine going from a predominantly black college where you're the big person on campus and very active in so many arenas-for example, with Hampton [University] we would come and debate at Boston. That's the only place where you'd be in a hotel and they would come knocking on your door to find out what was going on as we weren't a noisy group, we were intellectuals, you know, if you will. But it was a hostile atmosphere at the time. Boston was going through a lot of tension with the school segregation. I was there at that time when they beat up the lawyer on the square. Speaker 1: You're talking about the famous incident where there is actually a photo of somebody jabbing the flag--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Absolutely--that was Louise Day Hicks and that time was very tense. There was only a one percent black population in the area at the time. It was hostile and you felt it and we felt it in the classrooms from the professors who--and from the student body. The competition was tough, I mean it's such that people would actually steal books out of the library to keep other colleagues from being able to get the correct answers to gather cases. Boston University is an excellent school and I'm happy that I went there in retrospect but at the time it was tough going and in fact, most of the blacks who matriculated in Boston at the time almost to a person if you talk to them. In fact, here Judge Jackie Cox who was the presiding judge of the First Municipal District--we were classmates at BU [Boston University] and all of this went through that same tough period. It was like when you went to south Boston and you had to go there because that's where the driver's license facility was and it was--you've seen the pictures of [Martin Luther] King ducking when they were throwing the bricks and here when he was marching here in Gage Park I think it was. That's the kind of feeling you had in South Boston, let's hope that they don't see me and I can get in here and get out quickly. Story_ID: 68862 Speaker 1: It was tough but we managed, what I did here was continue in the activist tradition. We started the black law students--BALSA, Black American Law Students Association and I became the president of that. I started a law in the black community series where we had African American presenters from Legal Defense Fund which of course I got to know all of them, that's what I wanted to do was be a civil rights lawyer as well as prominent black lawyers from all over. They would come in and talk, we started a prison program where we went into the prisons and consulted with folks there. We started the combined Boston BALSA which was an organization we created and it still exists to this day. The black law organizations from Harvard [University], from New England Law School, from Boston College and Boston University. We all came together and we created a combined Boston BALSA. We were trying to keep it alive and be there for each other and that's the way that we found to do it. At the time, who else was there, from TransAfrica with Randall Robinson and he would come up, he was trying to get Boston University to divest itself from its interest at I think in Shell Oil and various oil companies saw that there was a lot of activity going on at the time, a lot of consciousness raising that we were a part of. Story_ID: 70640 Speaker 1: You all organized the other black law students? Speaker 2: Yes we did, we all came together just to support each other, absolutely. But it was a good education on many fronts. Speaker 1: Were there any instructors who stand out? Speaker 2: Dean Haddad was good. His name was Dean Haddad; he was the dean, Ernest Haddad. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: H-A-D-D-A-D, in fact I think he has brother here in Chicago and he was actually actively recruiting African Americans and so that's why there were more blacks there than there are now which didn't say that-really there weren't that many, I think there were like twelve per class or something like that. But that same commitment does not appear to be there at this time. In the '60s [1960s] they were trying to get more blacks into law schools as well as medical schools, in fact in all the professions. And so that's why among other reasons, I have no problem with affirmative action. I think it's a wonderful concept that should be maintained. Speaker 1: Now you wanted to be a civil rights lawyer. Did you get any encouragement in Boston U for that or did you have to look elsewhere? Speaker 2: Well I brought in my own encouragement. As I said, I had the law in the black community series and I met the people at the Legal Defense Fund, Elaine Jones who is currently the general counsel and executive director of the ink fund. She was a staff attorney at the time and Lynn Walker and Sylvia Drew Ivy who is Dr. Charles Drew's daughter. All of them were staff attorneys on the ink fund and all of them I met and they came down up to Boston [Massachusetts] from New York [New York] and spoke at our law school at my instance. Story_ID: 70641 Speaker 1: So it was--I--we got to find out I mean we were able to find out more and more about what civil rights law was about and such that by the time I was graduating from Boston University, I applied to the [NAACP] Legal Defense Fund and was chosen as an Earl Warren fellow and that meant that they gave me funds to set up private practice. They trained me at the ink fund what we used to call it which is a Legal Defense and Education Fund Incorporated and we call it the ink fund for short. They trained us at their offices and then assigned us to cooperating attorneys throughout the South. So I was assigned to [HM] Gabrielle [Kirk] McDonald and Mark McDonald in Houston, Texas. I was born in Texas, I wanted to go back. I had some idea that's where I wanted to practice law. And so the ink fund--legal defense fund gave me money for books and they gave us a stipend and assigned me to Gabby McDonald [Gabrielle Kirk McDonald] and then for three years after that they supported me being in private practice as long as I was cooperating with them in terms of their civil rights cases. So it was a, it was a wonderful beginning for a person who wanted to be a civil rights lawyer. Story_ID: 70642 Speaker 1: What were some of the civil rights issues in Houston [Texas]? Speaker 2: Oh, in Houston--of course, employment discrimination was the big area that we worked in and [HM] Gabrielle McDonald who subsequently became the first black United States District Court judge, federal judge and then went on to start the International Criminal War Crimes Tribunal in Rwanda and she was at the Hague also. Then on their Court of Appeals, she trained me in civil rights law and she was very well known as an employment discrimination lawyer, she and her husband Mark. They had lawsuits against many, many of the major corporations who were at the time in Houston [Texas] engaging in discriminatory behavior. There was also discrimination in public--places of public accommodation and in housing as well and so we had cases in all of those areas. Discrimination in employment was based on not, our race and sex. Of course you had many categories that covered race, sex, religion, national origin, disability, physical and mental disabilities, all of those are covered. Speaker 1: Did you at the time--did you think you would stay in Houston? Speaker 2: Well at the time, yes I did. You know, we used to call it heavenly Houston and I was young, straight out of school, made good friends. What we did was we started--that's when we started the first all black--all law firm in the country. After I finished my year of training with Gabby McDonald, we went out into the private practice of law in an area called Acres Homes in Houston which was a predominantly black area still in the city. So Algenita Scott Davis and Joan Edwards and Jeanette Burney and Haroldine Hartsfield and I got together and started--and opened a law office but primarily I was--most of them were still working their day jobs. But I was the one who was out there full time. So we did that for a little while and got featured in 'Ebony Magazine'. The people were going past us to go downtown even though we were right in the neighborhood. So it was difficult. I ultimately started another firm with a guy I had gone to law school with named Joe Wright and we went downtown ourselves. Speaker 1: Was it deliberately done to start--did you deliberately start an all black law firm? Speaker 2: Well yes, we started--created the black women lawyers association in Houston and met--became friends and Jeanette had been in private practice and so she and Haroldine and Algenita were talking about it and so we--yes deliberately started an all black, all female firm, five of us, B's we called it, Birney, Edwards, Hall, Hartsfield and Scott. Speaker 1: So you eventually formed another group, I mean it didn't--that group didn't do as well? Speaker 2: It didn't last, you know, that long but it was a beginning. You started to get your name out there. I did some work for--well I mean I was always in private practice when I was in Houston and so I always had my own firm. Speaker 1: Was it hard for--I mean was it more difficult for black women in a law office than black men in those days? Speaker 2: Well, yes because you're dealing with dual discrimination. You didn't have that many women lawyers in the first place and let alone black women lawyers. There were some established black male practitioners but to be a young, black female practicing law, there were several barriers you had to, to hurdle. I will never forget when I first came out of law school, I was--they have the bars--when you come in the courtroom and you know everybody else is supposed to sit behind the gate in the section, you know, for the audience and I came in front of it and the bailiff came running toward me, you have to get behind, you have to get behind. He just immediately assumed--you are either a defendant and certainly it never crossed his mind that I was a lawyer. So but it was an anomaly. Story_ID: 70643 Speaker 1: Now you got involved in--tell me if I'm moving too fast--but you got involved with Mickey Leland and Lewis Curtis. Speaker 2: Mickey Leland was well known in Houston [Texas] circles. In fact, he had been an activist for a very long time. He was a pharmacist by training but he started the Black Cats in Houston, Houston's answer to the Black Panthers, I guess. But then he would become a state representative and was very popular and then decided he wanted to run for Congress which was interesting. He was not alone, Judson Robinson who was on the city council at the time also decided he was running for Congress. I think Anthony Hall and so they had a three way congressional race with all of these folks running for Barbara Jordan's seat because she had left the House of Representatives and Mickey prevailed. I was president of the Houston Lawyers Association at the time. That was the organization of black lawyers in Houston. I was the first female president of that organization and so Mickey had occasion to know me and I him. Someone recommended me to him when he won, to work on Capitol Hill and so he asked and I agreed. I only had to leave my beautiful house that I had bought with the help of my sister in Houston. But--and so I left Houston and went to Capitol Hill to work with Congressman Leland as his legislative director for two years and that was very exciting. Talk about organized bedlam, the Capitol Hill. Speaker 1: He was a pharmacist by trade and been involved in the Black Cats, you said? Speaker 2: But he was a politician, he had been a state representative for many years and before he went into Congress. Ron Dellums was his natural mentor and because Mickey was like I said earlier, a very activist brother and he-of course he had a congressional office in Houston and then the one in Washington D.C. and my task was to monitor the legislation and to propose legislative bills and to attend his committee hearings. He was on several committees, the energy committee and the health subcommittee and then he started his own committee on hunger--a task force on hunger. And so because he was very concerned with hunger particularly in Africa, in fact that's how he lost his life because he was going to Ethiopia in a plane and it went down. He was going trying to feed--bringing food--trying to feed the starving folks in Ethiopia and his plane went down and he lost his life. Speaker 1: Now there is a grade school named for Mickey Leland on the west side. Speaker 2: Yes, there is. Speaker 1: Were you instrumental in that? Speaker 2: I was not but I was delighted to meet the lady, in fact the person who is behind it she's an aunt of Mickey Leland's and I was on, receiving some award I think from Pure Midwest Association a couple of years ago and we shared the dais and found out that she was Mickey's aunt and that she was the one who was behind getting the school named for George T. Leland--Mickey Leland and it was a pleasure to meet her. Story_ID: 70644 Speaker 1: Now you said earlier, I'm just going to backtrack, might be a good point to make here. Mickey Leland was an activist, politician and his natural mentor you said was Ron Dellums also an activist. I think some people may think that all politicians ought to be activist or should be or they are or something. Give me the difference between somebody like Mickey Leland and maybe some general model--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Nobody wants to be known as a general model but what I'm saying is that Mickey [Leland] was an experiment as far as I'm concerned. He was steeped in black consciousness and throughout his history as a politician that was one of his focuses in terms of lifting black people but like I said he was like a forerunner of Bobby Rush you know who actually was a Panther as we all know at the same time of Fred Hampton. So Mickey had been in that same background, he was not middle of the road. There were no issues where he was going to take the middle of the road. He was going to push the envelope. Now with that having been said, he was also very, very inclusive. If you were to go to a Mickey Leland fundraiser, he was going to have a mariachi band. I mean he was very stalwart supporter of the Hispanic community. Some of his biggest supporters were the de Menils who were some of the riches people in the world and the de Menils had supported him for the longest, I think they owned Schlumberger corporation. So he had white friends, his girlfriend was Caucasian, in fact which got him a lot of heat from a lot of the sisters in Houston. But although ultimately his wife--he married--you know she was African American. So he was all over the place, he was very much of a free spirit. But still it was not mainstream by any stretch of the imagination. That's why I'm saying that Ron Dellums was his mentor; in fact they got along very well. So my fondest memories were watching Ron Dellums play Richard Pryor's Mud Bones, oh he had that down pat. He would have the whole office laughing. If you can imagine these people--these congresspeople they are such--there are such, so many so talented really because I mean--what did they say, politics is Hollywood for the unbeautiful or something. But they really--Ron Dellums was just awesome and he and Mickey--they would, to have them playing off of each other and going back and forth, oh gosh just natural entertainers both of them. Indefatigable in terms of Mickey went back to his district every week. There was not a week that passed either Thursday, Friday we found him going back to Houston which was how he could win with ninety eight percent of the vote because people just loved him. He was just a wonderful personality, he's missed. Speaker 1: When did Mickey Leland die? Speaker 2: Oh gosh, I think it was like two years after I left. I'm not quite sure, I think I left--I was there from '80 [1980] to '82 [1982] I think around '84 [1984] somewhere between there. And in fact, one of the--my best friend which was Algenita Scott Davis who was the vice president at Chase Bank in Houston, she was one of my law partners, her niece Patrice had taken over as legislative director. In fact, she died in that plane crash with him. Story_ID: 70645 Speaker 1: So why did you leave Washington [D.C.]? Speaker 2: It was time to go. The pace was just like I said, it was--Washington, D.C. the paper that we would get on average bills was just incredible in terms of the volume. The pace was nonstop, it was--you could tell--my sister when she would come and visit and it's like everything was speeded up, double, triple time. It was easy to burn out in a short period of time because the pace was so frantic in terms of work pace and then when you weren't finished with working because then in the evenings there would be the receptions and then, of course you know back in the morning, you know, to monitor the hearings. So it was exciting but exhausting and plus I was a legislative director. I wasn't directly practicing law although I was a lawyer and so I wanted to get back into the practice of law, two years is long enough. Speaker 1: Basically you served as kind of like a consultant on legal matters. Speaker 2: No I was his actual staff member, I was his actual legislative director. They have the administrative assistant, the legislative director under the legislative director you've got all of the staff--most of the staff is under the legislative director because then they monitor the various sub committees that the members sit on. So they are in charge of making sure that he's abreast of what's happening in terms of new legislation and meeting with the constituents and finding out what bills people want to enact and being the--speaking. Making, in fact I was the congressional black caucus' specialist on energy at the time because as my members sat on both of the energy committees in the house. So I would be responsible during black caucus weekend of setting up the energy brain trust and putting on those seminars and staying in touch with the energy committee or community as well as the health community, as well as his interests in foreign affairs. Story_ID: 70646 Speaker 1: In fact, it was during my stay with Mickey [Leland] that he--we went to Cuba and met Fidel[Castro] because he wanted to get the doctors in Houston [Texas] connected with the--and get medicine to the healthcare system in Cuba because Cuba has a very fine system but in terms of the medicines and to share their programs. He wanted to make that connection and so I went with him early on during my time with Congressman Leland to Havana [Cuba]. Speaker 2: What was that like? Speaker 1: Well it was very interesting. It was a tropical--it was like going to Miami [Florida] in many respects except that in the hotels the--the strips of--where you're showing everything is sanitary it would be in Russian because the Russians were big supporters of Fidel [Castro] at the time. They let us go anywhere, they gave us free reign. So we travelled where we wanted to go and it was on one hand we were at the Tropicabana, a night club which was an incredible open air club and where they did the entire history of the Cuban people and dance, showing their African roots and the influence of the Spanish and tracking that on up, it was a wonderful experience. We went to the bars where [Ernest] Hemingway used to hangout and ate. Where the blacks and the whites which was some kind of peas--black peas you know a dish. The thing that I found most interesting was we went to an island called Isla de la Juventud, the island of the children and this is where they had taken children from various African and third world countries and they had a school for all of them, their own separate schools and they were educating them. But at the same time they were training them in their dogma and that was very interesting to witness that. How they were doing that with the kids from all of these third world countries. But we had a very long conversation with Fidel [Castro] and we had been briefed by the state department before we left and this is right at the time of the Mariel boat--people were coming over and so we were asking them and in fact it was a question I asked--and then the missionaries who would had been trying to drop literature they had captured them as well. So I asked him about letting them go and he said that he would do that and then we asked them about the embargo in terms of the Mariel lease, the boat people and I remember Fidel said--and we wanted to know if he would take them back because he was basically getting rid of his riff raff and he said oh no, no, no that's what they were trying to do. So he says oh no, no we don't want to get the riff raff back, you know, you can keep them. But he was very, very charming and accommodating and he talked a lot. Story_ID: 70647 Speaker 1: Well so you left [Washington] D.C. in '82 [1982] so I supposed you'd already plan what you were going to do, right? Speaker 2: I came back to being a civil rights lawyer, of course. Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly in Chicago. I came back home and I worked with the Illinois Department of Human Rights first as a senior attorney and then I became the general counsel for the Illinois Department of Human Rights. The Department of Human Rights was a State of Illinois' civil rights agency. So we investigated charges of discrimination on the basis of employment, housing, public accommodations, primarily. So I directed a staff of twelve attorneys, six clericals to determine whether or not that was substantial evidence to believe that discrimination had existed in the claims that were brought. I worked with Joyce Tucker who is the director of the Department of Human Rights and did that for several years. Speaker 1: I don't know if you can talk about this but are there any particular cases that stand out? Speaker 2: Well there was one against the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] which is the reason that there are now lifts on the busses to accommodate the handicapped. Before then there were none but now how the busses lower and roll up. That was one of my cases and we did, I did legislation as well and one of the bills that we amended the Human Rights Act to prohibit people from being discharged on the basis of their age as long as--in most areas of employment as long as they're capable of performing then there is no automatic--you don't have to automatically make a person leave employment at age seventy or sixty-five unless there is some specialized group. For example, police persons or fire persons or--and judges some times. Also, we have seventy-five is the cut off. Story_ID: 69833 Speaker 1: Kind of got you around 1982 when you came in as the human rights--The Department of Human Rights. You had twelve attorneys, six clericals and (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah throughout this entire time I had been very active with the National Bar Association and--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: Tell us what that is. Speaker 2: The National Bar Association is the organization for this nation's African American attorneys and of which, there, my goodness--I don't know how many thousands there were. More than twenty thousand are what the numbers are but the--and that was--I had been active right out of law school with the National Conference of Black Lawyers which was--they call themselves the legal arm of the revolution and the National Bar Association was started in 1925. It was a more moderate organization and it was like the grandfather and grandmother of black legal organizations. I had been the president of the young lawyers division and one of the founders of the women's division and I served as a vice president--national vice president of the National Bar Association. Speaker 1: Now you've received awards from The National Council of Black Lawyers too? Speaker 2: Oh yeah sure in Houston [Texas] they have their divisions in sections throughout the country as well. It's--the NCBL is still going on but again the NBA [National Bar Association] is the larger of the organizations. It has affiliates throughout the country and internationally as well. I'm getting ready to cough can we stop? So I had been involved in the NBA well actually since I was in law school and we started the student arm of the National Bar Association and then that just kind of seguewayed into being part of it up to today. The judicial council is a part of the National Bar Association as well. It's one of the--one of its divisions and we've been very active in that too. Speaker 1: One of the, I guess the issues today with the National Bar Association what were they (unclear)? Speaker 2: There are the same issues that are affecting black people around the world. In fact, of course there are concerns of the individual attorney and there are several divisions--sections that address that from the small practitioner to the corporate,the government attorney as well as women's concerns as well as law students concerns. So it's a large organization that covers many different things but when you're looking at the resolutions that are passed, of course, they are concerned about the issues of affirmative action and historically they are of course concerned about whether or not civil liberties are being challenged during the fight against terrorism. It would be two of the issues and then with the judicial council and we of course, are concerned with judicial ethics as well as challenges that are made against African American jurors as well as the issues of whether or not judges should be elected or whether or not they should be appointed as well as trying to keep abreast of the current issues in the law. So you know the full panoply of concerns. Story_ID: 69834 Speaker 1: Now you were appointed by the Illinois Supreme Court as the Circuit Court Judge in 1991? Speaker 2: Yes, I was. Justice Charles Freeman was on the Supreme Court--is on the Supreme Court and he initiated my original appointment as a full Circuit Court judge. I was appointed to the vacancy that was created when Judge Lucia Thomas--Lucia Theodosia Thomas retired and, of course that meant that I had to run in the next election and so I did that in 1992. I ran as a democrat and it was partisan. I had an opponent during the--well it started out that I had an opponent and then we were able to knock them off the ballot. We initiated a petition challenge and then they withdrew. So I ended up ultimately running unopposed and was successful in securing that position and served for a six year term in the Circuit Court. Initially I was in the domestic relations division which meant that I handled cases of dealing with divorce, child support, child custody and the full panoply. Dealing with dissolutions of marriage and trying the cases and the cases were tried to me as a judge and dealing with post decree matters. You would think that after people had been divorced that was the end of the story but it rarely is. In fact, the post decree litigation is almost as massive as the initial dissolution. We often joke that some families had a judge for life you know from beginning to end, to end. But it was exciting; of course that's one of the most emotional branches of the Circuit Court. So it can be difficult and of course your decisions have such a vast impact on so many people's lives. So it's not one to be taken lightly and I never did take it lightly. Story_ID: 69835 Speaker 1: Are there any cases that really stand out that you can tell us about that you remember? Speaker 2: I remember divorcing a man at the early part of the week and performing his marriage ceremony at the end of the week, that was interesting. Speaker 1: Not to the same person? Speaker 2: Oh no, it was to a new person. Not really, there. I remember a couple, I think they had been divorced for more than fifty years or at least fifty years and they were still fighting over some issue or the other. But you know, it's, yeah. You try not to take it home with you but you give it its full due in terms of the gravity of the decisions that you have to make. Speaker 1: Were there things that you thought that should be changed in terms of the law as you sat on the bench and watch some of the domestic--judge some of these domestic issues? I mean were there laws that you actually think probably not in the best interest of people and should be changed? Speaker 2: It's a pretty heavily litigated area and the changes that they made would be more fine tuning in terms of the percentages in terms of child support, in terms of who is entitled to custody of the children in light of so many changes that--fathers now are receiving custody a lot more than they used to. Of course, then you've got the issues of same sex couples and if you have custody issues there. But I think the laws have basically been--and the rules also because the Circuit Court and the Supreme Court has its own rule making authority. They've been pretty much keeping on top of making that area responsive to the actual cases that come before the courts. Speaker 1: Did you ever feel that you really didn't have enough information in order to make a decent decision? Speaker 2: If I didn't have enough information then I would get more and make that--if you're saying during the course of a trial then obviously you're stuck with what the lawyers have presented. As a judge I would not get actively involved in the questioning of witnesses because I'm the judge and the lawyers are supposed to do that. So basically you have to make your decision on what is presented before you as well as the full body of laws. Both the--I mean the statutes as well as the case law, the common law that's in existence. And as I say, this is a pretty heavily tread area of the law so basically what you need to make the decision is generally there. It can be difficult sometimes with the child custody cases and that's why I always--when I was doing that we would talk with the children to find out what their desires and experiences and wants were and I think that's very important for judges to do in terms of not leave the children out of the mix when it really is all about them. So that's an important consideration and probably could be more formally structured in terms of the judges having in-camera conversations with children. Story_ID: 69836 Speaker 1: Now in 1991 the year that you were appointed I think Clarence Thomas was appointed to the Supreme Court and that was on television every day. Do you remember that period of time and the discussions in the legal community? Speaker 2: Oh lord yes it was riveting television wasn't it? It was hard to escape, I mean just about impossible and then I knew some of the players also and in fact, I had met Clarence Thomas years before he was head of the Equal Employment Opportunity commission and him being with the states civil rights agency. When we had substantial compliance--we had a work share agreement with the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] as well as having our own organization where we would investigate people. We would do a file with the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] as well as the state and so I had occasion to meet him previously. Actually the lawyer who introduced Anita Hill and Clarence Thomas was a friend of mine. A very fine lawyer who is now deceased, Gale Harding and he was very active with the National Bar Association and so I'm sure he probably regretted that introduction many a day but he passed on somewhere during that time. So that was--it was--watching that and so many of the black lawyers that were involved testified and nobody in the black legal community escaped that. When it became for the National Bar Association [NBA] and they were--Clarence Thomas was asking for the support of the NBA and I was general counsel of the NBA at that time and Algenita Scott Davis was the national president and I was her general counsel and the NBA debated that issue for hours and hours and it was just one of the most tense and so many differences of opinions and I think they voted not to support him by a narrow margin, one vote or two or something like that. But it was very tough time because he had his people who were there, militating and trying to encourage us to support. The others who had had experience with him were saying no you can't do this and ultimately the NBA did go on record as not supporting his nomination to the Supreme Court. But I called it a buppy bloodletting that was my term for that fiasco. Of course you know, buppy being the black urban professional and that's what it was. It was buppy blood letting and it was just devastating watching that on television, night after night, hour after hour. Story_ID: 69837 Speaker 1: And did you--how did you feel about Clarence Thomas being nominated to fill--obviously to fill a spot that was once held by Thurgood Marshall? Speaker 2: Well yeah, I thought it was a travesty and a trick at the time of the administration. I thought--it seemed that it was so consistent. During the Reagan administration when I was on Capitol Hill we would watch this-as he would put people in charge of organizations who were the antithesis of the organization. It was like people who were in charge were really there to undermine and undo what the agency was about and we saw him do it, agency after agency after agency. So Clarence Thomas, to me was more of the same of that. How could you replace a Thurgood Marshall with a Clarence Thomas whose views were the antithetical and diametrically opposed to each other. So of course, it caused us great concern. There were those among us who had hoped that once he got into the office that he would feel secure and be changed, there were those who hoped that. But they have since come to see the light that he is what he is. One of our tensest moment was when I was coming in as a national chair of all the black judges in the nation, chair of the judicial council of the National Bar Association and there were at the time some 1300/1500 African American judges and I was coming in as the--I was chair elect at the time and the outgoing chair and the local convention chair who invited Clarence Thomas to be the guest speaker at the luncheon where I was to be installed and we didn't find it out until it was a fait accompli. The other members of the judicial council and the board had not been consulted or anything and that set off such a firestorm that it was really one of the tensest moments in my judicial career. Because for all the time leading up to that convention in Memphis [Tennessee], it happened to be--what was it the 30th anniversary of the Dr. King's assassination in Memphis that Clarence Thomas was going to speak at the National Bar's luncheon where I'm coming in as the national chairperson. It was--I mean we fought that battle over and over, in fact the executive committee of the Judicial Council voted to rescind the invitation and the chair refused to do it and then we sent our own letter to Clarence Thomas and told him that whereas we were willing to dialogue with him in a seminar to discuss issues and ideas and concerns but that we didn't want to have him talking in a monologue, just having his say at the luncheon. But the current chair was the one who called the shots. So he came and fortunately I had my say before he had his and I think there is a picture of that when I spoke very directly that that we were not approving or supportive of anyone who didn't greet the gains of the Civil Rights Movement or Martin Luther King [Jr.]. But they went on to try and bind the organization back together because we were able to--we have to move past that. He got up and talked about A. [Aloyisus] Leon Higginbotham as being less than literate, he was very insulting. Speaker 1: Talking about him? Speaker 2: Exactly, oh it was awful, it was just--it's all on tape about how after Martin Luther King had been killed, how he'd gone into this dark moment and then he came out realizing that he was an American. It was a very sad moment at the time. They interviewed me on ABC News and US News and World Report and New York Times but it was--as a counter to it, A. Leon Higginbotham I had him do a full half afternoon seminar and he had done the analysis between Thurgood Marshall and Clarence Thomas and of course you know about his open letter to Clarence Thomas and so we made the case by way of counteracting that experience. But it was one of the tensest moments in our lives and in my life certainly. But we came from a serious civil rights tradition so my family was behind me and I stood up and God is good. Story_ID: 69838 Speaker 1: Is there anything else you want to tell us about your tenure as a Circuit Court judge? Speaker 2: Yeah we left the domestic relations division after about four years and went into the law division which is one of the most prestigious divisions of the Circuit Court and there I did civil jury trials. And you know, the fact that the minimum was $50,000 and up and those were--I loved juries. That was really a very gratifying assignment interfacing with people from the various communities and listening to their stories about why they didn't want to serve and then finding on the other side how most of them really enjoyed that aspect of public service, if you will for that short period of time. I have a great deal of respect for the jury system and so of course the lawyers--the caliber of lawyers is very good in that division as well. But we litigated everything from slip and falls to medical malpractice to corporate disputes. And so that was a good experience. Speaker 1: I imagine you had to really stay on the case in litigation like that? Speaker 2: Oh surely and that's one of the things that's constantly interesting about a case is that there you become a little mini expert in so many different areas but it changes from case to case and that's why it's endlessly interesting. Speaker 1: Okay now they provide you with a staff to help you research your--they don't? Speaker 2: Not on the Circuit Court level, no. On the Appellate level it's a different thing but you're basically on your own. Absolutely, absolutely. There are staff attorneys, I think in the chief judges office, you might be able to utilize from time to time but judges basically--you really don't have-you have a clerk who records what happens on your orders and you have a bailiff or deputy sometimes and used to keep order and that's it. But in terms of research, you have to basically do your own which is something that needs to change and would be an improvement of the system. If there were more research lawyers assigned to each judge and a secretary that's what I would change would be to give each judge a research attorney as well as a secretary. Story_ID: 69839 Speaker 1: Now so you served in that capacity until 1999, right? You were a justice with the Illinois Appellate Court, February 1999. Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Justice [Daniel] McNamara had died and there was a vacancy in the Appellate Court and they rotate the appointments between the justice of the Supreme Court and it happened that it was Justice [Charles E.] Freeman's turn and he was aware of my background as a judge having initially been responsible for appointing me to the Circuit Court vacancy and so he asked me to serve in this capacity. And again, it was the caveat that I had to run county wide for election--at the first election. This time I did not run unopposed, I had opponents in both the democratic primary as well as the general election and we ran county wide and had (unclear) a million or 100,000 votes and was able to prevail over my opponent and it was not easy. I had actually two opponents in the primary and then one in the general. Story_ID: 68878 Speaker 1: How, from the top end of this as somebody running for judge, how you make sure your people know who you are. Speaker 2: Well as a judge who is up for election who has to get their name out before the entirety of Cook County [Illinois] which is a massive area and you don't know how big it is until you try and run from one end of it to the next to get a fundraiser or function and you have to be in two places or three at the same time. But to us, of course, it's an amazing thing that people don't know you because we're so closely scrutinized by the bar organizations. The Chicago Bar Association, the Illinois State Bar Association, Cook County Bar Association, Puerto Rican Bar Association, Mexican American Bar Association, the Polish Bar Association, the Jewish Bar Association, the Italian Bar Association, the West Suburban Bar, North Suburban Bar all of them demand and require that you present your credentials to them for them to examine whether or not you are worthy of being a judge, if you will. So by the time we've finished, we've presented almost a books worth of material and information on ourselves to these various organizations and then, of course you've got news organizations, The Chicago Tribune, The Sun Times, The Defender, The Daily Southtown and then the one in the northern suburbs. All those organizations also want you-you have to fill out their questionnaire and submit material and then come in for an interview with them in order for them to tell--for you to tell them who you are and to seek their endorsement and support. So whereas we think we're overly scrutinized and in some instances criticized, on the other hand the masses of people say who are all these people? I don't know one name from the next and basically the only thing that I can say to them is that all of those organizations publicize their findings. They have gone in depth from cases to lawyers to your referrals and they have gone back and talked to people about you. They know how many cases you've done and which ones have been reversed and whether or not you have judicial temperament-the appropriate judicial temperament or whether you possess enough acumen or legal knowledge in order to perform. So they've gone the work already for you and so it's a question of choosing one of those organizations. The Cook County Bar Association for example is the organization of black attorneys and they spend, they have their own committee and they spend a great deal of time examining and then making recommendations of whom they want to support and who they think people should support. They put that recommendation in The Chicago Defender before every election. So if you feel that The Cook County Bar Association is your kind of organization then it would seem that you would go along with what they are recommending. And so all this stuff is published, it's in the newspapers right before the elections. The evaluations of the various bar associations and of the newspapers themselves of the judges and they would have gone through great scrutiny. Not to say that they're always right because in many instances sometimes they are not but there is enough choice for the populace that they can align with one of the organizations and follow their recommendations. Speaker 1: Most people don't take advantage of all that. Speaker 2: But it's right there in their daily paper, it's right there for them to see and in fact, the CBA [Chicago Bar Association] does a special production as well as the ISBA [Illinois State Bar Association] does a standalone sheet that they hand out at the polls. So it's there for those who want to know and then of course, there's always the good old word of mouth. Of course, we try and get to as many places as we possibly can to speak to people to let them know your name from church organizations to educational to receptions and having our own functions and so we have to run and so that's what we do. Just like any other candidate for office. It's just that there are more of us but its there for the person in the public who wants to know, it's there to be known. Story_ID: 68879 Speaker 1: So what is life like as an appellate judge? Speaker 2: Wonderful. Speaker 1: A justice rather. Speaker 2: Wonderful, it's the best job I've ever had. Quite simply it's a--when I first came and what you hear as a trial judge is oh you're going to miss being out of the fray, the day to day trial of cases. You'll miss not being in the mix like that because you're sitting back and you have to be so cerebral, and separate and apart from everybody else. I have not found that I really miss the fray at all. We have oral arguments once a week. We're not in the court room everyday but once a week we do have oral arguments on the various cases that are before us. We'll have from one to four cases at a time at those oral arguments. The structure is very different there. Three of us will sit on any given case and I had served for the last two years, in fact as a presiding judge of my division-of the third division and so I would sit in the middle and call a case and have the lawyers identify themselves and then the judges ask the lawyers the questions. So that means we've already studied volumes of material and our law clerks of which we have two who are both lawyers will have written us a memorandum in order to explain the case furthering the law. So we make inquiry to the lawyers about what we want to know about the case to further our understanding of what's going on. We may pose hypotheticals or just quiz them on what the meaning of the law and the facts are in a given case. And then after we finish the oral argument, we go back and conference and we discuss among ourselves how we think we would rule and then whoever is assigned that case writes it up, writes an opinion or an order and goes through the analysis of the facts in applying the law and then coming up with a conclusion. We circulate it to the other two who sat with us. We need two persons to be on the same side to agree in order for--two of the three have to agree in order for that decision to prevail. Most instances all three of us agree, there are sometimes when one or the other will descent. If two persons disagree with the author then that case is taken away from that author and one of the others of the two will write the majority opinion. So I find--and then after we finish our orals, we--in our impressions conference, we go to lunch which is always big fun because we go to various restaurants in the area and it's a time for being collegial and that's the thing that I want to say about the Appellate Court that it is very, very collegial. Some people said oh you're here and you're isolated and don't have any connection but I have found working with the other justices has been an excellent experience. The work has been stimulating. We'll get cases from all over the entire judicial system and so we can have a criminal case one minute, you can have a custody domestic--a child custody case the next or you could have a medical malpractice the next. So we get them from everywhere, anybody has the right to appeal their case as long as it's done within a certain period of time and that's--keeps it interesting as well. Story_ID: 68880 Speaker 1: Okay, it does sound interesting. Are there any cases that stand out that you'd like to tell us about? Speaker 2: Let's see, we can only talk about cases after they are finally over so I don't think--I've had interesting cases where we made new law but I have to think about whether or not--as long as it doesn't come back to me--as long as it's over, then I can talk about it for purposes of education. We do have cases that impact people's right to feel--right to have privacy in terms of the workplace where people have been investigating their employees and created a new duty to or right to not be intruded upon. We've had cases where the, where children were playing sports at schools and whether or not the schools, in fact were responsible in the event of that child's injury. Of course, we have had--there is one that I can't talk about because I know it's still pending so you've got me shifting through here. But read your daily newspaper, we do everything except capital punishment cases here and in fact in the Chicago Daily Law Bulletin you'll see our cases all the time because everything that's happening that's in litigation in the daily newspaper ultimately it will usually get to us-to one of our divisions but I don't want to go into too much detail because cases have a way not being over. Story_ID: 68881 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: Well my concerns are that there is a growing division between the haves and the have nots, if you will. I think that during the, there was a point during the '50s [1950s] and the during the bad old days of segregation when the black intelligentsia, if you will or the black middle class lived along with those who were not so well off and in so doing, they all considered themselves as part of a larger family. With the advent of integration and the ability of the middle class to utilize their funds, that was a separating and sometimes we went into the suburbs and rarely saw or interfaced with persons who were not on the same level economically as we were and I think the result of that there seems to be as far as the black middle and upper class is concerned less of a recognition of the experiences of what it is like to be poor and black in America and almost a callous disinterest in what that experience is because it's part of their experience and if it is, it's a part that they want to forget. From the perspective of the poor black, I think that the separation of the middle and upper class black for them means that there is a narrowing of their vision of what is possible. And so if all you've seen is three generations of folks living in the Robert Taylor [Homes] or the Henry Horner Homes and living a tense life. Not knowing when bullet holes are going to come through your window or whether or not when your daughter goes to school and tries to come back through the hallway where the elevator is broken and tries to get back to the apartment and is going to raped or the prevalence of drugs living in that kind of tense environment, all you're focusing on is survival. So they are often not made aware of the opportunities that are available in order to--available to them to where they are actually to reach out and they don't know. And then sometimes they don't have the will because living is tough. So I think that from both perspectives there needs to--we need to establish a forum for ongoing dialog inter reaction, you know, because we all need each other. To separate on the basis of money and status, it's still folly because ultimately in the larger and wider America, we still lumped together in a category of blacks. However far you rise, I mean it's still--I still can't get a taxicab up corner of LaSalle and--when I come down from these lofty chambers, cabs still pass me by. When I go to some of these fine restaurants with my colleagues and we're a nice little mixed model group, they still insist on taking us all the way to the back to where the wait station is or where they're bringing the dishes. So it still--the fact of the racialization of America is still an active fact and something that we have to deal with and we need to be dealing with it together because that's where our power is. Story_ID: 68882 Speaker 1: Now--though you're still relatively young--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: It's true. You have accomplished quite a bit and what would you consider your legacy at this point? Speaker 2: Legacy? Well you've heard from my story that I was--started out on the west side of Chicago and wanted to be an English teacher and I've lived in oh my goodness, many places since high school and so I would say that my life has been one not of perfection but it's been one of persistence and that, I think is my legacy and that I would say to my niece who's coming up. I started with the travelling bug from the various travels with The National Bar to, of course my travels to Egypt was on my own and to Tokyo but throughout the African continent and I would say to her that persistence is really what pays off. It's important to be socially conscious, you know, to be aware and committed to the betterment of people but that above all else if you have a goal and I did mine, you're going to get knocked around a bunch. There is no doubt if you're alive it's going to happen to you. But if you stay focused that ultimately you can prevail and so not perfection but persistence. Story_ID: 68883 Speaker 1: Now your sister is a judge as well, a justice for the New York Supreme Court? Speaker 2: Absolutely, from west side of Chicago. Speaker 1: Right, Priscilla Hall. Speaker 2: Yes Priscilla. Speaker 1: How does your family feel about that? Speaker 2: How they get their heads through the door you mean? My daddy doesn't, my mother manages and so he will tell you every other minute my daughters the judges. We are, we are, my sister and I are the nation's first African--elected African American sister judges and literally sisters. Sisters in law as well as blood sisters and our family, of course is very proud of that. As I said they've long had a tradition of educational achievement. This has been something that's been instill from my parents' parents and on and it continues to this day. Our niece just graduated from Carnegie Mellon [University] with a degree in chemistry and where is she going-to the Peace Corps to Namibia no less, you know, in South Africa and we're very proud of her for that and we hope she'll come out and practice law. She is the only child in the family and that's why we mention her name. So the family, of course is very proud and we are of course as proud of my brother who works with the New York Department of Education and his degrees were in psychology. He has his masters, and all but his dissertation in that as well. So but it was--my sister and I have played off of each other, you know, as you could imagine, she's two years ahead. Throughout our lives and so it's always been this friendly, competition, if you will. But mostly she's been a source of great support. Every good thing that I've done, she's always been there supporting it and helping it on and certainly I could not have chosen a better big sister or a dearer friend. Story_ID: 68884 Speaker 1: Okay, now how do you--how would you like to be remembered, once again this is premature? Speaker 2: Remembered? I guess basically I'd like to be remembered as someone who was willing to work with--certainly with the organizations that were in existence that were about the business of improving the profession and improving people's lives. I'd like to be remembered as a person of consciousness who was aware and proud of the fact that I am an African American and who encouraged others not only to be proud of that but to achieve. As someone who has encouraged both law students as well as the youth. I'd like to be remembered as not just a team player but a leader as well and as somebody who you were able to count on to do the job and to do a job well. I think that it's important that we tell folks and that we stand for the proposition that though limitations may be placed on you, as long as you don't place limitations on yourself then you will be able to achieve because it's only the self limitation that is the most binding and that I think would be how I would like to be remembered. Story_ID: 68885 Speaker 1: What are your plans for the future, you think-(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: I happen to like the Appellate Court. Some people, it's never enough for people. You get to one level and they go oh you know it's time for you to go the Supreme Court and I say I happen to like where I am, let me enjoy this. So there are those who are pushing me on to the Supreme Court but I really like this. This is really, like I said the best job that I've ever had. So I'm going to enjoy it and then ultimately I'll probably get back to doing some teaching, these things go in a circle don't they. I never get too far away from teaching. I teach legal education and just last week, I taught at the Baptist Institute and the Leadership Institute teaching on the church confronting youth violence. So ultimately teaching is in the heart and so I'm sure that will still be in my future as well. Speaker 1: And you recently got married? Speaker 2: I did; jumped the broom at long last. On Christmas morning at 7:00 a.m. would you believe that? I married Ephraim Martin who is the president of his own company, Martin Interculture, does PR and owns three events, the Chicago Music Awards, the Festival of Life, that's in Washington Park on July 4th weekend and the International World Reggae and World Music Awards and is very hard working. He's a Jamaican national but--he was born in Jamaica although he is a U.S. citizen and the sweetest man I ever met, just nice and he works as hard as I do or harder. Speaker 1: Okay well thank you very much, it's been a pleasure. Speaker 2: Oh the pleasure was mine, thank you so much, it was a joy. Story_ID: 68886 Speaker 1: Just give us a brief description and let us know who is in the photo and where it's at--where it's shot at and what--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Well this is in 1990 in the summer and this was at the Great Pyramid of Giza in Egypt and that's me mounted on a wonderful camel which is double jointed. I recall getting on it going ride your pony, get on your pony and ride. I went there with Dr. Anderson Thompson and Yvonne Jones and it was a wonderful trip to Aswan and Luxor and Cairo. I'll never forget them saying welcome home Nubian American sista. Speaker 1: That's my wedding. That's Christmas morning 2001 and to the left at the bottom is my husband, Ephraim Martin and in the middle that glorious person is me, gown top and bottom which was made in Ghana that past summer in June when I visited. To my right is the best man and to his right is my sister, Justice Pricilla Hall and in the back my father left Reverend Shelvin Hall, my mother Mrs. Lucy Hall and to her left is the Reverend Jesse Lewis Jackson, 7:00 a.m. Friendship Baptist Church, Chicago. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my swearing in to the Illinois Bar Association. To the left is Justice Glen Johnson of the Illinois Appellate Court, a mentor. Next is me to my left is my mother Mrs. Lucy Hall, Joyce Tucker, head of the Department of Human Rights at the time. Is now a vice president of Boeing airlines, Corporation and my uncle Mr. Willie J. Hall, my aunt Mrs. Violet Carol and Reverend Earl Miller a family friend. Speaker 1: This is my swearing in ceremony into the Appellate Court. To my left is Justice Charles Freeman. He's been a former chief justice of the Supreme Court of the state of Illinois. To the right is me and this is at Friendship Baptist Church, my home church. You see my father to the right standing in the pulpit and I took the ceremony instead of having it as usual at the court, I took it to the community into the church in the hood, if you will on the west side of Chicago. Speaker 2: That was the swearing ceremony when I first became a lawyer in Illinois. To the right is Justice Seymour Simon. He was on the Supreme Court of Illinois at the time. Justice Glen Johnson, to the right of him is Joyce Tucker and to the right of her are my mother Mrs. Lucy Hall and my uncle Willie J. Hall, Reverend Clarence Miller and Mrs. Violet Carol, my aunt. Speaker 1: This was some time ago when I was around thirteen years old, I guess. You see I'm being a prima donna. This is at a church picnic, Friendship Baptist Church picnic. I'm on the far right and to my right is my cousin Mamie Carol and to her right is Mrs. Bertha Brown a church clerk and to her right is my sister Pricilla Hall back in the early '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Well it doesn't get much further back than that. To the left is me, that's me as a baby with my gorgeous round face. To the right is my sister, she's two years older. That was, I guess less than a year old there which means she had to be around two. This is--where is that--should be El Campo, Texas around 1949 or something like that. Speaker 1: This is at the Friendship Baptist banquet. This is the three Hall children. That's me to the far left in the pink and that's my brother, Lewis Jerome Hall. He lives in upstate New York--Albany, New York, east Greenbush and my sister, Pricilla Hall and this is at a Friendship Baptist Church banquet which would be out at Johnnie Coleman's church and that would be about 1984/85. Speaker 2: This is my parental unit, this is my father, Dr. Shelvin Jerome Hall on the left and my mother Mrs. Lucy Hall and I would say that would be somewhere in the mid '60s {1960's]. Speaker 1: This is Havana, Cuba, I went there with Congressman Mickey Leland in 1980 and this was walking into Fidel Castro's office. That's me on the left and Fidel is on the right. Speaker 2: This is at Friendship Baptist Church in Chicago. We were presenting an award to Dr. Shelvin Hall to my left that's me and in the middle is my father, Dr. Shelvin Hall, pastor of Friendship Baptist Church and to the right is my mother, Mrs. Lucy Hall. He had just been installed as the state president of the Baptist General State Convention of Illinois. That would around 1996, Chicago. Speaker 1: This is right outside the chief judge's office where I had just been sworn in as the full Circuit Court judge in December 11, 1991. To the far left is my sister Justice Pricilla Hall who had just flown in on faith because we didn't know until the night before that I was going to be sworn in and then the next is my father, Dr. Hall then me and my mother Mrs. Lucy Hall. Speaker 2: This is at Friendship Baptist Church. To the left is me, next is Dr. Norman Owens then Mayor Harold Washington and my father Dr. Hall. This should have been around 1982 when I was still chief counsel at the Illinois Department of Human Rights and this would have been a Baptist General Congress function, Chicago. Speaker 1: This is our entire family around 1984/85 at the Friendship Baptist Church Banquet. On the first row to the left is Naim Olivia Hall the only child in our family, that's my brother's daughter and next to her is my father Dr. Shelvin Jerome Hall, my mother, Mrs. Lucy Hall and then on the second row far left is me, my brother next to me Lewis Jerome Hall, my sister in law Lillian Denton Hall and my sister L. Pricilla Hall--Justice Hall, New York. Speaker 2: This was taken in Chicago. These are some of the judges of the Illinois Judicial Counsel and I'll just tell you on the first row. Of course, there is Albertina Walker and then Dr. Heisel Taylor and Mrs. Taylor and Judge Blanche Manning and then I'm directly behind Dr. Heisel Taylor and these are some of the judges of the Illinois Judicial Counsel at First Baptist Church--Second Baptist Church in Evanston, Illinois. There are many other judges, Judge Barry Thomas on the second row, Morgan Hamilton, Willie Whiting, James Stewart, Cheryl Ingrams, Sophia Hall then me. Dorothy Joy Cunningham, Jackie Cox and that's a lawyer, this is terrible. At the top Tim Evans is second from the left, Gaylord (unclear), Sidney Jones, Justice Charles Cousins, Al Porter and on that final row--who would that be about three years ago-this is about 1999, Evanston, Illinois. Rodney S. Brooks was the last judge on that on the right. Speaker 1: This was taken at the--in front of the house in Lawndale where Dr. King lived when he came to Chicago and lived on the west side of Chicago in one of these tenement houses. This picture was used widely with the community renewal society with a caption about save your city. On the first row was my father, far left in the glasses and hat is Dr. Shelvin Hall, to his left is Al Raby to his left is Dr. Martin Luther King and to his left is Coretta Scott King. This is on the west side of Chicago, this is circa somewhere between '62 [1962], I want to say but I'd have to look it up '62 [1962] to '64 [1964]. Speaker 2: This was January 1, 2000 brought in the new millennium. This is my parents, my mother on the left Mrs. Lucy Hall, my father on the right at Ivan Williams' home in Broadview, Illinois. Speaker 1: I had gone to the White House and that was President Clinton talking about the law and legal aid in my capacity of chairperson of the Judicial Counsel of the National Bar Association and I took that occasion to ask him about appointed Ann Williams to the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals and shortly after it was done and she's there now. That's me on the left, Bill Clinton on the right at the White House and that would be 1999. Speaker 2: This was an Operation Push convention--Rainbow Push convention. They had a special leader with Vice President Al Gore who was at the time running for president and this is at their forum. That's me in the foreground, left of Vice President Al Gore and immediately behind me is Reverend Billy Kyles of Memphis, Tennessee; a legendary civil rights leader who was there with Dr. King. Speaker 1: This is my formal shot that is there on the 16th floor of the Illinois Appellate Court when I first joined the Illinois Court of Appeals in February 1999. You know who that is? This is a photo at Richard Hunt's gallery. I have on my Amistad tee shirt having witnessed the premiere of that opera at the Opera House and he was very kind to allow Dr. Paulette Fleming from California and a group of our students to come and view his works at his shop. This would have been around in 1999 or 2000. Speaker 2: This is April 1999; this is Richard Hunt's studio. The famous black sculptor and on the front of the State of Illinois building where I work is one of Richard Hunt's sculptor called Free Form that he designed specifically for the Illinois Appellate Court. Speaker 1: It was my pleasure to meet Winnie Mandela three times actually and this is when she was in Chicago February 28, 2001 and she was at the Dusable Museum. That's Winnie Mandela on the left, that's me on the right. Speaker 2: This is on St. Patrick's Day and this is me on the left and on the right is Judge Lucia Theodosia Thomas. She was a premier black female judge and it was her seat that I took when she retired. This is Judge A. Leon Higginbotham who is a brilliant scholar and a former member of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals and me on his right. Speaker 1: This was in Chicago. He was here in Chicago for a convention. After the Memphis Convention where Justice Clarence Thomas spoke at our luncheon though opposed by me and the other members of the executive committee of the Judicial Counsel. J. Leon Higginbotham is a legendary scholar and author and my mentor. Speaker 2: This is when I was coming in as national chair of the Judicial Counsel with the National Bar Association after a lot of wrangling opposing Justice Thomas speaking. I spoke after being installed. To the far left is Justice Clarence Thomas, in front of him are Al Green and Judge D'Army Bailey, behind him is my sister Justice Pricilla Hall behind me is my mother, Mrs. Lucy Hall. To the right is my father, Dr. Shelvin Hall and Judge Damon Keith is to the far right. The actual bar convention in Memphis, Tennessee, 1998. Speaker 1: That's when I was getting sworn in as the national chair of the Judicial Counsel of the National Bar Association. To the left is Justice Clarence Thomas, in front of him is Reverend Al Green, at the podium is my sister, to my left behind my sister is my mother, Mrs. Hall, to the right is me with my hand up and my father to the right and Judge Damon Keith to his right. Speaker 2: This is me to the far left, Judge Mary Jane Tice and Judge Ann Burk both justices of the Illinois Appellate Court and that was after we had done the first ruling by an all female court of the Court of Appeals on a case, Chicago. Speaker 1: This was the fourth division of the Illinois Appellate Court. My first division which I joined in February 1999 my first assignment to this division. To the left is me and to my left is Justice Warren Wilson and Justice Thomas Hoffman and Justice Leslie Elaine South, she's the only other black female on the Court of Appeals. Speaker 2: Was that Wesley South's--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yes, his daughter. This is the 50th wedding anniversary of my parents. To the far left--they were married in December 1944. So that would make this fifty years later and to the left is my brother, Lewis Jerome Hall, to his left is my sister-in-law, Lillian Denton Hall, and me and my father, Dr. Shelvin Jerome Hall and my mother, Mrs. Lucy Hall, my niece, Naima Lillian Hall, my sister, Justice L. Pricilla Hall. This is at the Plaza Club in Chicago downtown on top of the Prudential Building. That would make it 1994, right?..