 Story_ID: 7956 Speaker 1: We're gonna start by slating it. My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer. And Scott Sterns is the videographer. And we're here with Doctor Cecil Hale. Doctor Hale, if you would state and spell your name? And also middle--include the middle name. Speaker 2: Okay. My name is Cecil Hale, "C E C I L." I don't use a middle name. I had one. I got rid of it. Middle initial "I" "H A L E." Speaker 1: You don't want to say what the middle initial-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, no (laughing). Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --stands for? Okay. Can I have your date of birth? Speaker 2: August 3, 1945. Speaker 1: Okay. And I'd like to have today's date? Speaker 2: What is this, February 22, 2002? Speaker 1: And location? Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois, History Makers' Production Studio. Speaker 1: 1900 South Michigan. Speaker 2: 1900 South Michigan. What a-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --place. Okay (laughing). Speaker 1: And I also would like to have your profession. Speaker 2: I'm a Professor of broadcast communications. Story_ID: 7957 Speaker 1: I ask five questions of everyone. They have no meaning except I've start asking them. They're sort of People magazine-ish. But what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food. I have several. My most favorite food is Dim Sum and Sushi. I love that. Favorite dessert, lemon pie. Speaker 1: I love fish too. Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of year is fall. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Several: I love Maui. I love Tokyo. There're some parts of Africa that I really was into at one point but not so much anymore. Kenya is very nice. But number one would have be probably be Maui. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Hmm. Speaker 2: I love Maui. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh there're thousands of those. The one my grandmother made me remember always, "With God all things are possible." And so far, that's been the case. Story_ID: 7958 Speaker 1: I want to talk about your mother. Is it Allean [Cunningham]? Speaker 2: Allean. Speaker 1: Cunningham? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And she was from Little Rock, Arkansas? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: I was wondering if you could tell us about her? Speaker 2: My mother married very young. She married my father [Cecil Hale, Sr.]. They were high school sweethearts. When they--after they married, they moved to St. Louis. Because his parents had moved there. When I was very young they divorced. And she moved to Chicago. And about--There were two of us then, me and my sister. We started school in Chicago. But then we left Chicago and moved back to Little Rock, Arkansas. Just me and my sister. And we were raised by our grandparents. So I spend all of my childhood in Little Rock. My Mother remarried and stayed in Chicago. She worked for Zenith Electronics for many years. And then she went to work for Kimberly Clark as a buyer in Memphis, Tennessee. And then she retired. And now she lives in Chicago again. Speaker 1: Did she talk to you about her growing up? Speaker 2: Yes she did. Speaker 1: Now what things did she share with you? Speaker 2: She told me about her relationship with her mother [Jettie Gardner Cunningham] which was very special. Because my relationship with her mother was also very special. Which you'll find out as we get into this, is that because my grandmother raised me and my sister, she ultimately adopted us. Someone of those very strange people whose mother is also his sister, his uncle is also his brother. But she talked about when they were growing up. This was post-Depression. Very poor in Arkansas--in Little Rock. Not that many job openings. She talked about her mother going to work in the defense industry during Word War Two. How her father [ Allen Cunningham] worked for a trucking company. And how that--they always found time to play with her and her brother. They were a very small family. The grand--my grandmother and my grandfather and two children. So the father always took time with the son. The mother always took time with the daughter. And they had a great childhood from what I hear. Story_ID: 7959 Speaker 1: Tell me about--what about your Father? What--Cecil Hale [Sr.]. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: He died--he passed away when? You-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Many years ago. He died in 1970, I think was the year. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Died of cancer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And what do you know about he and his family background? Speaker 2: Oh, quite a bit. His father, McKinley Hale and his Mother, Effie Chavis was her maiden name, which is funny because I had a grandmother on my father's side named Effie and one on my mother's side named Jeffie. So it was Effie and Jeffie. But he came from a relatively small family. There were four children. There's only one of them still alive now, my uncle in St. Louis. He says that his mother was very loving and very much into the church. I remember that she was a member of the Church of God in Christ. The old Church of God in Christ [COGIC] where you started early in the morning and stayed until late at night. And she did this several times per week. So it was a very religious family. They believed very much in taking care of each other. Pretty close family. What else? I won't even go into the genetics of health 'cause there's all kind of stuff with that. That's why there's only one of them left now. Most of them had high blood pressure and heart attacks and died early. But he told me they encouraged him to do the best that he could, which he did. Very intelligent guy. What finally killed him we think: He was working in art restoration and he was working on a project at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, fell off a scaffolding, injured his back. And that turned into cancer which killed him. So. He came from a very loving family. The kids loved each other. The brothers were very close. Sisters very close. And what else? I spent quite a few summers there with them to not only hear this but to watch this. And, of course, I had to go to church all the time when I was there. But that was okay. Speaker 1: How did he get involved in art restoration? That's sort of-- Speaker 2: He was always fascinated with art. He loved art. He loved to write and he loved art. He could never make a real living as an artist. So he did all kind of other jobs to provide income to him. But on occasion he would get a chance to do what he really wanted to do which was art. And over the years, he basically taught himself how to do art restoration. To the point that other people would pay him for it. Speaker 1: Hmm Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's a fascinating story there in and of itself. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 7960 Speaker 1: Let's go over your siblings in order. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Just who you lived [unclear]-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Let's start from the oldest down. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Okay. My oldest sister, her name is Vernita [Hale] Robertson. She lives in Memphis, Tennessee. She's married, has four children, two boys, two girls. She like the rest of us, toughened it out as far as raising these kids are concerned and she's almost done. She has one daughter in medical school who'll graduate next year. Another daughter who is at Vanderbilt who will be out in a couple of years. Another son who's at the University of Tennessee and another son who decided that he would wait till later to go to school and has now started at Memphis State. So she's doing great. My second sister Theresa who we call Tony--Teresa Antoinette is her name. She lives in Little Rock, Arkansas still. Teresa [Hale] Coleman is her name. She is a nurse. She works for the Veterans Administration. She is at the University of Arkansas in Little Rock. She has three children, two sons, one daughter. In fact, one son just died last year. So--great lady. Okay. Further down the list, there's [half sister] Deborah [Taylor] . Deborah Washington is her last name now. Lives here in Chicago. These are my half sisters. She is the first lady of a church. Wife of a reverend and she loves that. She always wanted to do that and that's what she's doing. My [half] sister Pam, Pamela [Taylor] . I'm not sure which company she's with now but she was with Matsushida for a long time. She's still here in Chicago. My [half] sister Frankie [Taylor] works for the City of Chicago. Has been doing it for a few years. Before that she was in personnel with Marshall Field and Company. My [half] brother Kenny [Kenneth Taylor] works for the library, the city of Chicago. My brother Kevin just moved from Memphis to Chicago. He's into the computer industry. Who am I missing? Let's see. I got Frankie, Debra, Pam, all girls. Tanya that lives here in Chicago. She lives with my mother. Story_ID: 7961 Speaker 1: I want to know what your earliest memory is growing up (unclear) Speaker 2: My earliest memory? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: I think the very earliest memory that I have is learning to read. I've always loved reading. I've been in books all my life. I remember when I was in kindergarten that one of the things that the teacher did not believe was that I could read. But I could because I had learned to read early at home. We can divide those memories up into many different categories. If you're asking my most important memory, there's thousands of those. But I think this is about my earliest memory, learning to read. Story_ID: 7962 Speaker 1: I was born in St. Louis. Speaker 2: In St. Louis, okay. That's right. And-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) then-- Speaker 2: then you moved-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) to Chicago. Speaker 2: --to Chicago. About what year is it? I mean, what is--how old are you at that [unclear]? Speaker 1: Okay. I started kindergarten in Chicago and first grade in Chicago and left the end of first grade. So that makes me six and seven, right. Speaker 2: Now when you moved to--back to Little Rock-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Do you remember that whole experience? Speaker 1: Yep, I do. Speaker 2: Can you talk about that? Speaker 1: Sure. My grandmother [Jeffie Gardner Cunningham] came to Chicago [Illinois] and we always loved to see her. When she came in, it was like, "Oh, my God! She's here. Let's go, let's go." And we would go back with her on many occasions but this time we said we wanted to go and we didn't want to come back. So she said, "Fine." So she took us on a train. I'll never forget that. And made it to Little Rock. And we were quite happy there. It was like, "Oh God! We love this place." Not aware of ev--all the other stuff that we can talk about later about Little Rock and what it was about. But it was a lot of fun. We loved that. Speaker 2: So what was your address there? Your grandparents address? Speaker 1: 1824 East Capital, Little Rock, Arkansas 72202. Phone number (501) 375-4232. Number did not change for almost fifty years. Story_ID: 7963 Speaker 1: Now what kind of child would you describe yourself Dr. Hale? I knew you said you liked to read? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But were you--Did that mean that you were more shy and introspected? Speaker 2: I was. Very introspective kid, quiet kid. From what they tell me is that I was a pretty good kid. You know, didn't give anybody a lot of trouble. Again because I loved reading and I loved music and would find every chance that I could to read and to listen to music. They thought it was very strange that I liked classical music, but I did. As a kid, on the weekends when I finished doing all of my work and, you know, finished doing kid stuff like swimming and riding bikes and all of that, I would find some time to go to the public library. And in the library, I couldn't wait to get my little library card, you know, to check things out. But also would spend a lot of time in the listening room. And would pull down all of the great classics so I could listen to what was happening in terms of composing. Along with that, I took piano lessons. I took piano lessons for about ten years. My grandmother [Jeffie Gardner Cunningham] wanted to nurture this. So I spent a lot of time learning to play the piano. And then when I became older, I learned to play other instruments. I became an oboist when I was a teenager. And at that time, that was a very strange instrument for somebody to play anyway. For a young black kid to play this, that was unheard of. But it was one of the things I learned to do. So all of this stuff about--Gee, there were so many things that were favorite for me. Loved swimming, loved the Boy Scouts. You know, loved listening to music, loved reading, loved learning. Speaker 1: Well what were the things influencing you there? The people around? What was the community like or even home life with your, you know? Speaker 2: It was great. The first thing that I remember is that they are just now talking about this now in terms of, "It takes a village to raise a child," and all of that. That was really important then. Neighbors cared what happened with kids in the neighborhood. The churches cared what happened with kids in the neighborhood. I think Maya Angelou talks about when she was growing up. That when a kid did well in school, they would take the kid and march him from church to church to church to talk about how great he had done in that grading period. That's pretty much the way it was when I was growing up. You would go to church. And they would pick you out, you know. And, "Stand up. You did a great job this time." All of that. It was a great environment. It was a segregated environment. But even in that, it was a great environment. Many of the people who were important to me then, some of them are still alive. And when I see them, you know, I like to remind them, "You know, I remember you." And they say, "Oh, yeah. We remember you too." And I like to give them credit for anything that I became. Because they had a lot to do with that. I think that's one of the pieces that we're missing these days in terms of everybody is interested in everybody else's kid--and is willing to do more than pay lip service to that. They're willing to help, you know, to make you succeed. Story_ID: 7964 Speaker 1: Now you went--What elementary school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to two of them. I started in Chicago at William Penn Elementary School on the West Side, Near West Side. Then I went to George Washington Carver Elementary School in the east end of Little Rock, Arkansas. After that, because the system was different then, in sixth grade you went to junior high school. So I went to Dunbar Junior High School. That had been converted from a high school. It before was Dunbar High School. And then I went to Horace Mann High School. The same High school that Chelsea Clinton eventually went to in Little Rock. Speaker 1: Was that may--Horace--okay. But when you wen--I have a question. When you-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 1: --were attending these schools, did you know--Was there some sense of who they were named after? Did you grow up in, in a segregated community world and did you understand, you know, who George Washington Carver was [unclear]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay [unclear]. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: [unclear]. Speaker 2: And the reason for that is because I got a lot of that at home to begin with. But in the South during that period, especially in Little Rock, Negro history month as it was called then was always talked about. You know, Black history month as it is now. It was talked about then. But there were also courses that you had to take in school and one of them was Negro History. And there were a lot of us who did not want to take Negro History because we didn't know what it meant. But because they made us take it, that's when we began to learn all of these things about who we are and where we came from. Speaker 1: You know, that's, that's a great background to have--a conven--in stark comparison-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --to how, you know-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --or even how Iwas raised-- but a lot of people are raised, have been raised--. So you--so you're a reader. You like music. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: You know, that's forming--you say you play--You started the oboe when? Speaker 2: I started that in junior high school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And you also--What did you play in sports? You were a--you said a-- Speaker 2: I was a swimmer. Speaker 1: Swimmer. Story_ID: 7965 Speaker 1: Were there other people influencing you besides your grandmother [Jeffie Gardner Cunningham]? I mean was there, you know, people in the community whether it was teachers-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Sure. Speaker 1: --or others? And I'm just wondering who some of those people were? Speaker 2: Well I can start with Edwin Hawkins. He was the principal of the high school that I went to [Horace Mann High School, Little Rock, Arkansas]. And he took a personal interest in my development. He wanted to make sure that--He thought I was fairly intelligent for what that was worth and wanted to see that develop. So he made sure that I was introduced to the right things like the philosophy club and the chess club. You know, for a black school this is very interesting stuff from--in the late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s]. I came out of high school in 1963. So from 1960 to '63 I was at Horace Mann. And all of this stuff was opening up to me because I was kind of steered in that direction. Another guy by the name of Charles Ruth (ph.), one of the elders in the church who's still with us. His interest was that--he wanted to do two things. He wanted to see me develop as a person but he also wanted to try to make history. Earl Brown (ph.) another one. He was my Boy Scout leader, also in the mode of building character, but also interested in creating history. So because of those three--they worked with me a lot and ultimately they sat on a court of honor where I became an Eagle Scout. And that was a big deal. Well it's still a big deal today. But in 1960, that was a very big deal. Nineteen sixty in Arkansas, that was a huge deal. So I became the second, we think it was the second, black Eagle Scout in the history of the state [Arkansas]. Up until that point they think there had been one other back in the '40s. But not un--from the '40s until I became one in 1960, there had not been one. So these people had a lot to do with who I became. Ministers in the church took a great interest in what kids were about. Oh I could make a list that would go on forever. Because I think what I'm saying with this is that the entire community was involved in this whole thing of forming this person, you know, that I am now. Story_ID: 7966 Speaker 1: What do you think you learned from the Scouts that, you know, have taken you through? Because that's, you know, to become an Eagle Scout is a sort of a big, big deal. Speaker 2: It really was then. Speaker 1: Right. I mean it is--Right. Speaker 2: What I learned from it--I think I learned organization and organizational values. One of the things that was a benefit of this--a side benefit of this is every summer I worked at the Boy Scout camp in--it was near Hot Springs in Ouachita, Arkansas. Worked every summer and I learned the value of work and, and the fact that you could earn your own money, you know, by doing what you learn to do and do well. I also learned a lot about tolerance. The way that this--the camps are set up there is that the white scouts would go to camp during the first part of the summer. In fact, pretty much all of the summer. But the last week of the season is when the black scouts could go to camp. It was segregated that way. And now this story leads to yet another story. When--At the end of the white season at camp, and the beginning of the black season at camp, there was some overlap, in terms of the staff members. And a couple of us became friends. You know, so I had white friends who were Eagle Scouts. And none of--They couldn't wait to get home to say they had this black friend who was an Eagle Scout. When they desegregated the accommodations, one of the first things that happened was desegregation at movie theaters. Before that, when you went to a movie theater, the whites sat downstairs. The blacks had to go through a side balcony. You had to go up the steps on the side and sit in the balcony. When they desegregated the theaters, I walked into this theater on the first floor. And when I walked in, the first guy I saw was this guy who was my buddy, the other Eagle Scout from camp. And we ran and we saw each other and jumped up and down. And the rest of the movie [audience] was freaked out by this. Because they had not seen this happen before. But I never forgot that. That was really something. So that's another one of the things that came directly from the Boy Scout involvement. The fact that this whole thing of people and friendships and all of that is not about color. It's about so many other things. And much of that comes from things you have in common, that we all have in common with each other. In that case, there was Boy Scout, Eagle Scout achievement. Story_ID: 7967 Speaker 1: I want you to think about Little Rock and your time there. And I want you to tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood. Speaker 2: [pause] I've been back to Little Rock quite a bit in the last few years. My grandmother [Jeffie Gardner Cunningham] became ill, and ultimately passed away. So I was there maybe three or four times a year, for the last three years. The one thing that I remember about Arkansas, that I did not like, was the heat. I never liked the heat. And then some people say that when you live in the South long enough, you get used to that. No. I never got used to that. What was--What had a lot of memories for me, when I went back there, were the smells of the vegetation. The fact that it is very green smelling, very lush smelling. I remember as a kid, because I also had asthma. That sometimes this would trigger that, when I would smell this stuff. But now as an adult, when I go there and smell this, it just brings back great memories of summertime and fun and running and playing and all of that. What else? Because I moved around much of the state as a kid, because that's part of young church groups. We would go visit other churches and youth conventions and all of this. I remember Hot Springs, Arkansas, which is a National Park. And one of the things that I remember about that was the smell of the water. The fact that, when you got there, because of all these lakes there, it was so fresh and cooling and all of that. And I think that had a lot to do with why I ended up living near someplace with water. Like Chicago and ultimately California. And my great requirement these days is that anywhere that I live has got to be near some water, and hopefully a mountain thrown in. You know, to color it up some. But I th--those things are the things that I remember. Story_ID: 7968 Speaker 1: What subjects were you attracted to in school? Speaker 2: Science. Loved science. Hated math. Now that doesn't even make sense. Because you gotta have one to have the other. But I loved science and hated math. Loved music, loved history. In junior high school and high school, my favorite subject was Latin. Go figure. I don't understand it either. But I ended up doing three years of Latin. What else? I couldn't wait to get to--couldn't wait to get to science class. And couldn't wait to get to music class and couldn't wait to get to band practice because I loved music. Speaker 1: So what of your science classes did you like the best? Was it biology or-- Speaker 2: Chemistry. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you ever think about becoming a doctor? Speaker 2: Funny you should ask that question. Because I think you're ultimately gonna ask me the question of how I became a disc jockey. This is the beginning of that story. Story_ID: 7969 Speaker 1: When I was growing up in the South, there were three things that if you were gonna be a black professional that everyone said you had a shot at doing. One of them was to be a doctor. The other was to be a lawyer. And the other one was to be a preacher. Those three. So at that time I really didn't care that much about the law. I had never read the law. So I didn't know. At one time I had thought about going into the ministry, when I was a young kid. But I think I was having too much fun, and decided that wasn't the way to do it. So I thought I'd be a doctor. They had a career fair at my high school. And I was supposed to go to this room to meet with the local doctor, who happened to be my physician. A guy by the name of Morris Jackson. So I'm on my way to the room. And for some strange reason I walked into the wrong room. When I walked into the wrong room, in this room was the general manger of the local radio station. Now what he was saying sounded fascinating. So I'm listening to him. And he invited us few that made it to this session to come down to the radio station, and take a look at it. Now here I am, a teenager, loved radio, loved music, and he invites us into this hollowed inner sanctum of... I mean this was nirvana for me. So when I walked in, I saw the lights flashing and the needles moving. And the guy who was on the air, who's still a good friend of mine to this day, was a guy by the name of Al Bell. Who ultimately became the President of Stax Records and did all kind of great stuff. Al Bell was on the air. When I watched him, and I saw that he could do all of this stuff, and if he turned the switch this would happen and if he talked, you could hear him right here, but you could also hear him out there. And he could pick his own records and all this. I was in love. It's like, "This is it. This is it. This is what I wanna do." So, "So much for the doctor. That's out the window. I'm doing this." Speaker 2: And what year were you in? Were you in your junior year? Or... I knew you said you were in high school. Speaker 1: I was fifteen years old. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: [unclear]. Speaker 1: [simultaneously] So that would be my sophomore year. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 7970 Speaker 1: I mean you were totally smitten [after visiting a radio station]. But were... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: So were you... Did you end up doing any of that [unclear]? Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's another guy who was a teacher in high school, William Walker (ph.). He was my speech teacher--speech and English teacher. He worked at the radio station part time on the weekend. So I begged him if I could come down to the station with him. He said, "Sure, come on down." So one weekend while I was there, he says, "I need for you to run into the back to the wire machine" At that time it's AP-- "And rip out some copy for me." So I went back. I couldn't wait to do this. I ripped it off and brought it back to him. He separated it out. It said the weather forecast. A little strip about this wide. He said, "What's the weather going to be?" I said, "Well according to this, the weather's going to be pretty good." He says, "You know, I think you're correct. Sit down right there and read it for me." And he turned the mike on. So that was my first experience on the air. I got a chance to read the weather on the air. Ultimately I ended up with a one hour show in my senior year of high school. Teenage disc jockey. I thought I was the hottest thing moving. And that was the beginning. Some say the beginning of my downfall. But-- (laughing). Speaker 1: So let me ask you, how did that feel the first time? Speaker 2: I loved it. Speaker 1: I mean but how did it--? 'Cause it's a mike and you don't--you're-- It's not necessarily like you're talking to anyone. Was it just the fact...? You know what I'm saying? 'Cause I often wonder. It's a very--Well you, you know. Look at all the people who came the other evening. But you're in a room by yourself-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] That's right. Speaker 1: with a microphone. And so I was just wondering how that... that didn't feel odd? Or it just... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] No! It felt right. If you talk to anyone who has been doing this for a while, including Herb Kent--he'll tell you that you just know that this is what you're supposed to do. There's no way you can quantify that. It's like it's magical. You know, you just know that this is what you love and this is what you wanna do. What I tell my students sometimes is that for all the years that I was in radio, I would have paid them to let me do it. Now by the success books they say that when you feel that way about any job, where you'll pay them for the privilege of being able to do it, you're in a good groove. And that's what happened with me. Speaker 1: So this station [KOKY]. So you had a teen show on the stattion? Speaker 2: On Saturdays, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how did that come about? Who was... we... How did that even... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] My speech teacher and... Speaker 1: Was he... Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. And Al Bell. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The first disc jockey that I saw. Yeah. Speaker 1: So now how did you plan out your show? What was the whole premise behind it and everything? Speaker 2: Play records. Speaker 1: Play records? Speaker 2: That was it. Play records and say-- Speaker 1: [simultaneously] [unclear]. this is and that was. That was the extent of the whole thing and [laughing]. Speaker 2: No idle chatter. Speaker 1: No idle chatter. No great esoteric philosophy. Just, "This is... "That was..." "It's 3:15, call letters." And loved it. Speaker 2: And was there... Did... What... Did you play music of your youth? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: I mean... And so what were some... what were your... what were the artists that you were playing? Speaker 1: Oh what was happening then? Some very early Motown stuff was around. There was a Ray Charles record-- Speaker 2: Your favorite artist? Speaker 1: Well then... There was a Ray Charles song that was out. I've forgotten which one. Because I played so many over the years. But there was one that was a hit then. Was it "Hit the Road?" I think it may have been "Hit The Road Jack And Don't You Come Back no More, no More, no More." A couple of early Motown things were out then. What else? Oo! I can't remember all of them because they start to run together with when I began to work at other radio stations. But oh yeah. There's one instrumental. What was this song? Because the band also played it at football games [singing notes]. What was that song? I can't think of the title of it. It'll hit me in a minute. Speaker 2: So you were a big deal then in high school at that point, right? Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Oh I was the man at that point, [laughing] you know. "Oh we heard you the other day." It's like, "I love that. Okay. Great." So that also gave you a new kind of social power too. Yeah. Speaker 2: So how was that for, you know, a young teenager in love? Did you, you know, you're more of an introspective shy type. So [laughing] were you... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Most people in radio are. Most people in radio are. I think what makes it right for them is that in regular old every day life they're just, you know, regular folks with this party animal goin' on inside of them. And they use radio as a way to express all of that. And it gives them balance. But most radio people that I have met over the years tend to be in person, fairly introspective. Speaker 2: Hmm. And so you've got this bug. You're... this is your... This is what you're doing. You're not really... I mean this is strongly becoming your love? Speaker 1: Oh absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was instant love. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Story_ID: 7971 Speaker 1: What is your grandmother [Jeffie Gardner Cunningham] saying about this? Speaker 2: She loves it. Because I'm interested in something. My grandfather [Allen Cunningham] on the other hand, was not too thrilled with that. Because he did not see that as being a real job [chuckle]. Speaker 1: So what was he saying you needed to do? Speaker 2: "Get a real job. If you want a job, go get a real job. This is not a job." [laughing] You know. Speaker 1: Was there anyway... a place that he was directing you? Speaker 2: Oh no. The only thing... My grandfather was very... strong kind of guy. You know, he didn't... How can I put this? He was kind of authoritarian. And he really would have loved to have things go his way all the time. But as I began to grow up, even in my choice of college, he wanted me to stay home and go to school there. When I left for college I thought, "Well he'll be okay." You know, "He's a tough guy" and all of that. But he cried the night that I left. I'd never seen him cry ever in life. But it broke his heart that I was leaving home, to go to school. Story_ID: 7972 Speaker 1: You went to Southern Illinois [University]. Right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: How did you choose Southern Ill? Is this... Where is Southern Ill...? Carbondale [Illinois], compared to Little Rock? It's... Speaker 2: It's a good ways. Speaker 1: But how did you end up choosing SIU? Speaker 2: I think part of it was personal decision. I think the rest of it was fate. When I was graduating, when we were in the final days of school, they put out the class standings. And I found out... I didn't even know this. Out of 256, I was number 13 on the list. The school that I had heard about that was "the bomb" --you know, if you went to this school you couldn't do better, was Harvard. But no one had ever really seriously talked to me about going to Harvard. I had one classmate who ended up going to Yale. But he was it for the Ivy League out of my entire class. I ended up with a lot of scholarships to... I had a scholarship to Dillard. I had one to... Oh where was it? It was a college in Tennessee. Not Tennessee State. Oh Lane College. I had about five scholarships. And this all came from testing that had been done at the senior year. But then I heard about this school that had a radio TV program. And at that time, there were very few schools that had this goin' on. There were a couple on the east coast. There was Emerson in Boston, a couple of them in New York State. They had a program at UCLA. But I hadn't really thought of moving to California. And they had this one at Southern Illinois University. And they offered me a scholarship. They offered me a scholarship based on the Eagle Scout stuff and all of that. So when I ended up going to Southern, I had no idea where Carbondale was. But when I ended up going there, I found out that not only was it what I wanted in terms of the radio TV curriculum. But it was also where I had friends. The guy who was my best friend in high school, he and I both ended up going to Southern Illinois. He's a three star admiral now in the Navy. You should interview him too.. A guy by the name of Edward Moore. Ed Moore and I went to Carbondale in '63. [1963] Not a clue as to what this school was about. Other than we knew that they pretty much offered what we wanted. And found out when we got there that several of the Little Rock Nine, the original kids that had desegregated Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], were our classmates. So they kinda took us in their arms and said, "Okay, you're here with us now. Let's talk about what's happenin' with the school and how you can deal with the environment of this university." There were so few black people there at that time. I think the student body was 22,000, 23,000. There were less than 500 black people on the entire campus. And of the ones that you knew, there were maybe 200 that we knew. So we were a very tight knit community on that campus. Speaker 1: You know, I'm impressed with... because this is what... See you go... What year did you enter SIU? Speaker 2: 1963. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm impressed with, you know, the breadth of what you had looked at. You know, in terms of going to school. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And was anyone advising you? Or would you... you were just searching out yourself? Speaker 2: Searching out myself. The one thing that I regretted about high school is that we didn't have the kind of counselors that really were prepared to look at all of the possibilities. And maybe they were being what they considered to be realistic at that point, about what the possibilities might be. The reason I wanted to go to Harvard was not because of Harvard. You know, some people just like it because it's Harvard. But it was W.E. B. DuBois that made me wanna go to Harvard. And I always wanted to go to Harvard. And when that wasn't gonna happen as a teenager, I kind of threw it out of my mind. And moved on with what I wanted to do that was fun for me. Story_ID: 7973 Speaker 1: What impressed you about W.E.B. DuBois? Speaker 2: The best way to answer that is to tell you of a ritual that I have in my family. Whenever one of my children graduates from high school... I'm through with that now. But whenever one of them graduated from high school, they get two things from me. One of them is that I give them a book of poems. And the second thing that I give them is 'The Souls of Black Folks'. And I require them to read it before they can ever get any money from me for college or any of that stuff. You have to read the 'Souls of Black Folks', especially the first chapter, the forward. And come back and tell me what it means to you. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: That's one of my little rituals. Speaker 1: But how did he strike a chord with you is what I'm saying? Speaker 2: When I read it. Speaker 1: When you read it? Speaker 2: When I first read... Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I thought it was the most beautiful thing I had ever read. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had never seen anyone... And, you know, for a kid, I think I have been exposed to quite a bit as far as literature and philosophy was concerned. More than the average teenager. But when I read this, it was like... it was like reading music. The way the man strung the words together. And the way that there was a meaning behind the meaning, behind the meaning, knocked me over. And I said, "If he learned to do this there, I'm going there so I can learn to do the same thing." Story_ID: 7974 Speaker 1: Now when you get to SIU that's a different experience from what you've been growing up in. Isn't it? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: It's not? Speaker 2: No. This is Southern Illinois [University] in 1963. Speaker 1: Okay. But... It... Okay. How large was the... But the institution was large. Speaker 2: Large institution, yes. Speaker 1: That's all I'm saying. Is that... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Yes. Speaker 1: the institution was like almost a town. The size of a town. [unclear]. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] It pretty much was the town. There was the university and then the rest of Carbondale [Illinois]. Speaker 1: How... What was your college experience like? Speaker 2: It was good and bad. I think probably equal amount of both. Now when I first came to Southern, there were no black advisors. Ended up taking all the wrong classes that I didn't like. Because there was nobody who cared about the black students. You know, to tell you, "Okay. You wanna follow this track? Then you need to do this, this, this, this. You wanna finish your GE's very quickly? Then you need to do this, this, this, this." So I ended up with a lot of classes that I really did not like. And as a result of that, I ended up ditching a lot of classes. A lot of classes I didn't go to. Which screwed up my GPA big-time. It took something else to motivate me to make me want to get my GPA up again. And that was my fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha]. That's what did it for me. You couldn't pledge a fraternity, even if they wanted you, if you didn't have the right grades. My fraternity was a stickler with that. They were the standard bearer for the GPA and Panhellenic Council. So they didn't even want to talk to you unless you had your grades right. So that fired me up to go and try to do the right thing. But once I was in, you know, suddenly it was not that important anymore. And I began to write my own programs. I finished all of the courses for my major, probably by the beginning of my junior year. All the other stuff, you know, was not that important. Speaker 1: Now so what fraternity was it [that he pledged at Southern Illinois University]? Speaker 2: Alpha. Speaker 1: Alpha. Speaker 2: Alpha Phi Alpha. Speaker 1: So tell me... so you... Are you a big fraternity person? Do you feel that that really helped you and... Speaker 2: It did help me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: In what way? Speaker 2: Well first of all, there was a camaraderie that comes from that experience. The second thing is that I had this profound sense of history. And it, it bowled me over that this was the first African-American fraternity. The fact that some guys at Cornell in 1906, had managed to put this together, was fascinating to me. As I grew older, I began to see that every fraternity and sorority has a history that is important. But it was just a great source of pride. That I was in with this group that had this great history, that had done great things for our people. Because that was always important to me. That whatever it is that you're part of has to contribute to something greater than yourself. It has to help people in general. Black people in particular. Because we needed help the most. Speaker 1: And how do you say that Alphas differ from the others soro [sic]...? I mean, you know, they all have their niche. But [laughing]. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [laughing]. Trying to get me in trouble. Speaker 1: [laughing] No. Speaker 2: But I'll say this. My best friend, the guy who is the Admiral now, is a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi]. And the Kappa house was right next door. And we would have these arguments all the time, when we were kids. You know, "Mine is better than yours." "Mine was first." "That's okay. Mine has a better color." "We give bigger parties." "That's okay. We have prettier girls coming around." all of that. But if you look at the history of all of the black Greek letter fraternities and sororities, they all started for a particular reason for a particular time. The Alphas helped start some of the other black fraternities. To show 'em how it was done. That doesn't make us better than them. It means we were first. And it wouldn't matter to me anyway. Because I wasn't around then. But it's the idea that this kind of bonding was necessary for African-American students from the beginning of being able to go to college. I mean when you think about Cornell in 1906 with the Alphas, how many black folks were in college, period, at that time? And the fact that there were so few of them, they needed to have something that would hold them together. So I think in terms of differences, the only difference would be--the only difference would be the founding dates obviously. I don't think there's a great deal of difference in terms of commitment to black people in the community. Speaker 1: And so you be--You were an active member. Have you--are you still--are you, are you--? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I haven't paid my dues this year but yeah. I still do some things with the graduate chapter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now one thing that's important to me is we have a--every year we do this thing, where we go to schools and we talk to-- It's pubic service. We go to high schools and talk to black students about the importance of staying in school and, you know, trying to live right and all of that. Speaker 1: Now so it's time for you--so you say that, you know, I-- if I--Well you didn't say that if I felt the reason my grade were up. But, you know, they were sort of--you did okay. But you didn't do your--you didn't do your best. It wasn't like-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] I could have done so much better. Speaker 1: Better? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: I really didn't care about school. I really wanted to do radio. Radio TV. As long as I did that, the rest of it was not that important. Story_ID: 7975 Speaker 1: During that time what radio TV... what you were doing there [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale Illinois]? I mean were you hosting... DJ'ing a show there? Speaker 2: I was, sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And every summer to make more money so I could go back to school, I worked at a different radio station someplace in the country. There's a project that I'm working on now that I have to talk to you about in depth later. But in 1965, I worked at a radio station [KOVC] in North Dakota, of all places. And the way that happened was, I was listening to an air check in the studio one day. This white kid walks by and says, "You know, I like the way you sound." It's like, "Okay, fine. Now go away, you bother me." He was like, "No, no, no. Let me talk to you. Don't tell anyone else in the class this. But my Dad owns a chain of radio stations. And I think you would be perfect to work there this summer." "Okay, fine." So they sent me a plane ticket to Fargo, North Dakota. They picked me up in a--he had his Corvette and drove me to his radio station in a town called Valley City, North Dakota. I did not know until I got there. When I got out of the car, traffic stopped on the street. As I was walking to the hotel where I was going to stay, people would catch their breath [intaking breath]. Mother's would grab their children and gr--and bring them closer to her. And I looked around to find out that I not only was the only African-American in that town, I was the only one in the region. I know because I checked. I went looking and found out there was only one guy of color in town. He was half black. And they had been giving him hell for years. The bottom of the story is that on the--in the last night and the last hour that I was on the air, two friends that I made there were in the studio with me. And we thought the station was burning down. We thought we saw fire. So when I was doing my stuff I sent them to the front to look. They came back and said, "You can't go this way." I'm like, "Why?" "No you can't go this way. You don't need to look." "Well is the station burning down? Do I need to get out of here?" "No you're okay." Found out that they had burned a cross in front of the station. I kept pictures of the cross. The ownership freaked out. So they hastily got me out of town the next day. My story made the national wire service the next day. The friend who was res--who was really my good friend at that time, who got me out of the station and gave me a little party and tried to get me drunk so I could forget it--we're still friends to this day. A lady who lives in Gresham, Oregon, Linda Hockenberry. But the owner of the station got me out of town. Took me to his summer home in Detroit Lakes, Minnesota and kept me there for a couple of days. And then sent me on back to Chicago. So I could go back to Southern. The project that I'm working on is that I've been talking about doing this for years. But I'm going to do it this year. I'm writing a letter to the Governor of North Dakota, to the two Senators of North Dakota and to the Mayor of Valley City to talk about this incident that occurred. And I'm going back there. I haven't been back there since. I'm going back there. And I'm gonna take a camera crew with me. And talk to some of the folks there to see if they remember this. And to see what they felt about this. It's a way to--I don't know, to reconcile and try to smooth over some of the feelings that came, you know, out of me during that period. Remember I grew up in the segregated South. So a burning cross in front of a radio station as far north as you can get in the country without being in Canada, struck me as being very strange. And I want to see how the story plays out. How this ends up all these years later. Speaker 1: That's fascinating [unclear]. Now, you know, the other thing. What year are you... I mean not... I wanna know what year we're in? But also what year in school when it happened? Because it was a summer job, right? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. That was in 1965. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was at the end of my sophomore year. Speaker 1: Your sophomore year, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: During your junior and senior year were you, you know, actively-- mean still DJ'ing? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, at the school [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale Illinois] radio station. Speaker 1: Okay. I think someone's knocking. [Note: Tape turned off, probably while someone is let into the room; it picks up again in the middle of sentence]. Speaker 1: ...In town. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. (laughing) Speaker 1: (Simultaneously, laughing) You know, what they were wondering, you're probably an African or something. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughing). Speaker 1: (Laughing) Speaker 2: The only guy in town of color was the guy named Riley Rodgers--I still remember his name. He was a pharmacist at the hospital. He was half black and they gave him hell. When, when we finally became friends, he told me about all the junk he was going through with these people. I'd say, "How can anybody--first of all, you don't look half black. You look white to me." He says, "It's not about that. Somebody found out what was--my family tree was about and they have given me hell ever since. There's them and then there's me." Speaker 1: Hmm. And how had he ended up there? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I don't... You know, I should... When I go back there I'm gonna... Speaker 1: [simultaneously] You said... Speaker 2: try to find him. Speaker 1: Where in North... was... where... what's the name of this... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Valley City. Speaker 1: Valley City. Okay. Speaker 2: It's about sixty miles east of Fargo. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. And that... What is that region like? Is it flat pretty much? Speaker 2: Very flat. Speaker 1: Very flat. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Very cold. Speaker 1: Okay. Hmm. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: But you were there in the summer. Right? Speaker 2: In North Dakota it starts getting cold there very early. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: [laughing] I got out just in time. Speaker 1: Okay. No [unclear] Okay. Story_ID: 7976 Speaker 1: Now when it's time for you to graduate [from Southern Illinois University, Carbondale Illinois], what are your thoughts at that point? Speaker 2: It's time for me to leave school. One of the things that I did not care about ever was school. I just wanted to do radio. What happened to me in the meantime is I... of the period, thought I was in love and all of that, and got married in college. And had to go to work. So I left school. I left school in my senior year to go to work... where I ended up working? The radio station in Chicago Heights [Illinois]. And I did not care. I thought that I would never, ever, ever go to school again. Didn't care, didn't matter. I was doin' what I loved and I knew eventually I would make enough money doing it. But as it turns out on the educational thing, I met somebody in the 1970's. Still good friends to this day, a guy by the name of Robert L. Hilliard. He at that time was head of educational broadcasting for the Federal Communications Commission. And at that time I was also running a national organization. We struck up this friendship. And he was telling me about a program that he was developing through the FCC that was a master's level program. And that they were looking for certain individuals across the country to be a test class for this program. I thought this is the weirdest thing I've ever heard in my life. He says, "You would be perfect for this. So why don't we put you in the program and let's see if you can prosper within this." He did it and it worked out. Speaker 1: And so what were you doing in the program? Speaker 2: Getting a Master's Degree. Speaker 1: Okay, Wow! Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So this was 1966? Or... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] This is 197... Speaker 1: [simultaneously] 70.... Speaker 2: 73. Speaker 1: Oh you said, "Early '70's." Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 1973. Speaker 1: But from 1965 to 19... the early '70's, you were working at Chicago Heights. Speaker 2: No. In 1966... Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Okay. Speaker 2: I was still in college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In 1967 I was in Chicago Heights. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In 1968 I was hired by WVON [Chicago]. Speaker 1: Okay! Okay. Speaker 2: And then in... Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Okay. Speaker 2: 1968, when they hired us, they shipped off several of us to open a new station in Milwaukee, WNOV. And I was there for a year and a half and then came back to 'VON. Story_ID: 7977 Speaker 1: Okay, so--how did you get to WVON[-AM radio, Chicago, Illinois] though? You don't--you haven't answered that question. Speaker 2: Yes. [sigh] When [1967] I started working [at WMPP] in Chicago Heights [Illinois] , the way that I got that job was that I also had an FCC first class license. Now back in those days that was a big deal. And I was very young and not too many--very few African-Americans had the license to begin with and certainly no one young. At that I could name almost all of us who had them. The guy who owned the station in Chicago Heights--that's another story--hired me because Roy Wood over at WVON had told him that he had met me. Roy Wood was also an Alpha [Phi Alpha]. That's how we first met each other. Roy Wood was a news man who was great. I met this guy. He hired me. And he hired me because he thought he could get four people in one. He'd get an announcer, he could get a sportscaster, he could get a newscaster and he could get an engineer all in one for the grand sum of $100.00 a week. And, of course, I would take it. It's like, "Yes, I'll take it." I mean what is $100.00 a week these days, maybe $300.00 a week? It's not... It wasn't that much money. But anyway, I worked at the station for a year and a half. The way I got to 'VON there--the guy who was doing mornings at 'VON, Joe Cobb, he and I had gone to high school together. It's funny how that works. He was doing mornings. I met him again in Chicago. He mentioned me to some people in the station which made them begin to listen to me. They heard me in Chicago Heights. They knew they were putting a new station [WNOV] together in Milwaukee and so they recruited me to come to the--for the new station in Milwaukee. After they hired me, there were four of us. We sat around 'VON for a month doing air shifts, doing production and all of this. They shipped us off to Milwaukee [1968]. I did middays there for the first--August--about the first nine months. And then I did mornings for the rest of my tenure there. And then... Oh, this is funny. During one of the periods, some stuff was happening at 'VON. I don't remember what. But Lucky--they shifted us back and forth all the time. [Moses Lindberg] 'Lucky' Cordell came to Milwaukee to do middays for about two weeks. And Lucky was making that drive every day. He would drive up early in the morning and be beat to death after the shift was over. So I would keep him awake in the car all the way back to Chicago. We developed a friendship. So after Lucky became General Manager and a lot of shifting took place, Lucky called me and said, "Little Brother, you ready to come home?" It's like, "Yes! I finally made it." There I was at 'VON [in 1970]. Story_ID: 7978 Speaker 1: Describe what the environment was that you came upon and, you know. Speaker 2: At 'VON? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Oh. Everyone you've talked to about this... See I get choked up when I think about this. We were a family. We loved each other. We loved Chicago. We did everything together. We knew everybody's family. We cared what happened to each other. We loved each other. When the station was broken up in the late '70s, it destroyed us. We loved that station. Great people, great friendship, doing real good for the community. We loved it. Hmm, everybody should have a job like that once in their lifetime. It was great. Speaker 1: So you knew you were part of something special? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: I knew that before I got there. That's why I wanted to be there. Speaker 1: Now you were the 'Young Turk.' So were they... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: But you didn't have--you--I thought everyone had these, you know, the nicknames and you didn't have one? Speaker 2: No, no. I just used my name. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: That's unusual enough as it is. Speaker 1: That's right. That's true. Speaker 2: [laughing]. Speaker 1: Okay. That's right. Speaker 2: Came out great in jingles. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: I remember when I was in England for the first time. I was there for Polygram. They had sent a telegram ahead to the organizer folks there and said, "Okay. We're sending someone over special to look at your operation." His name is Dr. Cecil Hale." They didn't send a picture though. So when I got there, [chuckle] this is in England now--when I got there, 'Cecil' is Cecil [pronounced 'Sessel"] in English. 'Hale' is fairly European--there's a little story about where that name came from. And the 'Dr.' on the front of that really cemented the fact that it was anything but this skinny African-American kid with a big natural [laughing] coming over to discuss the record business with the European company [laughing]. It was amazing [laughing]. Oh boy. Anyway back to your question about 'VON. It was wonderful.Do you wanna share any memories [from WVON-AM radio, Chicago, Illinois] ? Speaker 1: I have a thousand of them. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: A zillion of them. Speaker 2: You should have a... You have a... Then your cohorts... And when I asked that question, I was there for hours trying to get... But anyway. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. I have a zillion of them. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: This is the funniest story. I can't say the funniest. There're so many. But this is a good one [chuckle]. We had this promotion at the station once. We were really into cancer prevention. So we were telling, you know, our listeners that lifestyle has a lot to do with prevention of cancer. And that what you should do is have annual checkups and all of this, and the kind of checkups you should have. They had just opened a center here in Chicago. It was called the Porter's Cancer Prevention Clinic. I'll never forget this. So the way to make sure that we drove our point home, we all decided that we would get physicals. And have pictures taken and all of this at the Porter's Clinic. So we all go down to the Cancer Center. We get the blood test and the stethoscope here and all of that. And it was wonderful. Except there was one examination that we didn't know about. At the very end [laughing] there was this colon examination. Now we didn't know that this going to happen the way it was going to happen [chuckle]. So Jay Johnson and I were sitting in the waiting room, waiting for the next piece of this examination, and Jay leaves. I'm the last guy sitting there. I don't see Jay anymore. So I don't know what's happened. Now it's my turn. Go into this room with this z shaped table. And [chuckle] I'm asking like, "What is this for?" It's like, "Well you have to kneel here, and we'll take care of the rest." So now this table goes [made noise] and your behind is pointing up in the air. And this nurse walks in with a pipe about this long. And goes [makes noise] [laughing]. So after this is over, you feel completely and thoroughly violated. We all drove back to the radio station. And there were a lot a guys walking around like this [laughing]. So we asked... We had to get the courage to ask first. "Listen, I didn't wanna bring this up. But when you were in that last room, did someone attack you with a pipe?" Said, "Yeah, funny you should mention that. Yeah. That's why we're all walkin' like this right now." That did... that was hilarious. And there was no way that we could explain this on the air without just being gross. But this pipe joke went on for about two or three months. You know. "Jay, you're walkin' like you've been by that pipe again. What's goin' on [laughing]?" So... But there're a million stories. We could... I don't know. We could... We could sit here all night and tell these stories. Speaker 2: Now what was your shift? Speaker 1: My first shift was from 6:00 to 8:00. I came on at 6:00, after Jay Johnson went off at 8:00. Herb Kent came on behind me. Six to 8:00 Monday through Friday. And then I came back on Saturday morning from 6:00 'til 10:00 just before Operation Push. Then the shift changed. Story_ID: 7979 Speaker 1: Leonard [Chess] was likeable. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a good guy. He first of all had the good sense that most owners and managers really didn't have. And that is, if you have an organization and there's a winning chemistry in the organization and the organization is doing great things, and in business that would mean being profitable, and also being great bearers of good will--then it's a good idea not to play around with that. Just let them keep on doing what there're doing. And you'll make even more money and have more good will. And Phil [Chess] was very much into that. As long as everything was working well, he had no problems. And it always worked well. So we had no problems with Phil whatsoever. He supported us in all the ways that we needed to be supported. If we wanted to do something that would cost money, you know, he'd make that happen. Just before I came there, they had this giveaway, where they gave away a Cadillac. This is a few years before my time. But when it was brought up that they wanted to do that, he said, "Fine." So he went out and bought the Cadillac. And they gave it away. I mean with most station owners it's the-- it takes a proposal and it takes almost an act of Congress to make stuff happen. Not with him. When we moved to Milwaukee and opened [W]NOV, it was whatever you need. We said, "We need jingles. We need to sound exactly like the station in Chicago." The next week we had jingles. He was a special guy, when it came to understanding what it took to win. Phil was really never the main player in this, even though he was Leonard's brother. And they have great history together in terms of what happened with Chess Records and all of that. On the day to day operational level--not even day to day with Leonard, on the operational level of the station, Phil was always way behind the scenes. Leonard was the main guy. He was a good guy. Speaker 2: Was there a relationship between Chess Records and--I mean I know, they--but Chess Records and WVON... Was there any... Speaker 1: Was it symbiotic? Speaker 2: Right. Was it... Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: It wasn't? Speaker 1: It was illegal to do that. Speaker 2: I know. But I was... Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No. Leonard never leaned on anybody to play his records. Never did. His theory was that, "If you make good records, people will play them." And he was right about that. It didn't hurt that many of the folk that were on Chess were also hometown people. You know, so we were gonna be very inclined to look... to listen to them and play them anyway. But no. He never put the arm on anybody to play his records. Never. Story_ID: 7980 Speaker 1: Everyone [at WVON radio, Chicago, Illinois] had their own personality and things they did? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Did you guys sort of merge, were there--was it an animal house type place? Speaker 2: [laughing]. Speaker 1: [unclear]. In some ways, yes. But it was not the same kind of reckless abandon that would come from an animal house kind of definition. We believed in having fun. But we also believed in respecting the rules. We believed in making people laugh. But we also believed in understanding that this is a... understanding that this is a business and it has to be a business. If we saw one of our friends, one of our coworkers, one of our cohorts doing something wrong, we'd tell them. We would always keep anything that was going to be potentially destructive, we kept that way down. You know, we tried to snuff it out before it became a big deal. And it always worked. That's why the station was so harmonious. We would cuss each other out. You know, we'd laugh at each other. You saw on stage the other night [at an event sponsored by The HistoryMakers, bringing together disc jockeys from WVON's past for a group interview]. You know, when we get together it's like a party and it happens every single time we get together. I saw [Moses Lindberg] 'Lucky' [Cordell] the next night. We spent 3&1/2 hours talking about one scrapbook. That's just one scrapbook. We could do this forever. These were relationships that were developed and were very deep that are still with us to this day. Story_ID: 7981 Speaker 1: WVON sort of adopted Jesse as the country preacher. Speaker 2: We did more than that. I don't think Jesse [Jackson, Sr.]--I, I know Jesse, I've known Jesse for thirty years. I don't think he gives us enough credit for what we did. But when Jesse first came to town it wasn't Operation PUSH. It was Operation Breadbasket. And because of what was happening in civil rights around the country then, and especially after Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came to town [Chicago] and that infamous march through Cicero [Illinois], and all that happened with that [in 1966]. We were outraged by all of what was happening over there. And we were all very active in the Civil Rights Movement. So what we did with Jesse, we basically put our arms around him and made him king of the hill, as far as black media was concerned in this town. Every time you turned on the radio you would hear something about PUSH, something about Jesse. Even our newscast. The way our newscast would begin, it would start with a recorded quotation from Dr. King, and then would go into the newscast. I mean every hour we were doing something that was driving home that this was the civil rights era that we're--that you should be active. That we are active. So we really I mean we embraced Jesse. We talked about everything that he did. We talked about the organization, everything it did, the Black Expo when that happened. The way we drove people to the Black Expo was to broadcast from the Expo 24 hours. Actually not, because when they closed the place down, that was around midnight. And [Pervis] Spann would work from midnight to 6:00. And then we'd start over again. But we really pushed Jesse. You know before anybody else would pay attention to him [W]VON was there to make sure that his message was heard. Story_ID: 7982 Speaker 1: Did you do that with any other person or group? Speaker 2: Not like that. Speaker 1: not like that. Okay. Speaker 2: Of course, we [WVON radio] represented quite a few organizations in Chicago. We were always big with the churches. Anybody who wanted to do anything that was worthwhile would come and see us. And if we could do it, we would do it. Bernadine... Bernadine C. Washington, she had this program called 'On the Scene with Bernadine'. And what that would be is... was this vignette that was very professionally produced by [phonetically] Tony Guzman, our production guy. She would go in every two or three days and do this calendar of events of what was happening in Chicago. And anybody could get on that--this is like free airtime on the biggest station in town for African-Americans--and have their events heard. Wesley South when he did Nightline [sic, 'Hotline'].--No not Nightline, Ted Koppel and that. Speaker 1: He did-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Yeah, he did-- Speaker 1: I forget what the name of-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Why am I calling it Nightline? Whatever. Speaker 1: [simultaneously] [unclear] Speaker 2: Whatever. The talk show from 11:00 to 12:00. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Wesley was out there digging up anybody, you know, who had something going on that was worth talking about and bringing 'em in so they could talk about it. And they'd talk back with the audience in terms of this live interview program. So the station was really over--we were on top of this as far as public affairs was concerned. We loved all of this stuff. As we said the other night, "There was no mistaking when you listened to our station that, first of all, it was a black station. No doubt about it. And second of all, that it was a Black station that cared about what was happening to black folks in Chicago." Speaker 1: Did the station ever get any political heat for, you know, being so actively--? 'Cause look at this. This is, you know, the '60's. You're supporting... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] But now we're into the '70's. Speaker 1: '70's. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Well '60's, '70's. We still had Mayor Daley... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: you know, there and... Speaker 2: You think we cared? Speaker 1: You didn't? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And no pressure? Speaker 2: We didn't care. How was the pressure going to be brought? We brought the pressure. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Who was gonna give us pressure? Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: We had a couple of incidents of harassment. I--one time--I'll give you one instance. This scar on my hand was a surgery scar. I had to have a tendon operated on in '72 [1972]. And it was not a major thing, just a tendon operation. But one day when I was going home to pack my little suitcase to go to the hospital, there was this car outside of my house. And I lived in South Shore then. Plain car, two guys, hanging around my backyard. I went around the front. Came out the back with my little suitcase to make sure nobody was, you know, doing anything that they shouldn't be doing. These two guys grabbed me and threw me on the car, put a gun to my head. It turns out that these were two plainclothes policemen and once the gun was moved, idea was like, "You know, why me. You know, what... You have to have probable cause for... to be doing this. What's that about?" "Well we thought you may have stolen your car." It's like, "No you didn't. Because I saw you when I drove up in my car, first of all. So that's not what's goin on." I always suspected that there was more to that than was--then I was led to believe. Story_ID: 7983 Speaker 1: I don't know if you have any views on the subject or if you experienced or--but the whole issue of payola. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. I have quite a few views on that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. One thing that did not come out of our session the other night [an event sponsored by The HistoryMakers, bringing together disc jockeys from WVON's past for a group interview]. is that VON was not only big in Chicago. It was huge nationally. We ended up with three leaders from WVON that ended up running the national organization for all black stations in the country. [E.] Rodney Jones who was one of the... he was the second president of NATRA, National Association of Television and Radio Artists. [Moses Lindberg] Lucky Cordell who became the executive director of NATRA between 1971 and 1973 and myself. I became national president between '73 and '75 [1975]. It was during this period that this whole payola scandal thing broke loose. What was happening was being said is that black stations across the country were just cesspools, corrupt with payola. That was not true. What we said was basically that, "You need to look at where the real money is made. And that is in the white stations across the country." Well this started a major--this whole thing started with--Okay. I'm trying to make it a compact story. The grand jury that sits in Newark, New Jersey as, you know, is the one that's permanently empanelled to deal with underworld activities. What had happened during that period is that the Nixon administration through the Attorney General had been pushing for some crack down using this grand jury. That grand jury became empowered to deal with investigation of payola by way of RICO so--. All of that to say, is that the next piece that happened was that we ended up with people being subpoenaed all over the country to go before the grand jury in Newark. Including our organization. They had deduced--interesting deduction, that this organization was kind of the funnel. That you sent money through to give to Black radio stations across the country. And they said, "The way that this happened is because the organization had a huge national convention every year. And that this wasn't a convention of mutual interests in terms of technology and programming techniques and all of that. The mutual interest was exchanging of favors so that records would be played around the country." As a result of this whole thing, I ended up having to go to the grand jury too. Which was an interesting experience for me. That's another story about what happened at Harvard when I told them I had gone before a grand jury and explained it. But the bottom line of it was that we came back very hard at the government, for accusing black stations of being the cesspools of payola, that they were being characterized as being. They were not. There was a lot happening in black radio stations. But this thing about the huge gifts and all of that, that was not part of the mix. Especially at 'VON. Remember that Leonard Chess owned a record company. If anybody was going to be, you know, subject to payola and pressure from record companies, it most certainly would have been that station if any other station in the country. But that just did not happen. A very interesting thing happened when I finished giving my testimony to the grand jury, and I won't tell you what that was about, but the guy who was the lead prosecutor in this case, actually he was the federal attorney in the case. We were going down in the elevator. We all rode the same elevator down. He says to me, "You gonna write any more bad stores about us?" I said, "You gonna keep picking on black radio stations?" And that's how we left it. You know, it was hostile that way. Because at that time, they were trying to say that all black people in radio were crooks. Well shortly after that, Nixon was out of office. Ford came into office. That investigation dissolved and that was the end of that. Every ten years or so there's always another version of that that comes up again. Story_ID: 7984 Speaker 1: Now who were the predominant record companies? Were there... At this point, well let's... Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) This is the early 70's. [1970s] Speaker 1: So Early '70's. So were Atlantic... Alanta- [sic]... Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And Arista? Speaker 2: No, not Arista. It didn't exist then. Speaker 1: It didn't exist then. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: That's right. So... Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The number one company at that time was CBS, Columbia. And they were by far number one. All of the majors and all the big five... the big six at that time were doing big numbers. Speaker 1: So do you think you at that point understood the business of radio? Or do you think... Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm a student of radio--Some of the things that I teach--have been teaching for the last--almost two decades at San Francisco State [University]. One course that I've designed and taught for years was the history of the business of music and the history of the business of radio. Much of that came from, not what I learned in school. Because this is another piece how this all leads in. When I was doing my PhD, and I was trying to find a subject that was going to be acceptable to my committee. What I found out was that most of the information about black radio was actually passed from generation to generation by spoken word. There was always a guy who became the mentor of another guy who told him about all this stuff that was happening. And therein, the history was passed on much as.almost like that of a tribal griot. So I decided that I was going to do something about that, and deal with that history. And put it in an organized form. And also to put it into a form that could be taught. So--I've studied radio all my life--you know, so I understood the business of it. Yeah. Story_ID: 7985 Speaker 1: WVON--You know, people talk. Do you agree when Pervis [Spann]\ said that it was the disco you know, disco era that came in, and--You know. It was... well he said that. And then someone else said it was WBMX and, you know... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] You mean the demise of VON? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: No, it was none of those. Disco coexisted with VON for a long time. We knew it because we had a station that was right down the hall that was at one time, WSDM, which was an all girls jazz station. But then it became the all disco station. Numbers were changing, of course, in the market place. Because FM had a higher penetration by then. Not necessarily because it was FM, but because of the governmental things that had been put in place to make FM grow. Such as, requiring that all new cars had to have FM radios. Requiring that programming on FM radio stations, at least half of it had to be original programming. So you end up with this growth of stations. BMX came along. And BMX was a great station. You could hear it in stereo and it was all of that. All of what we were not, they were, technically. But we still did quite well in terms of the ratings. The demise of VON happened as a result of the ownership of VON. Well I can take it back to when [the heirs of] Leonard Chess sold the station [after Chess's death in 1969]. The new owners of VON thought they had a better way of doing it. They decided to hire some people from the outside. Some consultants to come in and try to remake the station. Some of the people that they hired from the outside had no idea of what this market was like or what VON was about. They didn't understand the history. And really couldn't even understand what was happening in terms of the successes of the station. You really have to study the station's history to know this. They didn't. They thought that the best way to remake the station into an image that they thought it should be would be change everybody. So they basically came in and fired everybody one by one. Whittled it down one by one. Story_ID: 7986 Speaker 1: (Tape picks up in the middle of a sentence) African-American group, that was [Pervis] Spann and Wesley South and everyone else in that group. And the other was an ethnic group from the near North Side, Northwest Side of town [Chicago]. That's why VON's hours are the way that they are. They split it in half. So Spann has it from, I think he comes on at nine o'clock at night. Nine until nine the next morning. And then they have it from nine 'til nine. That's how that happened. Speaker 2: [unclear] Wow. I mean it's--. Okay. Hmm. So when it was time--So you were there--You were part of the group that was let go at the time that they let everyone go? Speaker 1: We all were. Speaker 2: [unclear]. Speaker 1: [laughing]. Speaker 2: [simultaneously laughing] Okay. Speaker 1: We all were. They undid the entire station. Speaker 2: So what is that like at this point? Speaker 1: Horrible! Keep in mind this is a family. Every time something like this happens, this is like a death in the family. The first person to get it was Jay Johnson. We couldn't believe it. "Numbers were good. His ratings were decent. He's a good guy. What's the problem?" "He was let go." They wouldn't' even discuss it with us. So all we knew was that Jay Johnson was a good guy who was one of us who had done a great job, who now had to find himself a job. The job that he found was in Indianapolis. So he had to pack up his family and move them off to Indianapolis. Who was next? I think Herb [Kent] was next. 'Cause they got Herb and then we thought, "That was horrible! You know, how could they do this? Especially to Herb. How can--he's been here forever. How could that happen?" And so forth and so on all the way down the line until there were none. And that was the end of VON. Speaker 2: Because Herb went even into--so--But people are sort of strewn to the wind, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 7987 Speaker 1: Okay. You go to Washington. Speaker 2: To go to school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I was doing that when I was at [W] VON. Speaker 1: Oh I see. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh okay, okay.... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I would commute. Speaker 1: Oh I see. Speaker 2: Washington is only an hour and fifteen minutes by plane. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So I would go there four times a month. Speaker 1: That was pretty, you know, you don't think of that as back then planes were still--Well I don't know if they're new but, you know what I'm saying. Speaker 2: Yeah [laughing] they are [unclear]. Speaker 1: But it's not like now, you know. Speaker 2: Pretty much. You could get around very easily. Especially from Chicago. Because... Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Right. Speaker 2: we have O'Hare. Speaker 1: This is 19 what? Speaker 2: '73. [1973] Speaker 1: '73, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. So '73... Speaker 2: Until '75. [1975] Speaker 1: '75. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And then '75. That--Is '75 when you leave WVON, no. Speaker 2: I left VON in '77. [1977] Speaker 1: Okay, in '77. Okay. Speaker 2: But I started my PhD program in '75. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And--but your PhD program was with... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Union Institute. Speaker 1: Institute in Cincinnati. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So how did you--So what are you wanting to do with it? Did they call you the Doctor, the educated one over there? I mean what--'cause it [unclear]. Speaker 2: [laughing]. Speaker 1: Racking up those degrees. Speaker 2: Yeah, but see, you gotta remember that I was the guy that didn't care about--that much about degrees in the beginning. And suddenly I'm into this stuff. I'm into learning. I'm into methodologies and all kind of wonderful things that you can do with information outside of radio. I also had great mentors. So Dr. Hilliard (ph.) at IUC who put me back on that track. When I finished my master's degree--A lot of this is serendipity too. I heard about this program that was headquartered at Northeastern Illinois University in the Department of Inner City Studies. There were a couple of guys over there who were on the faculty of the Union Institute. This is how I met Sherman Beverly. He told me about the program. He told me what was gonna happen with that.--that this is a very rigorous program. Very rigorous because you're doing a lot of stuff in a lot of different places. "What do you think? You still wanna try this?" And it's like, "Well yeah. I'll try this." So before I knew it I was in the middle of a PhD program. And one other thing also inspired me to do this. I'll never forget this. I was at a record store on the South Side of Chicago. This must have been maybe 1974. There was a young black guy who was in the record store doing market research who had a PhD. I thought that was the neatest thing that I had ever seen in my life. Because at that time there were not a lot of young black males with PhD's. I thought that was the greatest thing. But it also gave me an idea about the possibilities that if he can do that, I can do this, especially since I'm in grad school right now. So when this opportunity came along in '75, I jumped on it. I was there. Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts at that time? What were you studying? Speaker 2: Communications. Speaker 1: Communications. Speaker 2: Were your thoughts that you wanted to teach? Or--I mean, I'm just trying to... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] No, no. My thoughts were at that time--There were two things I wanted to do further down the road. One of them was to write and speak where people would pay attention. And credentialing is very important for that. And ultimately to get into politics. I at one time thought I had wanted to be a Commissioner for the FCC. That changed radically. What I thought that I would ultimately become would be a Congressman. Speaker 2: And where did that come from? I'm just.--I've missed that in the scenario. Speaker 1: Why do I love politics? Speaker 2: Now what--Where was the politics coming from? Speaker 1: I was very active in the Civil Rights Movement. And I understood that the only way to make any real change was going to be at the legislative level. As opposed to trying to get a law degree and try to tough it out that way. Because I didn't just want to be a lawyer and, you know, fighting cases in court. Even though law is a good way to bring about change. But it takes a long time to do that. I'm more into rather than working within tightly defined institutions like courts, I'm better reaching outside of institutions. And then organizing people to go back within institutions and try to make changes that way. Speaker 2: Were you still married at this time? And... Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Which year are we talking? Speaker 2: Well we're talking about between '75 and '78. Speaker 1: Yes. I was at... Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: the end of that marriage. Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. So but you were-- Did you go actually to live in Cincinnati for...? Speaker 1: [simultaneously] No, I was here. Speaker 2: Okay. You were here. Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 1: Most of my course work was done over at Northeastern Illinois. Speaker 2: Okay. I got ya. Speaker 1: In fact, my practicum was also there. Q: Okay, okay. And--[pause] Now when were you--okay--good. I got it. [pause] So what happens after you finish your PhD? Speaker 2: Very interesting. I was still working on it when I was at WVON. We were all gone from VON before I finished. I finished it when I was working for Phonogram Mercury, the Polygram company. What happened? Nothing changed. I still had the same job, still making the same money. Still doing the same thing. But now I had a PhD. And so what I began to do with that was to think about how I was going to apply this further down the road. It wasn't gonna make any difference in terms of the career path I had chosen because they don't require that for what I was doing. In some ways it seemed kind of self-serving. I mean what can you do with a PhD in a record company? But I found out later, especially after I got to Capitol [Records], that I started getting phone calls from other guys at other record companies who had PhD's, who said that they had given up that track to go into the music industry. Because they thought they could be more successful there. So for me it was never about, I'm getting this degree to make more money. It was about, I'm getting this degree because I want it, first of all. And second of all, all my life, I have heard about--heard of people and been around people who have said that, "You can't do that." But it's my philosophy that you can do anything you wanna do. All you have to do is make up your mind to do it. Story_ID: 7988 Speaker 1: Hmm. Now so how--What was the experience like with Polygram and then Capitol Records? Speaker 2: It was great. At Polygram [Records] my first job was National Director of Album Promotion and National Director of Publicity. So that meant that I had to organize marketing strategies of all of our acts that came out . And I also had to come up with the press strategy to put all of this in action. It was great. So I ended up doing a lot of work with many groups that I had known through radio. There's a continuum here. So with the Bar-Kays and the Ohio Players and all the groups that I had over at Polygram, it was fun. You know, I got a chance to hang out with these guys. And then too really deal with the science of how you make records happen. Well that went on and I did okay with that for about, I guess about almost a year. And then Irwin Steinberg who was the president of the Polygram Group decided he wanted to try me out with some other things. So they sent me to England. The trip I was telling you about. And decided that since I was gonna be in England, we have some other markets we want you to take a look at. Because Polygram at that time was the number one company worldwide. They had an office in every country of the free world. So I ended up going to London, to Nairobi, Kenya, to Athens, Greece, to Paris, France and then back to Chicago. So suddenly, you know, I'm a world player. And it's like, "I love this stuff." The experience was great. There's a guy that I worked with and for who has since passed away. A guy by the name of Bill Hayward who also came out of radio. He came out of radio in Washington, D.C. We talked about how we could change the face of the industry from the inside. We could make money and also do good things inside of the rad--of the music industry. And we did that. Speaker 1: Now you--so you were traveling extensively... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Yes. Speaker 1: Were there many people in your position in the record industry...? Blacks I'm taking about? Speaker 2: There were a lot of us in promotion. But there were very few of us at the management level making those kind of management decisions. The way that Polygram, Phonogram worked at that time is they were very much into management by consensus as far as projects were concerned. So every week, you know, we had this huge round table like King Arthur. Where all the players would come in and we'd sit down and map strategy. There was no one guy saying that, "You go do this and you go do this." We all decided together in terms of what direction we would take. It was a great experience. It was better than any classroom that I've ever been in. Because the--as I heard Scott Shannon say from radio in New York, "It's like professional wrestling. Except this time the blood is real." You know what's gonna happen minute by minute by minute. Great experience. Story_ID: 7989 Speaker 1: Did you have favorite artists at that time that you worked with? Or any stories around... Speaker 2: Quite a few. There were--I liked all my artists. There were some that were legends that I never thought I would work with this way. Like Esther Phillips. Most folks have forgotten that Esther Phillips ever existed. But Lttle Esther was a great jazz singer in her time. She was one of my projects. Like Jimmy Smith the organist. He was one of my acts. Along with that I had the Ohio Players who I thought were great. I had the Bar-Kays who I thought were great. And we're still friends to this day. Who else did I have? I wish I had the list in front of me. There're so many, I forget them. Now those are from Capitol. Yes I [unclear]. Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's when I became a producer. Speaker 1: Okay. And I wanna talk about that. So how--So you were with Polygram for a year. What-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] A year and a half. Speaker 1: Year and a half. So what made--You got tired of traveling or you didn't like to--You had a plum assignment. So what is? More money? Speaker 2: What sent me to Capitol? Well it just so happened that an executive search firm came through town looking at candidates for this job at Capitol. They would not tell us what company. They would not tell us what position. When they came through--If you were in Chicago in 1979, '78 into '79, you remember one of the worst blizzards to hit this town happened during that period. So when he came through and asked, "Would you be interested in living in California," and the fact that I had already been syndicated on radio in California for so many years--When he said that, it' s like, "Yeah, I think I would be." And that started that. At the end of the search process I ended up being the guy and moved to Capitol. It was more money. It was about twice as much as I was making here. It was also greater latitude in terms of what I could do within the company. Suddenly I not only was the guy who was trying to market and sell the music, I was now the guy responsible for making the music. I looked at myself after I'd gotten this job and looked in the mirror one day and said, "I can't believe this. This little kid from Little Rock. You know, used to play the oboe. Look at him now. So now he is now the vice president. The second in the history of that company that happened to be black in charge of A&R." The guy who was before me was a guy by the name of Larkin Arnold who was pretty much a legend. He discovered all kinds of folks including Natalie [Cole] and Peabo [Bryson]. I took his place when he moved over to Arista [Records]. Arista came into existence by then. Speaker 1: For those who don't understand what a producer is in this--in the record--What--tell--Say what role you played, would you? Speaker 2: Okay. There were two roles that I played. One of them was as producer, the other one as executive producer. As executive producer, I become the representative of the company in the production process. I oversee budgets. I oversee song selection. Most folks don't know that there's a whole process in terms of what songs are gonna be recorded. I find songs. I oversee expenses to make sure that it's all within budget. I oversee sequencing, which order the songs are going to be placed on the album. I devise plans in terms of, "Which one of these will we release first?" Because you release them in a sequence. You want to get the most sales out of the long form as compared to singles. Because the margins are much wider for that. I have to interact with the different departments that are putting the record together. I got to make sure publicity is doing its job. That promotion is doing its job. To make sure that my office is doing its job as far as all the payments are concerned for union payments. I have to pick the producer. I have to agree upon the producer contract and the producer salary. Make sure that the union contracts are being observed to the letter. All of that. And there's a lot that goes into making a record. As a producer, I became the line person. I became the guy who was in the studio, who had his hands on the tape and his hands on the console, doing what I had to do with the performer to get the best performance out of them. I had to organize the musicians to make sure that everything was great. From not only the concept, but all the way down to the mix, all the way to the sound. That would be commercial. Yes. Speaker 1: So who were some of the artists that you found or, you know, worked with or--? Speaker 2: The first one that I found--My first signing to Capitol was a duo. They were called Ren and Angela. I had heard about them through a friend and they were a cute little group. You know, and I thought they were okay. But what I heard from them--I heard great song writing and I heard a great voice. Well as it turns, out that great voice that I heard then went on to a great career. Her name is Angela Winbush. Angela Winbush from St. Louis coincidentally who went to Howard, is great. She is now the wife of Ron [Ronald] Isley. She has made many gold records for herself as well as other artists as she then became a producer for--including her husband. She produced a lot of his stuff. Some of the acts that I had: There was a group called Taste of Honey. They had had one big hit record called 'Boogie Oogie Oogie' and that was on the first album. That's when Larkin signed them. The second album was a dog. So my next assignment was, "You gotta find a way to resurrect these people." It's like, "How am I gonna resurrect these people from this hit?" "I don't know. But that's your job. Find a way." So what we ended up doing, I came up with another producer for them. I used George Duke and then we searched around for songs. And what we came up with was an updated version of a song that had been a big hit in the '60's. A song called 'Sukiyaki.' Remember that one? And they were back. So they had another gold record [in 1980]. I had Frankie Beverly & Maze. The album that I did with them that was, you know, I don't know. The greatest one I'd seen was the album that had the song, Joy and Pain. That was one of ours. There were two singles we released from there. We released one called Southern Girl and then Joy and Pain. And Joy and Pain is still being played to this day. I did Minnie Riperton. I had known Minnie Riperton since she's from Chicago. She was on Chess in the beginning. Minnie became my act. Her project was the first one that I worked on. She worked--had an album called 'Minnie.' And that was the last one she did while she was healthy. After Minnie died, we put together a special project called Love Lives Forever that had Michael Jackson and Stevie Wonder and a whole bunch of other folks on that album. A woman who is so dear to me even today is Nancy Wilson who is a legend. When I was a kid, you know, I remember my mother [Alean Cunningham Hale] falling out over Nancy Wilson. And here I am now her executive producer. And we became very good friends and we still are to this day. Who else? There are so many. Peabo Bryson. I remember when he first started. I normally played his records. I was a fan. Now here I am now organizing his music. The list is quite extensive. I think I have a pretty good body of work in black music. Speaker 1: Now you were there for-- you stayed at, at Capitol-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Almost three years. Speaker 1: For three years. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: That's a highly volatile industry-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Yes. Speaker 1: --isn't it? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Who was the head of Capitol at the time? Speaker 2: The President? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: A guy by the name of Don Zimmerman who reported to a guy who was in charge of Capitol worldwide. A guy from India. His name is Bhasker Menon. Story_ID: 7990 Speaker 1: After that... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] The African project. Speaker 1: Yes. I wanted to ask you about that. That I found very interesting. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So but how did that even come about then? Speaker 2: All right. The way that it came about, there was a guy who worked for CBS News by the name of Randy Daniels. I had known him since I was at [W]VON. He also went to SIU [Southern Illinois University] in Carbondale. When he first came out of college, when he was looking for a job, we became friends. Because I was helping him out with jobs. Well years later, as he is now about to leave CBS, he has met quite a few influential people in Africa. Because he became bureau chief of the African bureau. He had heard about the Nigerian government wanting to improve its television system. One of the things to make that happen, and at that time Nigeria is very different than it is now. It had its first democratically elected government. [Shehu] Shagari was the president. They wanted us to come over and take a look at the network and see what was wrong with it. Why wasn't it, you know, functioning as well as it should? Nigeria is the most populous nation in Africa. And at that time they were making unbelievable money from oil. But it didn't come through in terms of what was happening in terms of network programming. We went over. We spent a week there the first time just taking the system apart. Traveling all over Nigeria and really getting to understand the system. In the next piece of it, we came back and we gave them a proposal. Which they liked. So we came back and we began to offer consulting answers to some of the problems they were having with their network. And then ultimately, this is when I was no longer with the project, Daniels and a couple of other folks moved to Nigeria and were there for almost eight months training people. But that was the project. It was great. Story_ID: 7991 Speaker 1: You came back. You did--and then what did you do? You--Oh okay. This is when I moved to San Francisco. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: [unclear]. Speaker 1: See all of this time I was still living in Los Angeles. Speaker 2: Okay. So is this When you became part of the Nation--Black Music Association? Speaker 1: No, no, no. The Black Music Association... Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Okay. Let me [unclear]... Speaker 1: was back in the '70's. Speaker 2: Okay. So what did you do? Let me just, okay. What did you do at that point then? Speaker 1: After? Speaker 2: [simultaneously] You had moved to... Speaker 1: Africa? Speaker 2: Yeah. You moved back to LA. This is 19... Speaker 1: This is 1984? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. But by that time I was also doing other projects. I was--did the African thing. But I was also consulting other groups. And that's how I ended up going to Japan to deal with music there. When all of that was over, I was trying to decide where I wanted to go and what was next in my career. One of the things that I thought about was coming back to Chicago. Because I loved Chicago. But I also remembered that I also loved San Francisco. Story_ID: 7992 Speaker 1: Yeah. You moved back to LA. This is 19... Speaker 2: This is 1984? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. But by that time I was also doing other projects. I was--did the African thing. But I was also consulting other groups. And that's how I ended up going to Japan to deal with music there. When all of that was over, I was trying to decide where I wanted to go and what was next in my career. One of the things that I thought about was coming back to Chicago. Because I loved Chicago. But I also remembered that I also loved San Francisco. San Francisco reminded me in many ways of Chicago, but with no snow. And that was very important. So I moved to San Francisco. And that's where I started my academic career. My first job--excuse me--my first job was at a trade school in San Francisco. Which is a terrible place. But it was a good place to cut your teeth. So I left there and I went to work for San Francisco State University. I taught in two programs at State. I taught in the music recording industry program. Speaker 1: [unclear]. Speaker 2: We're almost there. Speaker 1: Right. So you got--So this is when you start teaching? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Now did you find--Was this sort of a--would you consider sort of a safety net? Or you were trying to, you know... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] It became that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I enjoy teaching. It was a lot of fun. Especially when I was teaching the way that I taught. I had a chance to teach at three distinct levels of education. I taught at the four year pubic university of San Francisco State. I taught at the really cream of the crop, you know, what is paramount to Ivy League at Stanford [University]. And then I taught at the City College of San Francisco. So I had all of this going. And it was wonderful as an experiment for me to see the differences in the students and to see there are really not that many differences. At State I taught in two programs. I taught in the music recording industry program and the Broadcast Communications Arts Department. I moved to City College of San Francisco because they were the first one to offer me a tenure track position. And they made a deal with me where I would have a shortened tenure line. Because of all the other stuff I had done. So I took that job. Then a year after that, I got a call from Stanford saying, "Come on down. We want you to teach in the Mass Media Institute." So once again I was standing in front of a mirror going, "I cannot believe that this kid from Little Rock is standing on Stanford's campus teaching." That's how that Speaker 1: started. Story_ID: 7993 Speaker 1: When did you decide to go to Kennedy School [John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University] though? Speaker 2: This happened in 1993. The Chancellor of City College [of San Francisco] is a guy who is no longer there. He is now president of the University of Hawaii. A guy by the name of Evan Dobelle. He had been the Mayor of Pittsfield and all of that. And he had also gone to the Kennedy School. Two deans of the college had also gone to the Kennedy School. They wanted me to meet some of the people from the Kennedy School because they thought I would fit. That I would be the perfect guy for the program. So I went back east and I went to Cambridge [Massachusetts] . Met some of the folks at the school and thought it was an interesting program. But I wasn't all that motivated. I thought it was okay. Then in 1994, I had been at the college long enough where I had a sabbatical. And I was trying to figure out what to do with my sabbatical. They encouraged me to apply to the Kennedy School. I did. Was accepted, started at the Kennedy School the summer of 1994, and finished the--at the end of spring of 1995. Story_ID: 7994 Speaker 1: So, have you enjoyed the experience, you know, you've had at the college you're at right now [City College of San Francisco]? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Have you enjoyed it? Speaker 2: Good days, bad days like any other job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And okay. I wanna go on to ask you about a black radio and how you would sort of define that institution? Speaker 2: What it was or what it is? Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Or what I want it to become? Speaker 1: All three. Speaker 2: Okay. Black radio in the beginning did not exist. There was only radio. That systematically kept all people of color out, period. When black radio finally came into existence, meaning not only in programming but also in ownership--in programming that occurred in the 1930s. Pioneer here in Chicago, a guy by the name of Jack Hale Cooper [Jack Cooper] was the first guy to convince someone who owned a radio station that, "It is a good idea to broadcast to these folks out here. Because they have money. As evidenced by everything else that we look at. They're buying newspapers, magazines and they're certainly buying phono records. It's a good idea to try to reach these folks." The owner said basically to Jack Hale Cooper, "If that's what you believe, then we'll do it this way. We'll sell you the time. Then you go out and resell the time. And if you make money from this, good. If you don't make money from it, we don't care 'cause you still gotta pay us." From that there became this great connection between radio and African-Americans because now we now had a--we had a platform from which to talk about our culture, and everything else that was affecting our communities. The first black owned station didn't happen until the 1940s. A station WERD in Atlanta [Georgia]. I mean [phonetically] J. B. [Jesse B.] Blayton who was a student here at the University of Chicago, in accounting, bought a radio station. The reason he bought the station is because all the other stations had gone bankrupt because of the advent of television which started in 1949. A lot of stations went broke. He saw this as an opportunity. Bought a station in Atlanta, programmed it to reach a black audience, and was successful with it. As the years moved on, other folks took notice of this. That this--what--this audience was an overlooked goldmine. But that's happened in every form of entertainment that we've ever dealt with. The record industry has been around since the turn of the century. Flat disc recording has been around since 1901. But we didn't see a solo black artist on record until the 1920s. Why? Because accidentally they found out when they recorded Mamie Smith, by accident, that during her first month out Mamie Smith sold 75,000 records in the first month. Unheard of in the 1920s. That 75,000 black people have record players then. And what they found out was everybody was liking the music. Record companies suddenly, with their situational ethics, began to set up divisions inside of these companies called 'race records' divisions, to reach these black consumers that they had not dealt with before. So as it was in newspapers, magazines, records, as it is in radio. Radio became the huge powerhouse for the community during the '60s [1960s] and '70s.[1970s], during the heyday of the Civil Rights Movement. Because things were changing. And so we suddenly had these stations that again became platforms for what affected us most deeply. Now we move into the '80's [1980s] and '90's.[1990s] Especially the '90's. We began to see consolidation. We began to see no longer the individual maverick station in the marketplace. We began to see stations take on the veneer of corporate ownership. They were all owned by corporations, but never like this. After deregulation, then we see the change in the Communications Act in '96. [1996] Where suddenly a corporation can own as many stations as it can afford to own. Actually it started with Ronald Reagan when he came to power, in terms of deregulating what was going on in communications. We saw these stations cease to be the great organs of public concern that they were. And were turned into nothing more than cash registers. Now radio always made money. But it was never so overt to the point to the exclusion of everything else. We began to see that happen. So suddenly, money became the most important factor. Public service became very unimportant. Where do I think all of this is going? I think eventually we're gonna get to a place where radio is going to find out that to reach our communities it takes a different kind of formula. You gotta have a personality. This ain't enough. That's what Tom Joyner is about. The reason he's successful is because Joyner is doing what radio used to do. And they can do it cheaply and efficiently by way of satellite distribution. Well stations are gonna find out that that's very important to us. We have to have that personal touch, that personal connection. In Chicago they will find that out. There're moves afoot now from what I hear to reduce personnel. Which is absolutely correct in terms of corporate efficiencies. But there're these other things called externalities that figure into this. That you can become so efficient that you cut out all the good stuff, that you would derive from being a little less efficient. But you'd actually--you would actually be more efficient in terms of the good will that you produce. So I think that it's gonna be a rough time for black radio for a few more years. Because of this ownership, what's driving programming, what's driving hiring practices, what's driving sensitivity to public issues is the bottom line. It's about, "How high is the stock today?" I think when we moved into that public arena of, "How high the stock was today," radio began to lose its soul. And I think the only way that it's ever going to be great again is to try to reclaim that. By looking backwards instead of looking forward. Story_ID: 7995 Speaker 1: What do you think of the hip-hop industry? Speaker 2: Mixed feelings. I know that as a, as a human being on this continuum that there're all these eras. I studied enough to know that there's always a kind of music movement that will come along that is going to make the older generation very angry and they're gonna say that it's rebellious and all of that. And that's okay. That's the way it should be. But I see something very dangerous inside of this movement. And I've been very critical of gangsta rap for a long time. I think that what we have done by way of that is reduce some of the most important feelings that happen within a community. We've reduced it to banality and viciousness. And how you solve problems is never through love and caring and negotiation. It's about, "Who has the biggest gun?" And, "Who can fight the biggest fight?" And all of that. And we've seen the result of that kind of thinking. When we saw what happened with Tupac [Shakur] and what happened with Biggie [Smalls, AKA the Notorious B.I.G., Christopher Smalls]. That was just the tip of the iceberg when two very public people became victims in a way to their very own sermon. I think that we've seen a huge murder rate in this country and especially among young people because of that. Even though I testified in a case defending one of the major record companies about the link between what we hear and what we do. There's not enough data that says absolutely that if you listen to a record that tells you to go shoot somebody that you're going to go shoot them. But there's enough to suggest, that if we reduce a--the entire platform of a society down to pop culture, and the fact that the interpretation of this society comes through pop culture, and that interpretation says that these are the values that you need to succeed: Instant gratification at any cost. Respect however you define it, at any cost. Violence whatever you have to use against whoever you have to use it at any time at any cost--then what we're doing with this is that we are pretty much setting the stage to wipe out a significant portion of an entire generation. And I have a problem with that. Hip-hop is okay. You know, music in and of itself is harmless, more or less. It's fun to listen to music, fun to make music. But when it begins to cost lives, when we see young people destroyed because of it, that's not a good thing. So I have mixed feelings on this. For the art form, great. For the expression that is going to come from pushing the envelope, great. When it comes to espousing those values that I've just outlined, not so great. Story_ID: 7996 Speaker 1: When you look at where you've come in your life and, you know, growing up in Little Rock, Arkansas-- We didn't really talk about, you know, the impact. Except that it was a segregated community. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And, you know, you look at that experience there. And you see, you know, and having gone through the Civil Rights Movement, and you see where the black community is today. What are your concerns or hopes? Speaker 2: A lot of concerns. I think that for many of the young people in our communities, they don't know enough about history to really appreciate what's happen-- what has happened to us along the way. The same way that I had an opportunity to read DuBois when I was a kid. I'm not so sure that that's happening to every kid. I think it should. And I think that's the responsibility of the parents to begin to teach this history to the kids. So they have a sense of where we have come from. The other side of it is that there're some things that all my life I've considered to be pretty awful, have now become commonplace. Such as in my own personal vocabulary, I do not use the word "nigger". And there's a reason for that. I've lived it. I've seen it expressed in all kinds of awful ways. I even remember the Richard Pryor era. You know, when he used it all the time. And then he figured out that he was not gonna use it anymore. But now it becomes very common inside of pop culture and the music that we use. That bothers me. We fought for a long time to get this derogatory word out of the vocabulary. So that we would be looked upon as being men and women of value. And men and women of great value with a great history. But I see all of that being minimized. Now the other side of that is I see some great things happening too. I like it when I see young people who are-- When I was at Harvard I saw a bunch of young people who are now going through those programs. And I'm hoping that when they come out of these schools, that they'll go back to their communities and try to make a difference. We have a larger [black] middle class now. But the middle class has to be about more than making money and buying the next big car and having the next big house. I think my heroes these days would be some of the people who are trying to teach this history. And who are really trying to take what they have been fortunate enough to get and try to share this with this new generation that's coming along. My anti-hero for lack of a better word would be people like Bob Johnson who owns BET. Who has a great platform which-- He could have made a world of difference. But he didn't. He made a great difference as far as black business was concerned. But I cannot say that I'm really satisfied with the cultural contribution that he has made. Do I think we have a shot at doing some great things? Absolutely. All we have to do is look around us to see that things are in some ways getting better. But also all we have to do is look around and remember that in many ways the more things change, the more they really do stay the same. Story_ID: 7997 Speaker 1: What would you like to see as your legacy? You're still relatively young though. Still young so that-- Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Well I've had a lot of-- a lot of great breaks very young in life. Joined [W]VON when I was how old? 22, 23. Had a chance to finish a PhD when I was 30. I was vice-president of Capitol when I was 31. I mean this is great stuff. It doesn't mean I'm all of that. It simply means I just had some good breaks and some great times in life. So now here I am in my mid 50's. And I hope I still have time left to do more things. So that when we talk ten years from now, we can take up from here. And I can give you as much stuff as I've given you in this discussion. What is my legacy going to be? What I want it to be is that, "He believed his grandmother [Jeffie Gardner Cunningham]." That's it. "He believed his grandmother." She said he could be and do anything he wanted to be. She was right...