 Story_ID: 608280 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project, our videographer is Scott Sterns. Ma'am, could you--oh, and we're--our interview is being observed by Jean Miller and Shaniqua--what's your name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Shaniqua LeBrett [ph.]. Speaker 1: LeBrett, okay, Speaker 2: And Ruby Riley. Speaker 1: And Ruby Riley, right, exactly, okay, Ma'am could you still--could you state your full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Spell it and state it? Speaker 1: Yes (background noise). Speaker 2: Ludie Olivia Jones [HistoryMaker Ludie Jones] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Whoa, wait a second, what's that? Speaker 2: That's the clock. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, okay. Speaker 2: You wanna wait? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is there a way to silence that clock? Speaker 2: It chimes every half hour. Speaker 1: Keep going, or start over? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Let's go ahead, 'cause if--we might have the half hour cycles, right with the clock. Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, and it's L-U-D David, I-E, Olivia, O-L-I-V-I-A, Jones, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is January 28th, 1916. Speaker 1: Where were you born? Speaker 2: Shall I give you the exact place where I was born? Speaker 1: If you like (laughter). Speaker 2: I was born in 248 West 64th Street, Apartment 2, New York City [New York, New York] (cough). Speaker 1: And ma'am what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Retired. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But now--I am retired, but I do dance--I was dancing, up until two thousand and--I was eighty-nine, I'll put it that way. Eighty-nine was when I was in my last show, I was in, and that was in Arkansas, Little Rock, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, I am retired completely. I do go to the center [Lt. Joseph P. Kennedy Community Center, New York, New York] and I teach dancing there, tap dancing to the seniors, Jeannie is one of the pupils there. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Jan- oh January (laughter), April 26th, 2010. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at the present time at my--in my apartment, 2541 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], New York, Apartment 23L. Story_ID: 608281 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they just require short answers. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: So I name it? Or you just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: I like spaghetti-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and sausage. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue, I think. Speaker 1: Blue, yeah, okay, I think so (laughter). Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like the winter. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Used to, I used to go to the Bahamas. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I beg-- Speaker 1: A favorite phrase, or saying. Speaker 2: I'm a little deaf. Speaker 1: Oh, a favorite saying or a phrase. Speaker 2: Oh. Not really. Oh, if you ask me how I'm feeling I'd say, "I'm good." I feel that, you know I'm good. Story_ID: 608282 Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask you about your family history and I'm gonna start with your--I'm gonna ask about both sides of the family, but I'll star- start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Mary--no, that's my grandmother, my mother's name was Lottie Pearl Jones [Lottie Watkins Jones], L-O-T-T-I-E, P--can we start again? Her maiden name, do you want that? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Lottie Pearl Watkins, that's L-O-T-T-I-E, P-E-A-R-L, Watkins, W-A-T-K-I-N-S. She was born in Ro- Roanoke, Virginia. Speaker 1: In what, what year? Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I think it was 1879. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I can go back to my grandmother, her name was Mary Watkins, that's all. I don't know her maiden name, but I know her name--married name was Mary Watkins. Speaker 1: And, are there any--can you tell us what she did for a living, or are there any stories about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Housewife, housewife. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories that are passed down from that side of the family about-- Speaker 2: You have to speak up. Speaker 1: Are there any stories that were passed down from that side of the family about what life was like then in Roanoke? Speaker 2: Well, I mean slavery, that's all I can tell you, that's the story I got, was slavery. Speaker 1: They talked about that? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, that's all I know. Speaker 1: Were they--what did they say about it? Speaker 2: Well, they say about the massa, and all that stuff like, M-A-S-S-A, massa. And that's about it, that I remember. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did-- Speaker 2: And my father [Luther Jones]-- Speaker 1: Oh, and her father? Speaker 2: No, my father. Speaker 1: Your father, okay, well, we'll get to his side in a minute-- Speaker 2: Oh, I see. Speaker 1: --want to take care of your mother's side first, but so, your mother was born in Roanoke, 1879, now that's during so called, Reconstruction, I guess right? So had your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah right after-- Speaker 1: --had your grandmother been a slave? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born after-- Speaker 2: Yeah, after slavery. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: 'Cause slavery was abolished in 1812, right? Speaker 1: No, in 1865. Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1865], yeah, she-- Speaker 1: She probably was born in slavery then. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, at least as a little kid, as a child, you know, I'm thinking that if your mother was born in 1879 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nine [1879], yeah. Speaker 1: And you say, well, if you give your grandmother--maybe she didn't have her until she was a teenager, if, you know, I don't know what age she was when she had her, the earliest she could have had her was-- Speaker 2: Well, all I know is she didn't have anything--I mean, the massa didn't have anything to do with her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause she married my fa- my grandfather, his name was Charles [Charles Watkins (ph.)]. Speaker 1: That's Charles-- Speaker 2: Watkins. Speaker 1: --Watkins. Okay, yeah, so I'm thinking your grandmother was probably born around 1860, I guess, somewhere around there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, '79 [1879], '80 [1880], just about. Speaker 1: About 1860, I'm thinking, close, four or five years on either side. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, she was--she came along just as slavery was ending, and--okay. So she remembers the massa, and all that. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: And were these, were these--how would they talk about it? Is it something that they would like to go back to, or something that they glad it's--- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no way, grandmother used to smoke a corncob pipe (laughter), that's all I know, you know, of those old- olden days. We used to go down there every summer, to Roanoke to visit them. Speaker 1: Okay, now did they own their own land down there? Speaker 2: No, they had a house. Speaker 1: They had a house, okay. Speaker 2: What was that address? I knew that address. Speaker 1: So now, what did your grandfather do for a living? Charles-- Speaker 2: Now, you got me, I really don't know. I know he worked, but where, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was only a kid when we used to go down there, and you know, you're not paying any attention to what's happening, he'd be coming home, with his pail, but I really--he must have been working in, in the yards. You know, the train yards. Speaker 1: Okay, railroad worker. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 608283 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Lottie Watkins Jones] have any stories about growing up, that she tol- told you about? Any stories from your mother about how it was growing up in Roanoke [Virginia] and-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: --going to school, or-- Speaker 2: She only went to third grade, that's all I know. She went to third grade, the rest of the time she was working. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did--is there a story about how she moved to New York [New York], or did she, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, she came up, we were born, and the other children were born, except one. One was born down south, so I think when she had him [Julius Johnston], he's about twenty years older than me, twenty or twenty-one years older than me, and she had him very young. After she had him, she left Roanoke, now what year that was, I don't know. 'Cause he was born, let's see, I'm '16 [1916], he was born about '89 [1889], '89 [1889], he must have been born in the 1800s too. Speaker 1: Yeah, in 1890 (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --if he's twenty years older than you, and you were born in 1916-- Speaker 2: She had him very young. Speaker 1: Yeah, about 18-- Speaker 2: About 1896, or something like that-- Speaker 1: That would be ten--yeah that would be ten years-- Speaker 2: Twenty years, yeah. Speaker 1: Born in the early 1890s. So, do you know why she chose to come up to New York, as opposed to some other country--I mean, other city in the North? Speaker 2: Well, I guess she had him so young, and she was married to the guy, but she had him so young, and she left him with my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Watkins], that's all I know, and she raised him, my grandmother raised him. Speaker 1: Did your mother have relatives in New York when she came up (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. She just came up. Speaker 1: She just came up by--okay. Speaker 2: I don't know, oh boy, now who did she know in New York, to come up here? But all I know is she met my father [Luther Jones] in New York. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So when she came up here, I mean, what did she do for a living in New York, when she came up here? Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess she came, she came up and did housework, I guess, you know working for--yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's what a lot of people did in those days. Story_ID: 608284 Speaker 1: Tell us your--can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Luther O'Binner, O, apostrophe, B-I-N-N-E-R, Jones [Luther Jones]. That's L-U-T-H (cough)--L-U-T-H-E-R, O, apostrophe, B-I-N-N--apostrophe, B--capital B-I-N-N-E-R, that's O'Binner. Speaker 1: Hm. So is there a significance to that name? Speaker 2: Not that I--I don't know. Speaker 1: It's almost like Obama, almost-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Isn't it? Yeah, Jones is the last name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was born in Georgia, now there are three places that they say--that I think of, Atlanta [Georgia], Augusta [Georgia], or Savannah [Georgia], now, I don't know, which one it was. Speaker 1: Okay, now what year was your father born? Speaker 2: She [Jones' mother, Lottie Watkins Jones] was born--I think she was a year, two years, a year older than my dad. So I put him at nine- 1890, what'd I say-- Speaker 1: Eighteen seventy- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighteen seventy-nine [1879], 1880, or '81 [1881]. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, okay. Now, I didn't ask you this, but what is the, is there a story behind the name Ludie [HistoryMaker Ludie Jones]? It's not a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it is a story-- Speaker 1: It's an unusual name, but okay-- Speaker 2: His nickname was, my dad's nickname was Luther--they called him Ludie. When I was born, he said, "I don't care--," he thought that I was gonna be a boy, though he thought he'd name me Ludie, name the boy Ludie, but I came out as a girl, and he still named me Ludie (laughter). And my aunt gave me the name of Olivia. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's your father's nickname (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's a nickname. Speaker 1: All right, okay, now, did you--what do you know about your father's side of the family, how far back? Speaker 2: Nothing. Speaker 1: Nothing, okay. Speaker 2: Nothing. Not really. I have cousins here, that, they're my first cousins, I think it was his brother, but it was his half-brother or something, I don't know, can't put that down. Speaker 1: So they don't have any family stories that are passed down about what was going on in Georgia? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Was your father raised in Georgia, or did he-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, oh, he went to college there. Pa- Paine, Paine university down there, what's that called-- Speaker 1: Okay, Paine College [Augusta, Georgia] I think, yeah Speaker 2: Yeah, he went there. Speaker 1: Okay, was he the only one in his family to go to school, or were there other people? Speaker 2: As far as I know, he was the only college graduate. Speaker 1: Okay, so he graduated, what did he major in? Speaker 2: Got me, but when he came up here, he got a job in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], and I think he had a porter's job too. Speaker 1: Now, those days, those are two good jobs for those days. Speaker 2: Excuse me? Speaker 1: Those were two good jobs for those days, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Being a porter or working in a post office, 'cause you had benefits-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: A lot of people really were trying to get those jobs. Speaker 2: Well, he worked the post office until he retired. Speaker 1: Okay, he had a good job. Now, is there a story about why he came to New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Not that I know of, only they better themselves, that's all I can say. Speaker 1: Okay, but did his whole family come, or did he come by himself (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, just him, as far as I know. Speaker 1: Did you ever go down south to visit his relatives in Georgia? Speaker 2: Not his relatives, my mother's yes, every summer they'd take us--(cough) I get hoarse every once in a while. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: I don't know too much about my ancestors. I'd have to go to a family tree. Speaker 1: Okay, but your father he--so he retired from the post office-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --he worked as a Pullman porter, for a while too. Speaker 2: No, he was a porter in the house. Speaker 1: Oh, a porter, okay that's different, okay, yeah. So, he had a job during the Depression [Great Depression] then. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah oh yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He worked for the whole Depression. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, is there a, is there a--well do you, what did, did you have any suspicions about why your father, you mean, you never went to visit his relatives in Georgia, or were they-- Speaker 2: I don't think he had anybody alive in Georgia. Speaker 1: So his parents passed away (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, his aunt, I mean, my aunt, his half-sister, was in New York, so the two of them were, you know, friends, but as far as visiting their, my relatives in Georgia, I don't, I think his father was dead, and his mother had been dead a long time. Story_ID: 608285 Speaker 1: Tell me, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: No, not that I know of, I don't really know. I really don't know. Speaker 1: So you don't know if friends introduced them or they met at a party-- Speaker 2: No, I don't know that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or at the church-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, but they did meet so-- Speaker 2: They did meet (laughter), maybe they met in church, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause we went to St. Mark's church [St. Mark's United Methodist Church, New York, New York], that was downtown on 53rd Street, that's where I was christened, fifty-th- St. Mark's Methodist Episcopal, it is now up here on 138th [Street], 37th [137th Street] and 38th. Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me this, if you, when you think about your parents' personalities, and their talents, and their dispositions, who do you think that you take after the most? Speaker 2: I hope my mother [Lottie Watkins Jones] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father [Luther Jones], he was all right, but I mean, it wasn't like, warm, like my mother. He was very staid, you know, he thought education was the best thing in life to have, he didn't want me to dance. He wanted me to play, I played the piano, because of him, he wasn't strict, but he was a very staid person. Speaker 1: Okay. And your mother, what was she like? Speaker 2: Well, she was very, she had personality, she was understandable, she understood you. You could talk to her. She's not strict, but she was firm, you couldn't do anything that she thought was wrong, and if she was gonna whip you or spank you, or what have you, you couldn't move, you had to stand right in that same spot (laughter), that's how firm she was, whip us, you know, and she'd give you a look, and you know, be quiet, but she was a lovable person. She--you knew she loved you. Story_ID: 608286 Speaker 1: You have brothers and sisters? So-- Speaker 2: I had two brothers and two sisters. Speaker 1: And where do you rank in the-- Speaker 2: I'm the third, I'm the--one, two, three, I'm the third daughter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Third sister-- Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us-- Speaker 2: --and the brother is the baby, and the brother is the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay, well can you give us their names and-- Speaker 2: The brother is Julius P--that's the half-brother on my mother's [Lottie Watkins Jones] side, his name is Julius P- Percell Johnston [Julius Johnston]. You can write it, or you want me to spell it, or what have you, or what, or you're not gonna use it? Speaker 1: You can, well yeah, you should probably spell it, you should probably spell it-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: You should spell it for us, I guess. Speaker 2: That's Julius, J-U-L-I-U-S, Percell, P-E-R-C-E-L-L, Johnston, J-O--J-O-H-N-S-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's one brother-- Speaker 2: That's the oldest brother, the younger brother was Earl--Stephen, Stephen Earl Jones [Earl Jones], we called him Earl. Stephen, S-T-E-P-H-E-N, Earl, E-A-R-L, Jones, J-O-N-E-S, and he was the younger of the two brothers. My sister was Gladys [Gladys Jones], G-L-A-D-Y-S, Beatrice, B-E-A--B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, Jones, J-O-N-E-S, she never married. My other sister, was Vivian [Vivian Jones Stanley], V-I- (laughter) V-I-V-I-A-N, Amanda, A-M-A-N-D-A, Jones, J-O-N-E-S, oh, Jones Stanley, S-T-A-N-L-E-Y, she married, that's it. Story_ID: 608287 Speaker 1: Now, where did you grow up, or did you, did you, did you grow up in the same place the whole time, or did you move around a lot, when you were little or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was born downtown, I would stay there until I was about thirteen years old, we moved to Harlem [New York, New York], 111th Street. We stayed there about, oh, I don't know how many years, then we moved to 118th Street, and when I went into show business, we were, they were just getting ready to move to 115th Street. Speaker 1: Okay, so you-- Speaker 2: So, well, I'd say from thirteen years to nineteen, I was nineteen, when I went, I'd say we moved about three or four times, and my father [Luther Jones] and mother [Lottie Watkins Jones] broke up. Speaker 1: How old were you when they broke up? Speaker 2: I was still in high school [Wadleigh High School for Girls; Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts, New York, New York] that was about fourteen--fifteen, fifteen years, sixteen. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: He moved out. Speaker 1: I, I'm gonna ask you a little bit about that later, but I wanted to talk about, I guess, when you were a little kid, growing up, so you grew up downtown in the 50s? Speaker 2: No, I grew up downtown in the 60s-- Speaker 1: 60s, okay. Speaker 2: 64th Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Exactly, there. Speaker 1: Well, describe where you all lived and what the neighborhood was like? Speaker 2: The neighborhood was very nice, it was like family, I was living in the new apartments, they called the Phipps apartments, and that's was from 24- 236 to 248. There were four buildings, 248 was mine, 244 was the next building, 240 and 236, see it was four, four numbers in between the buildings, 248, 244, 230--no, 244, 240, and then 236, that was the Phipps Houses [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: That, that's on West 64th or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, west, nearer between 10th [10th Avenue; Amsterdam Avenue] and 11th Avenues [11th Avenue; West End Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and were mostly black people living there? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, was black people, and from 236 on and up, that was the cold flats, see, we had hot water, running water, I had a bathtub, no sink in the bathroom, but we had a bathtub, and so we were modern, at that time (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, and other people, 'cause I've heard other people talking about living in a cold water flat, and they were cheaper, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, cold water flat (laughter), and those go from one room to the next, but ours was divided like, there was a long hall, the rooms off, like here's the living room, and the bedroom, here's the kitchen and the bathroom, and there was another room off the kitchen. We had four rooms, two bedrooms and one living room, and a bath, kitchen. Speaker 1: So, if you had a cold water flat, you had to heat your own water? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you had to heat your apartment with coal. Speaker 1: Okay, so you'd have a coal stove in your apartment? Speaker 2: No, not mine, I was getting steam-- Speaker 1: I mean, not yours but in the other, the cold water flats. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, did they have a potbellied stove, or what? Speaker 2: No, we didn't have a pot- we had gas. Speaker 1: No, not you, but the other, the cold water (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I guess they did. Speaker 1: So you had gas in your stove? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had gas, not electric, gas. Story_ID: 608288 Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were growing up? What was your personality? Speaker 2: Oh, I was tomboyish, I used to like to play ball, stick ball, and I liked to skate, liked to ride a bicycle, I was very tomboyish. Speaker 1: Was there a lot of music around when you were growing up? Speaker 2: No, not too much no, a lot of snow in the winter, mounds, and mounds, and mounds (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now, radio was kind of a new thing in those days (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, radio was--did I have a radio down there? I don't think I had a radio down in 64th Street. I think we got a radio when we moved up in Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, not everybody had 'em when they first came out-- Speaker 2: No, oh, no, no, we had a telephone though. Down in 64th Street, we had a telephone. Speaker 1: Were you fond of movies and that sort of thing or did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, used to go to movies called--we used to go to this movie called the dump (laughter), and sit in there all day long (laughter), and see cowboy pictures. Speaker 1: You called it the dump (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah, they called it the dump because it was dirty (laughter), and was ten cents to get in. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and where, where, was that? Speaker 2: That was in 66th Street, West 66th Street, off of Broadway, I think, yeah, off of Broadway. Speaker 1: Now, this is when you lived in that part of town, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, any stories about that part of town that come to mind about some of the pe- people around there or things that happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they used to have gangs, that's all I know, you know, 62nd Street was a bad block, we were forbidden to go on 62nd Street. 61st [Street] was kind of bad, but 62nd was bad, that's where the gangs were, they didn't shoot each other, but they used to fight. Speaker 1: Yeah, I wondered, I was gonna ask you what was the difference between the gang then and a gang now. Speaker 2: Oh man, the gang now, cut you, shoot you; they used to just fight. Story_ID: 608289 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The sights were like horse drawn, horse drawn wagons with the ice man, the coal man, hot dog guy, that's the sights, right? The sounds trucks, let's see trucks, trolley cars, I was in that era, trolley cars, and the elevated, el trains, the overhead, and what else did you say? Speaker 1: Smells. Speaker 2: Smells, (pause) bakery maybe, 'cause, I lived around bakeries, but that was about all that I can remember about that smells. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's downtown [New York, New York], I'm only talking about downtown, up here [Harlem, New York, New York] there's a lot of noise, cars and what have you. Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But this is downtown. Story_ID: 608290 Speaker 1: Now, I read in the material that we have that you started dancing seriously when you were three years old? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was three or four. Speaker 1: Three of four (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tapping, yeah. Um-hm. Speaker 1: So what happened, what got you interested in-- Speaker 2: This girl came-- Speaker 1: --tap dancing? Speaker 2: The girl came up from, let's see, I've been dancing, I'll put it at five years old, a girl came up from Norfolk, Virginia, at that time the Charleston had just come out, she taught me how to do the tap Charleston. I was doing the, it was doing the Charleston, but she put taps in it though (makes noise), so that's when I started to--tapping. And I just, I don't know, I was just gifted, that's all I can say. Speaker 1: Did the adults bring you out to dance, when they had a party? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, I used to do concerts, even used to try to sing (laughter). I did an amateur show, at the M and S [ph.] here in Harlem [New York, New York], 125th Street, they used to have amateur shows. And I sang and I danced, at the end of the song, I forget what the name of the song was, end of the song my voice cracked, I was devastated, I run it right into my dance routine, I got third prize though. Speaker 1: Okay, how old were you then? Speaker 2: I was about thirteen, fourteen, fifteen. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I was uptown when it happened. Speaker 1: Now when did you--you indicated before that your father [Luther Jones] wasn't that excited about you dancing. Speaker 2: No, no, he didn't care, he didn't show any interest in it whatsoever. Speaker 1: Did he try to stop you? Speaker 2: No, he didn't try to stop me because my mother [Lottie Watkins Jones] was like head of the family (laughter), and she knew I liked to dance, therefore, she gave me lessons. I didn't have any tap lessons though, I had formal dance training and she used to pay, it was a dollar a lesson, dollar every week to go to the dance class. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was about, at that time, I was about eight or nine years old. Speaker 1: Who were your teachers when you started? Speaker 2: Excuse me? Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers? Speaker 2: Only one, Amanda Kemp [sic. Emma Kemp]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she taught folk dancing and ballet, and had me to teach tap. Speaker 1: Amanda Kipp, can you spell (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Kemp, K-E-M-P. Speaker 1: Okay, K-E-M-P, all right, is this a black woman? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And very prejudiced. Speaker 1: Prejudiced, in what sense? Speaker 2: Color, she had light girls that she was crazy about, the only reason why she liked me was because I could dance. Speaker 1: Now this is a feature of society that had faded some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was a-- Speaker 1: --it's not gone, but it's faded. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was real prejudiced. The reason why she took me in--I don't say took me in, 'cause she'd take anybody in to dance, you know, they pay that money, but I used to be her--with her real fair girls, but I was on the second line, not the first line. She had me to close the show when we used to do concerts, she had me close the show, 'cause I'd bring the house down. She knew what she--oh, I touched that again. Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: She knew I had talent, but it didn't make any difference to her (laughter). She used me more or less. Speaker 1: Do you have any idea where that kind of thinking started, or how that, you know-- Speaker 2: I don't know why she felt that way, but I know that she was prejudiced. Speaker 1: This fits in with the chorus line scenarios that I've read about, in terms of the Cotton Club [New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they had-- Speaker 1: --or the Regal Theater in Chicago [Illinois], other places they had a line of very-- Speaker 2: --right, line dancing, very fair girls. Speaker 1: --light girls and if they had a dark one, she'd be at the end. Speaker 2: Right, you're right. Speaker 1: A lot of people have told us that. Speaker 2: Right, it's the truth. Speaker 1: So, did anybody ever raise the-- Speaker 2: No, not at that-- Speaker 1: --question about-- Speaker 2: --time. No, they didn't question, I did a concert for this lady, my dance teacher, and I was, there was a man there, a talent scout, and when I finished dancing, he came, he went, "Where's that child's mother?" So, he went to my mother, he wanted to take me, you know, do something with me, and what he was I don't know, but he wanted me to dance or sing or what have you, but my mother said no, she wasn't going for it. Speaker 1: About how old were you then? Speaker 2: I was about, I was about, ten or something like that, nine or ten. Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I was going to her at that time. Story_ID: 608291 Speaker 1: Can you remember your first show, the first show you were in? Speaker 2: No, no, you mean as far as the dance class? Speaker 1: Yeah, when you were a little-- Speaker 2: No, no (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The first time you were put onstage to dance? Speaker 2: No, the only thing I can remember now is that when I, like when I told you, I had to sing this real southern song, "Oh, they picking on your baby, 'cause you're a pickaninny rose," she [Jones' dance instructor, Emma Kemp] had me to sing that. Everybody who did a specialty, they wore a dress, real pretty dresses, what have you, when my mother [Lottie Watkins Jones], my aunt had made a very beautiful, accordion pleated peach dress, when I got ready to go on--my mother had put the dress on me, and she saw me, you know, naturally, she's at the stage, she said, "Take that off of her, put those overalls on her." I tell you she's prejudiced, and I had to sing and dance in the overalls. And I sang, "Oh, they picking on your baby, because you're a pickaninny rose." Now she's a black woman. Story_ID: 608292 Speaker 1: Now, did you get the chance to see other stage shows during that time period, I mean other people dancing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I didn't go. Speaker 1: Some of the big shows? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Any of the Sissle and Blake shows? Noble Sissle, Eubie Blake, or-- Speaker 2: No. Only when I was about sixteen years old, I used to go to the Lafayette Theatre [New York, New York], and that's where I saw Eddie Rector, and the Whitman Sisters. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Eddie--how, how, do you spell Eddie's last name? Speaker 2: R-E-C-T-O-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eddie Rector, he was a wonderful dancer, and then they had the Whitman Sisters, and they were tap--this was all tap dancing, and I saw it when I was sixteen years old, I went to the Lafayette Theatre, and that's where I saw 'The Phantom of the Opera' (laughter) 'cause they used to have movies and then stage show. Speaker 1: Okay, was this the movie? Speaker 2: 'Phantom of the Opera' was the movie-- Speaker 1: With Lon Chaney, Sr. [Lon Chaney]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right, that's the one, that's a long time. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the silent one right? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was silent, it was silent. Speaker 1: Movies didn't get--didn't start talking 'til 1929 or something. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, that was silent. Speaker 1: Okay, would there be a piano player and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they'd have an organ player or a piano player, one or the other. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you ever see, now one of the--did you ever see any of the Oscar Micheaux movies? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Oscar Micheaux's movies? He was a black film director who-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --he showed a lot of his movies (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I've seen 'em, but I don't remember. I know--what's his name, Marsh- ? Speaker 1: Micheaux. Speaker 2: Yeah, Micheaux. Speaker 1: Oscar Micheaux, I think he was related to Michaux that ran the bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York] up here. Speaker 2: Oh yeah? Speaker 1: I think so, Lewis Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I've seen his movies, years back, you know he had shorts. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you--when you were dancing, did you have an idol? I mean someone that you wanted to be like when you danced? Speaker 2: Eleanor Powell, I used to love to see her dance. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Dance like her, I don't like--that's all I can say. Speaker 1: All right, yeah, this was--she came along, she started up, she was in the movies in the '30s [1930s], early '30s [1930s] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so, I don't know, but I used to love to see her dance. Story_ID: 608293 Speaker 1: Now where did you start school? Where did you start school in New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Where did I started? Speaker 1: Yeah, what was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: My primary school was P.S. 141 [New York, New York]. That's a hudnred- that was downtown in--I was 64th [Street], that was about 50 some- some street, 58th, 58th Street, that's right. 58th Street, off of Broadway, that was primary, that went to sixth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then I went to P.S. 69 [sic. J.H.S. 69, New York, New York], that was in between, that was from seventh grade to, seventh and eighth grade, that's junior high, and then from there I went to high school, went to Wadleigh High School [Wadleigh High School for Girls; Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts], that was 114th Street in Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: 114th Street, okay. Speaker 2: And I graduated from there. Speaker 1: All right. Did you have any favorite teachers in high school? I mean, in school? Who were your-- Speaker 2: No, there was a teacher there, he taught economics, and he used to put shows on, and we used to work in his shows, dance in his shows, and he passed me in economics because of that (laughter). I was terrible in economics, but he passed me. Speaker 1: Were, were you a pretty good student basically (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was basically. Speaker 1: Okay, did you like school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 608294 Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school [Wadleigh High School for Girls; Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts, New York, New York], were you already doing a lot of shows, in those days? Speaker 2: No, no, I wasn't dancing, I wasn't doing any shows, and I just came out, I graduated from high school in June, in September I was with 'Lew Leslie's Blackbirds' ['Lew Leslie's Blackbirds of 1934']. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went and I did an audition, and-- Speaker 1: And what year was that, when you graduated? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-four [1934]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1934, okay so 1934, you--did, did you, you were about to graduate, did you have any--did you know you were going to be a professional dancer? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This girl and I, we went and did--we went to do this au- we had heard about it, and I don't know where we heard it, but we heard about it and we went and did an audition, and he took us both. She was fair, I was black (laughter), down, but he kept me because I could dance. And like, when we got--went to England, he had me show the girls how to do a number, that we were taught. They did the number, but he wanted it perfected, and he had me to do it for them, and used to call me a long drink of water (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was tall and thin (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were tall, okay. Speaker 2: "Where's that long drink of water," (laughter)? Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Lew Leslie, what was he like? Who was he? Speaker 2: He was a Jewish man, and he had Florence Mills, he, he used to put out these shows, 'Blackbirds,' Lew Leslie--that was the name of his show, 'Lew Leslie's Blackbirds.' I think that they started in 1927 [sic.], he had Florence Mills, he had Valaida Snow (unclear), I mean, the stars and I don't know the others. Speaker 1: Yeah now, Florence Mills was a big star. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and he was crazy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you're over in Europe too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what were you saying about him? He was-- Speaker 2: He was crazy about her, when she passed, he had these doves to fly, she had a funeral down, had her body down there in my area, sixty- I don't know if it was on Broadway, 60 some odd street, 66th Street or something like that, and these doves, had all these birds flying out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't see it, but that's what I heard. Speaker 1: Did you know Florence Mills? Did, did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, that was before my time, I was in high school then, or school. Speaker 1: You said Miss Snow, what was the name? Speaker 2: Valaida Snow was in our show-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That was 1934, she and the Berry Brothers, Edie, Edie, Edith Wilson, A- Ananias, and what was his brother's name? Ananias, he was married to Valaida, Ananias Berry, I can't think of the brother's name though [James Berry]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, this is happening real quick then, you've done some performances before, but you auditioned for 'Lew Leslie's Blackbirds,' and-- Speaker 2: When I was in high school, I didn't do any shows outside, just in the school, but when I came out, when I graduated, got this notice, I don't know who told, like I said, I don't know who told me, but we went to do this audition and he took us, this, this friend of mine, Ethel [ph.]. Story_ID: 608295 Speaker 1: So what was your position in the show? Now you said-- Speaker 2: I was a chorus girl. Speaker 1: All right, okay, so did they--did you have a special spot? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So they didn't make a distinction in terms of color with you? Speaker 2: No, no, oh, distinction was, like I was in the--I was tall, I guess, I was in the second line, and that was the distinction. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But this particular show, he [Lew Leslie] used to get all light women, light chorus girls, but this particular show, he had, he varied, you know, he had black, I mean, dark, medium, brown, and light. Speaker 1: Okay, so, how long did you have to prepare to go to England? Speaker 2: Well, we just did a stint in Chicago [Illinois], and we got stranded there (laughter), that was like an opening, you know, and anyhow, we came back and I think it was in October, I think about a month or so, a month or two, you know, rehearsals and going to Chicago, and coming back, and then going to Europe, I mean England. Speaker 1: Now did your parents, were they upset about it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother [Lottie Watkins Jones] was very--she said, "You wanna go?" So I said, "Yes mother, I'd rather dance than eat." She said, "Okay," and my father [Luther Jones] didn't have anything to do with it (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, they were divorced by then right? Speaker 2: No, they never were divorced, they separated (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, they split up, okay, okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: But he didn't have any say, 'cause at that time, they were separated. Speaker 1: And you lived with your mother? Speaker 2: I lived with my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what month was it that you all pulled out--well in the show, you sang and danced, right? Speaker 2: No, in what show? Speaker 1: In 'Blackbirds,' in 'Lew Leslie's Blackbirds' ['Lew Leslie's Blackbirds of 1934']-- Speaker 2: No, I only--I was a chorus girl (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You just danced? Oh, a chorus girl, okay. Speaker 2: I didn't sing, I just danced, in the line, that's all I did. Speaker 1: And the headliners of the show-- Speaker 2: Valaida Snow. Speaker 1: So she would sing and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, then they had a choir, the Hall Johnson Choir, and had--I can't think of his name, who was the director, musical director--can't think of his name now. Speaker 1: Okay so, well tell us about the trip, I mean, you know was it-- Speaker 2: Oh that, we went over on--oh, and I was looking at that too, it was at that time a luxury liner, 'cause we had state rooms, that was in 1934, yeah, yeah, and it was kind of rough, the water was kind of rough, we went first to Boston [Massachusetts], and then we left Boston and hit the high seas. And we used to go to see the movies and Harold Lloyd was playing in a picture and we were all in the lounge looking at the picture, it was dark in there naturally, and we'd look at the picture. When the lights went up, I think just my friend and I were they only ones, the others had gotten seasick, I never did get seasick. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: It was a lovely trip and we came back on a luxury liner too. Speaker 1: How did you--do you remember what the name, name of the boat was? Speaker 2: Mauretania [RMS Mauretania], I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think Mauretania. Speaker 1: Now, this is in the summer of nineteen thirty- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was fall-- Speaker 1: Fall, it was fall of 19--okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause we stayed there nine months. We did London [England] and then we went to Scotland, Manchester, England, and then we went Scotland, Glasgow, Scotland. Speaker 1: Okay and now, did you--what did you think about the British people? Speaker 2: At that time, they were very nice. I liked them, but it was very foggy over there, boy the fog used to swirl around you, I'd be frightened, just swirl around you, very thick, and very damp. Speaker 1: You didn't like the weather much. Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, what--so the people treated you very nice. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they were nice. Speaker 1: Were you all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Prince of Wales, came to see the show. Speaker 1: Hm, okay. Speaker 2: He was a tiny guy, sat down over in his box, the royal box. Speaker 1: Now, is this the same prince it was who became the king who one-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he gave it up. Speaker 1: Yeah, George VI [sic. Edward VIII], I think, was-- Speaker 2: I don't know, all I know he was the Prince of Wales. Speaker 1: Yeah, he fell in love with an American woman-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Wallis Simpson. Speaker 2: Wallis, yeah. Speaker 1: So, he came to see the show. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, this was a big, this is the big time production (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, this was the Coliseum [London Coliseum, London, England], that was a big theatre, that's a big theatre, had a revolving stage. Story_ID: 608296 Speaker 1: Were there any other performers on the bill other than 'Lew Leslie's Blackbirds' ['Lew Leslie's Blackbirds of 1934']? Or was that the whole show? Speaker 2: That was the show. That was a musical. You had the choir [Hall Johnson Choir], you had comics--what were their names? Speaker 1: Who were the comics? Speaker 2: Tim, Tim, Blue McAllister, and Tim--I can't think of his name now--last name, they were the com- and George [ph.], they (unclear). Speaker 1: It wasn't Tim Moore was it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tim, Tim Moore the guy that played Kingfish on ['Amos 'n' Andy']-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Tim Moore. Speaker 1: Oh, that all right, I was thinking it might be, but I didn't wanna say anything-- Speaker 2: And it was Blue McAllister-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Say that again, repeat what you just said. Speaker 2: Blue McAllister. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Look at Larry [Larry Crowe], and just say it in one, one whole sentence. Speaker 2: And it was Blue McAllister-- Speaker 1: Yeah the two comedians were, jus- just put it like that. Speaker 2: Oh, and the two comedians? Were Tim Moore and Blue McAllister, and George, there's three of them, George--you got me. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, he worked the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] all the time. Speaker 1: Okay now, was did you have any idea that Tim Moore was gonna be a big star? Speaker 2: No, well he was a star then, we saw him in that show. Speaker 1: You know the funny thing is a lot of people, you know they know who Kingfish is, and they laugh at him as Kingfish, but a lot of people don't know his name, don't know it's Tim Moore (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah right. Speaker 1: So, I don't know. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, it was he. Speaker 1: And, yeah, so Tim Moore, McAllister and Blue. Speaker 2: Blue McAllister-- Speaker 1: Blue McAllister, okay, all right, so you went to Scotland, you went to Manchester [England]-- Speaker 2: Yeah that's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Man- we didn't go down to the rivieras, or like that, in that show. Speaker 1: Okay, so, you didn't go to the rest of Europe, you just came back (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, we just went to the--we didn't go to the continent. Speaker 1: Now, were your parents [Lottie Watkins Jones and Luther Jones] worried about you during this time, or did they write you letters? Speaker 2: No, she was very, only thing see, I was a spoiled woman, brat, not brat, but I was spoiled when I was a very young girl. And my mother used to wash for me, cook for me, and she told me when I got older that she'd write me a letter, if you want you can send your clothes here, your soiled clothes, and I'll wash 'em, and send 'em back to you, that's how spoiled I was (laughter). Imagine me sending some soiled clothes home to be laundered and sent back to me. Speaker 1: What did it--now, I'm concerned that someone, now, you're a young girl, going to England, now, did they have somebody to chaperone you all, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --or to try to watch y'all? Speaker 2: I was nineteen at the time. Speaker 1: Nineteen, yeah, okay. Speaker 2: No chaperone, only the girls that were older in the chorus, and they look out for you. Speaker 1: Okay, but everything worked out okay? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Story_ID: 608297 Speaker 1: All right, so you came back after nine months, right? And-- Speaker 2: And what did I do? Speaker 1: That's in the spring or summer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, that's when I got the Lang Sisters, we starred in that. Speaker 1: Now, how did you come up with that idea? I mean, what-- Speaker 2: Well, we had gone to Buddy--you told me about this fella in England, Buddy-- Speaker 1: Oh, the dance instructor? Speaker 2: The dance instructor-- Speaker 1: Yeah, wait a minute, I'll come up with it in a minute here. Speaker 2: Buddy, Buddy, Buddy-- Speaker 1: Yeah, give me one second here, I'll come up with his name. Speaker 2: Anyhow he was a friend of-- Speaker 1: Buddy Bradley. Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: Buddy Bradley school of dance [Buddy Bradley Dance School, London, England]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you actually studied with him in England when you were there? Speaker 2: Yeah, we went there, the girls and I, just for the fun of it, just to have, you know, take lessons and he taught us a routine, so that's how we learned all, we learned the routine, and then when we came back here, Crawford, Lew Crawford was--Llewellyn Crawford, that's what, that's his name, and he was the producer of the shows in the Apollo [sic.], so Marion [Marion Worthy Warner] and Peggy [Peggy Wharton], got a job as a chorus girl, yeah, I was in the chorus one week, that's right, then the next week, he let us do a sh- do an act together, that's when we learned how to do--our names became the Lang Sisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause he had a crush on Peggy in the Lang Sisters, so he gave us a break. Llewellyn Crawford was the producer, Schiffman [Frank Schiffman] was the owner. Speaker 1: Okay so, now why did Lew Leslie's show ['Lew Leslie's Blackbirds of 1934']--he just shut down the show after you came back? Speaker 2: Yeah, when we came back, he might have had another show going out, but not us. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you decided it's time to go out your own-- Speaker 2: Well yeah, I was able to. You know, I didn't decide, it just happened, you know, these things--what happens to me happens. I don't make plans to do it, they just happen. Speaker 1: Okay, so, well tell us a little bit about the Cotton Club [New York, New York], and I think some people--a lot of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wasn't there, all I know, they were very prejudiced, the blacks couldn't go there to see the show-- Speaker 1: They could be in the show-- Speaker 2: They could be in the show-- Speaker 1: --but they couldn't go see the show, so you had an all-white audience. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was it owned by black people? Speaker 2: No, gangsters, I think, opposites (laughter). Speaker 1: So, it's a good likelihood they were gangsters? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know anything about, you know, the Cotton Club, 'cause I didn't work there. Speaker 1: Okay, so, but you were in the chorus, in one of Llewellyn Crawford's-- Speaker 2: One week. Speaker 1: One week, okay-- Speaker 2: Then I became the Lang Sisters. Story_ID: 608298 Speaker 1: What did the Lang Sisters do? What did you all do, when you decided to become the Lang Sisters? Speaker 2: We worked with--piano--Fats Waller, Louis Armstrong, Luis Russell, it was Luis Russell's band with Louis Armstrong featured, and Fats Waller. We did shows in theatres, with those two people. Speaker 1: Now, what would your routine consist of? I mean, what were, you know, here come the Lang Sisters, now what do they do? Speaker 2: We tap. Each one of us, like, I had--like we opened together, then the two of them [Marion Worthy Warner and Peggy Wharton] would dance together, and I would dance, and then we all--the three of us would dance, close it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the idea. Speaker 1: Did you have a specialty move? Speaker 2: I had a specialty-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They had a specialty too, but they danced together. Speaker 1: And what was your specialty? Speaker 2: Just tapping, I would tap, just like I had in the show, a 'Shade of Harlem' ['Shades of Harlem: The Musical Revue of the Harlem Renaissance,' Jeree Palmer], (unclear), just doing the tap, tap routine. Speaker 1: Nothing like, you know, like we were talking before about [HistoryMaker] Fayard Nicholas being able to do the jumping-- Speaker 2: Oh no, no--I'm a floor dancer (laughter), no splits, no nothing, stand up straight, that's it. Speaker 1: Just, just good tap dancing. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Feet. Story_ID: 608299 Speaker 1: Tell me about the personalities of Luis Russell and Louis Armstrong and? Speaker 2: Well, Luis Russell was a, he was a very nice guy, I liked him. He'd come in and he'd vocalize and he'd have a little poodle, and he call 'em Charm, and he'd vocalize, "Oh, Charmee," that's how he would warm up, warm his throat up. And Luis Russell was, he was very staid, you know, he, I don't say he was, wasn't friendly, but he wasn't outgoing like Luis Russell--Louis Armstrong. Speaker 1: Okay. So, Louis Armstrong had what? A bigger, bigger, personality (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: A lot of people have not heard of Luis Russell, these days, now, Louis Armstrong was the national icon-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, but Luis Russell, at that time, he was quite big too. And then, like I said, I worked with Fats Waller. Speaker 1: Yeah, now what was Fats Waller like? Now there were plays about Fats Waller-- Speaker 2: Oh, he was high all the time. He was high all the time (laughter). Speaker 1: On what? What do you think he-- Speaker 2: He drank. Speaker 1: Okay, so he drank. Speaker 2: He was a lush. Speaker 1: I know that he wrote a song about--called the 'Viper Drag' [sic. 'Viper's Drag'] or something. Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that. Speaker 1: About smoking, herb too, so I don't, I didn't-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't know about whether he smoked, I guess he could have, but I know he used to drink. He'd be drunk on that stage (laughter). Speaker 1: Did that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but I mean, he played that piano. Speaker 1: What kind of a person was he? Speaker 2: Oh, he was nice, he's dolly, very nice, very nice, dolly. Speaker 1: Yeah, he seemed to be kind of a witty person, the way they portray him on-- Speaker 2: Say what? Speaker 1: A witty person-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a clever person, and his speech-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he would be, yeah, I enjoyed working with him. I only worked, you know, maybe about a month or so on the road with him. Speaker 1: Who else were we talking about? We talked--oh, Cab Calloway. Speaker 2: Oh, Cab Calloway, he was something else (laughter), we used to work with him and The Peters Sisters, at the time. Did you ever hear of The Peters Sisters? They were the fat girls, black girls, and they could sing, and they were on a show with Pearl Bailey and me, I mean, this is with The Poms now, I'm all switched from the Lang Sisters, now to The Poms-- Speaker 1: Now, well, let's just talk about the Lang Sisters for a minute. How did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, I didn't work with Cab with the Lang Sisters. Speaker 1: Okay, how long did the Lang Sisters last? Speaker 2: We came back in '35 [1935], '36 [1936]--about a year, two years, 'cause at that time, 'The Mikado' with Bill Robinson [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson] opened up, and Marion [Marion Worthy Warner] decided (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'The Swing Mikado'? Speaker 2: Yeah, Mikad- yeah [sic. 'The Hot Mikado,' W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan], and Marion went for an audition, I went too, but they didn't take me, she got the job, and--of course, and so that left me out. I wasn't working anymore, you know, Peggy [Peggy Wharton] had stopped, and Marion when she got the job, naturally she was a chorus girl went into the chorus, so I was by myself, I didn't work by myself, but in, let's see '39 [1939], I think it was, the--an agent, told me he had two girls that wanted to dance with me, and that's how I became The Three Poms. Speaker 1: Okay, The Three Poms. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right, so it was with that group that you danced with Cab (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was there with them for about, let's see, we went to Japan, we went to--all over the USO shows [United Service Organizations], the US- shows from north to south, east to west, twice-- Speaker 1: The Poms, were they formed at the onset of World War II [WWII], around the same time as the war? Speaker 2: Yeah, while the war was on. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is about, so it's about four years when you're not working with a group (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. That's right, I didn't work. Speaker 1: Well, what did you do? Speaker 2: Nothing. My mother [Lottie Watkins Jones] was taking care of me (laughter). Speaker 1: Did she like the idea of having you home? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I didn't do anything. Story_ID: 608300 Speaker 1: Now when you traveled with the Lang Sisters, did--I mean, did you--what are some of the more memorable places? I know many towns had a black theatre, North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], had a famous black theatre, Denver [Colorado], you know, Dayton [Ohio], even had two black theatres-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --on the west side of Dayton. They were all over the place, Indianapolis [Indiana], had a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Say what dear? Speaker 1: Dayton, Indianapolis, did, did you go to any of those places, or Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: What, with the Lang Sisters? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Where did you go with the Lang Sisters? Speaker 2: I only went around here, you know, like, let's see, we went to Boston [Massachusetts], I know with Fats [Fats Waller] and Louis Armstrong, that's about all I know. And then I worked-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: I worked with, let me see, Louis Armstrong down at the Paramount, the Paramount Theatre on Broadway [New York, New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Here on Broadway. Speaker 2: Yeah, and Louis Armstrong, Luis Russell, we worked the Paramount, that's with the Lang Sisters, and when we traveled, we didn't do too much traveling, only with the, the bands, but where we went I have forgotten. I know that we went to Boston, I know. Speaker 1: Now, were you able to save any money, you know, when you were--in those days? Speaker 2: Nah, well yeah, I used to send money to my mother [Lottie Watkins Jones], give my mother and she put it in the, at that time, post office, but I mean saving money, we didn't make that kind of money. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wondered-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we didn't make that kind of money, like-- Speaker 1: Was it better than, the money you were making was better, than being a clerk or a maid, or something? Or what do you think (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wouldn't say, nah, I'm not gone say that, 'cause when I went to Europe, with Lew Leslie, '34 [1934], we were only getting thirty-five dollars a week, and that was in pounds, seven pounds, but naturally, things, the cost of living, was very low, and I was able to send my mother money every week, but as far as making money, I never really made good money, like these acts make thousands and thousands of dollars now. First off, you're black, even the male dancers didn't make that kind of money. They made more (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You mean females got paid less? Speaker 2: Yeah, blacks anyhow, but it was a living, as far as, you know as I worked. Story_ID: 608301 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about another person though, before we move on, and that was Bi- Bill Robinson, did you know Bill "Bojangles" Robinson (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I only did the audition [for 'The Hot Mikado,' W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan], and they didn't take me. Speaker 1: He was extremely successful in those days. Speaker 2: He was, he was something else, they say (laughter). Speaker 1: That's what I heard too, I've hear his personality was you know, a bit you know much sometimes. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was. Speaker 1: What stories did you hear about him? Speaker 2: Yeah, the stories are true (laughter). Speaker 1: So, they're true? Speaker 2: I should imagine (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, for instance? Can you give me a for instance? Speaker 2: Oh, I couldn't tell ya. Speaker 1: 'Cause you don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I knew the girls who worked with him, you know, I couldn't say. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, we'll be nice to him. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 608302 Speaker 1: So, you got another group together, the Poms, The Three Poms and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we got together I'll say in 1941 or '42 [1942], '41 [1941]. During the war. Speaker 1: Now, how did you--how did, can you remember how the black community felt about the war, about World War II [World War II]? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know. Speaker 1: How did you feel (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did I feel about it? I guess I was very nonchalant about it, I don't know, you know. I know we worked the camps and they were segregated and that's what made me mad though. Okay, I feel when you work these camps and you see the blacks here and the whites here, you go to various cities, white people fountain, black, colored--no it was colored and white, that's the way they used it, colored and white. That was when I was with The Three Poms. And we did the U.S. shows, we did all upstate, down south, west, East Coast, West Coast, I think we did that about twice during the war, and even after the war, 'cause these guys were still in camp, and I went to Japan after the war, did a show over there. Speaker 1: This was about 1945 or something? Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947], '48 [1948]. Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947], '48 [1948], okay. Speaker 2: USO shows [United Service Organizations] were still doing it. Speaker 1: The U.S. still had a sizable, army presence in Japan (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, in Japan, yeah. Speaker 1: Those were the days when they were writing 'Teahouse of the August Moon' ['The Teahouse of the August Moon,' Vern Sneider] and all that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, did you, did you serve in the service? Speaker 1: My father served in the World War- World War II. Speaker 2: Oh, your father, oh, that's right, you're just sixty, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was stationed in Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan]. Speaker 2: Oh yeah? I was there-- Speaker 1: Did you? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there, maybe I saw your father (laughter). Speaker 1: You might have, you might have, yeah 'cause he was definitely there for a while. Speaker 2: Was he in the [U.S.] Navy or the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 1: He was in the Army, he was a mess sergeant for his group, so he's in charge of the food, so he was a popular man, you know. Speaker 2: Oh yeah (laughter), not-- Speaker 1: Even though he couldn't cook that well (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, he learned how to cook though. Speaker 1: For the masses, yeah, so that's '47 [1947], '48 [1948], so you all stayed together a pretty good while then? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did, yeah. Speaker 1: The Three Poms so-- Speaker 2: Longer than the Langs [Lang Sisters], then one of the girls, Sylvia [Sylvia Warner], decided she was tired of traveling, so she said she's quitting, and Pom [Geraldine Ball] and I tried to make it alone, but it wasn't the same. That's what we called the little one, Pom, that's where the name came from. Her name--her nickname was Pom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I tried it on my own, and I did USO shows in the states, but that didn't last. I even did the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] on my own (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was all right. And then I did--tapping became very obsolete, so I had to give that up and get a job. Story_ID: 608303 Speaker 1: Now, this is about what time, do you think, tapping starts to wane (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is in the late '40s [1940s], you know, the '40s [1940s] and the fif- early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Now, you're right, I remember, I was a kid, I came along in '49 [1949], and as a kid, I saw tap dancing decline. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was declining. Speaker 1: It was more popular when I was little, than when I was an adult (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right. Speaker 1: But you knew, maybe I'll ask you about it, why you think that's true, but you did know most of the big name tap dancers, or the best tap dancers-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --and we all--you said you didn't know Bojangles [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson]-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't know him. Speaker 1: --personally, but you did know Honi Coles [Charles Coles]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I knew him personally. Speaker 1: And there are some others, could you name some of them? Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew Bunny Briggs, I knew him, I knew Sandman [Howard Sims], Slyde [Jimmy Slyde], Slyde did a show when I went back into show business, I went to Italy, Perugia, Italy had a festival [Umbria Jazz Festival], and Slyde was over there doing, you know, a show at a theatre, and we went over to do the show at a theatre in Perugia, Italy. But I knew--to get back to the dancers, I knew Sammy, and I knew--well I only met, the guy--what's his name? The fellow that--he was a real star, he was out, he was one of the Rat Pack-- Speaker 1: Oh, Sammy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sammy Davis, yeah. Speaker 1: He danced with his father [Sammy Davis, Sr.] and his uncle [Will Mastin], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They had a big show. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I only met him at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], Apollo returns--I mean, 'Motown Returns to the Apollo,' and that was the segment I was with, it was his segment, Sammy Davis, Jr., and he had the boys, the fellas, and me, that was in 1984. Speaker 1: Now there was a group, I don't know if you knew about it, I think they're pretty popular around here, called The Step Brothers [The Four Step Brothers]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I remember seeing them on 'The Ed Sullivan Show' (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, they were good. They were fast, fast, furious, yeah. Well, The Step Brothers is--Robert Reed [Robert L. Reed], his father [Robert Reed] was a Step Brother [sic.]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, there we go, so Robert Reed did something before the-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: I think The HistoryMakers--did we interview Robert Reed? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I don't know. I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, okay, 'cause we were talking about him before the interview-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that we were. Speaker 1: He's down in Florida or something? Speaker 2: No, he's down in Miss- Missouri, that's where he is (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Missouri? Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And he lives in Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay, so, Step Brothers, and there was another famous dancer who used to always come on 'The Ed Sullivan Show,' named Peg Leg Bates. Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked with him. He had a (cough)--he was on Lew Leslie's show ['Lew Leslie's Blackbirds of 1934'] too. One session, he came over and did the show with Lew Leslie, I worked with him there, and then I worked--when he came back to New York [New York], he got this club up in Al- I forget the name of the place. Speaker 1: Is this the lodge he owned out in the country or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a, it was a resort. Speaker 1: Yeah, King's Lodge [sic.]-- Speaker 2: No, it wasn't King's Lodge. Speaker 1: Well, they're calling it that now. I've been to it, I've been to it for something or other function, I talking about Dr. Ben [ph.] before that, they used to have a retreat up in King's Lodge, Upstate New York. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he had this show, I mean he--in fact I opened his club, Avis [ph.] and Estherlita [ph.], and me, and a singer, we opened his club. Speaker 1: So this was like, a lodge like sort of like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was a lodge where people came, a resort, where they came. Speaker 1: Kind of like the Jewish lounges up in the Catskills [Catskill Mountains]. Speaker 2: Yeah, like up in the Catskills, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, Peg Leg Bates Resort [sic. Peg Leg Bates Country Club; Mountain Valley Resort and Country Club, Kerhonkson, New York] or something they called it, I guess-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it Peg Leg Bates, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. What was he like? Did you get a chance to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was nice, he was nice, yeah, when I saw him--I think it was when I didn't show in 'Motown Returns to the Apollo,' I saw him, he was in the box, and was glad to see him. Speaker 1: And did you know [HistoryMaker] Jeni LeGon? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, no, I knew of her (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's someone that we interviewed, who's a tap dancer-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she was tap, she was good though. She was good. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Did you interview her? Speaker 1: Yes we did. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: We interviewed her and there's a film ['Jeni LeGon: Living in a Great Big Way'] that was made about her, I think by the Canadian film board [National Film Board of Canada]. Speaker 2: Oh yeah? Speaker 1: Yeah, we showed the film and we honored her in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Oh, how nice. Speaker 1: In conjunction with, I think, Chicago Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I think, it was yeah, right. But there's some- is there any other dancers? We talked about, we talked about Jimmy Payne [Jimmy Payne, Sr.], who lived in Chicago. You knew him, you knew Jimmy (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, he's a teacher, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, dance teacher. Speaker 2: Yeah I used--like I said, I used to go to his studio here in New York [New York], every day I was in his studio with the fellas, we have a ball (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 608304 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I worked with Earl Hines-- Speaker 2: I mean, Fath- yeah. Speaker 1: Fatha Hines (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not Earl "Fatha" Hines, but Hines, Hines and Dad, I guess-- Speaker 1: Oh no, I worked with Gregory [Gregory Hines] on the 'Motown Returns to the Apollo,' he was on that, I was with him, I mean, I worked with him. He did his own solo, he wasn't with Sammy Davis group, but I worked with him. Speaker 2: And I guess the most popular tap dancer now, I guess you gotta say it's [HistoryMaker] Savion Glover (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I don't, I don't particularly care for him, he's not that tight, not like a Honi Coles [Charles Coles], to me. I'm from-- Speaker 2: Well, what's the difference? Speaker 1: The difference is that they, they're all (makes noise), no style, no grace to me, it's just a matter of hoofing with the feet. They have no style, now, Honi Coles was a stylist. All these other fellas, Sammy Davis, Jr., when they danced, they had style to them, but I, I, don't particularly care for--they dance, oh, they got some feet on them, but no style, to me. Speaker 2: Okay. He's very athletic, I know-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --he does a lot of things (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: Now did you ever meet the Nicholas brothers? Speaker 1: Only Fayard [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas], when he did the show. He was on, he was on the bill, that's all. I wouldn't--he wouldn't know me if he fell over me now, I guess (laughter), and he died though (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Harold [Harold Nicholas] was his brother. Yeah, he passed away a few years ago, yeah. Speaker 1: And Fayard I think, just died didn't he? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right, yeah, Harold died a long time ago. Speaker 1: Yeah, but Fayard was sick too, he was crippled or something, I don't know. Speaker 2: I think he had some hip problems, towards the end but he was getting around when we interviewed him, walking around. Speaker 1: Oh, you interviewed him? Speaker 2: Yes ma'am, yes ma'am, he was getting along pretty good. I mean he was, you know he wasn't gonna dance again-- Speaker 1: No (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but he, he could walk. Speaker 1: Yeah, I used, I used to like them, I loved them. I loved to see them dance, they could dance. Story_ID: 608305 Speaker 1: Who was your favorite dancer, or did, did you have a favorite dancer? Speaker 2: Like I said, I wanted--liked to see Eleanor Powell, her style of dancing. And Honi Coles [Charles Coles], I liked him, I liked his style. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there was another one, Baby Laurence [Baby Laurence Jackson], he was good. Aw, he was good, he could tap, oh. See, most of these guys, that I'm calling now, they tap from, not that they're taught, they just have it in them. Like Chuck [Charles Green] of Chuck and Chuckles, he just has it in him, he had it in him, he died, and he worked with us with Cab [Cab Calloway], Chuck and Chuckles, the both of them. Speaker 1: Now, that's an interesting point because I think a lot of--when as a kid, we used to watch the tap dancers on TV and we'd try to do it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's a different style, you see something, you could do it. It's a different style altogether. Speaker 1: And I believe that's how, you know, I think, [HistoryMaker] Fayard Nicholas was telling me that he watched the performers in vaudeville from the wings, and then he practiced, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So it wasn't so much someone going to school and doing it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, you're either gifted with it, you know, you can pick it up. Speaker 1: So, what do you think--there was also a fella that, I think that he was on our schedule, but I don't know if we ever interviewed him, it was a fella who was featured, he was the only black person on 'The Lawrence Welk Show,' and he would dance. Do you remember him? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Do you remember who I'm talking about? Speaker 2: I think it was Briggs-- Speaker 1: Ah-- Speaker 2: I think it was--Teddy Briggs [sic. Arthur Duncan]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Teddy Briggs. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. All right, I remember he was the only black person on the show, and my father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Teddy Briggs, he, he was a beautiful dancer, but he started (gesture), that was his downfall. Speaker 1: And I know people of my father's generation that's the one thing they'd watch on 'Lawrence Welk.' Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: My father didn't want to watch anything else on there, he'd turn it off, after this guy was finished. Speaker 2: Oh yes, he was wonderful, he could dance too. Yeah, Teddy Briggs. Story_ID: 608306 Speaker 1: What do you think caused the decline of tap? Speaker 2: What happened? Speaker 1: It's not that tap's the only thing that's declined, that was going on then, I mean we had bebop music, we had the big bands (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. They, they just weren't going for it, at that time the seniors had this like the, the Commodores that--they came into, at that time, that's when they the things went down, when tap went down to me. You remember all those singers, like the Commodores? Speaker 1: The Temptations and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Four Tops. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, and I thought-- Speaker 1: Even though they were doing dance moves, they just weren't doing a lot of tapping (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I mean tapping just was just, slowly but surely it was going out of style. Until, Gregory Hines he started, Fabion--or was it Savion? Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Savion Glover, right, yeah. Speaker 2: But Gregory danced like that but I like--he did have style, he had style about him, but Savion stand up and (makes noise), nothing to me. Speaker 1: Okay now, did you see the movie 'Tap,' with Gregory Hines (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: What did you think of that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, I liked it. I loved it, yeah, and I look at it, it comes on sometimes, so I look at it again and again, and again. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is it accurate? Do you think it's an accurate reflection of the period? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's when Sammy Davis, Jr. was in it, Sandman [Howard Sims], yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Did you used to go to Fazil's [New York, New York]? The rehearsal space, Fazil's? Speaker 2: Fazil's? No, no, no. I think I heard of his name. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry Larry [Larry Crowe]. Speaker 2: Oh, no problem. But I think, I think 'Tap' though, it was a contemporary setting, contemporary time, but he brought in all the tap dancers that were famous way back, you know, that were still around and tapping, a lot of them like Honi Coles [Charles Coles], with Sammy Davis, they played characters in the movie, yeah, that's, that was made in the '80s [1980s] wasn't it? Made in the 1980s or early '90s [1990s]? Speaker 1: Possibly. Speaker 2: When you think about dance today, I mean do you like the dance that you see today? For the most part, you see people doing, you know-- Speaker 1: Do I like the dancers (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I enjoy--I like dancing, so I do like it. Speaker 2: Okay, so you're--you have an appreciation that goes beyond just tap then to other-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I go beyond that, yeah, of course. I like to see ballet, I like to see other, other folk dances. Story_ID: 608307 Speaker 1: You went through a period of time when you didn't, you didn't do a lot of dancing, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: So, what was it--what period are we talking here from? Speaker 2: The period I'm talking about is the late '30s [1930s], no--yeah, the late '30s [1930s] when I came back from the (unclear) shows (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: Yeah the early--the late '30s [1930s] to the early '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: And then you started dancing with the-- Speaker 2: With The Poms [The Three Poms]. Speaker 1: The Poms in the '40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then you danced--stayed--The Poms stayed together until what? Speaker 2: 'Til about-- Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty [1950]? Speaker 2: Fifty-one [1951] or '52 [1952], something like that. Speaker 1: And then? Speaker 2: Then I was--mother [Lottie Watkins Jones] took care of me, then I got a job with the telephone company [New York Telephone Company; Verizon Communications, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay, this is what I'm talking about, the period where you're working for the phone company. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And now, how did you get the phone company job? Speaker 2: Ruby [Ruby Riley] was working with it, in it, and she told me they were taking on--hiring, and I went and I--they took me. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: I became an operator. Speaker 1: Okay, and you rose up sort of the become (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I went to supervisor, that's as far as I went. Speaker 1: Okay, right, that's when there were a lot of jobs for operators in those days, I guess compared to now, when there's recording now on the phone. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you're in the op- did you retire from-- Speaker 2: I beg your pardon? Speaker 1: Did you retire from the telephone company? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, twenty-three years, I was in it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And retired, I retired in '68 [1968], and then I just did traveling then, and I was getting a pension and social security, I was able to do a little traveling, you know, on my own, no dance, when I was down, I used to go see--I have a couple of godchildren in Florida. I used to be there, go there and stay weeks and I'd come home, maybe go to the islands or something like that, just leisure time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Until, this came up, 'Shades of Harlem' ['Shades of Harlem: The Musical Revue of the Harlem Renaissance,' Jeree Palmer]. Story_ID: 608308 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about that now, what, what is 'Shades of Harlem' ['Shades of Harlem: The Musical Revue of the Harlem Renaissance,' Jeree Palmer] and when did it happen (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a musical that was supposed to be depicting the Cotton Club [New York, New York] era and one of the wo- the, star in it, wrote it, Jeree Wade, Jeree Palmer Wade [Jeree P. Wade]. Speaker 1: Okay, now this was performed at the Village Gate-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --down in Greenwich Village [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nine months, and then we started going on the road, intermittently, we did colleges, we did theatres here in the states, we went to Europe. Our first job in Europe, I think it was in Italy, we went to Perugia, the Perugia festival [Umbria Jazz Festival], and I think I was eighty-five, yeah. And we also went to Monte Carlo, there we worked, you know these businesses, you know, those big time businessmen, they had their--how can I explain that now? There was a commercial thing like, they get together and they invite the wives and the husbands, and they go there to Monte Carlo [Monaco], and I guess they discuss business, but they have the show at this theatre. I was there for three weeks. Speaker 1: Where did they--now you went to Paris [France], right? Or did you go to Paris? Speaker 2: Not to work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I've been there, but not to work. The places I've been were Perugia in Italy, Monte Carlo, Lithuania, Japan. Speaker 1: I know a lot of artists in the United States, I know in Chicago [Illinois], a lot of the jazz musicians who really pray- play progressive jazz, they spent most of their time in Europe. Speaker 2: And then they go to Paris, yeah. Speaker 1: They go to Amsterdam [the Netherlands], Paris, Italy, they even have records cut over there and everything. They've got like black expatriates, back there, like back in the old days, James Baldwin and Richard Wright and you got Alberta Hunter, do you know any of 'em? Speaker 2: Oh sh- I worked with her in the USO shows [United Service Organizations]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Did you ever, did you get her? Did y'all get her? Speaker 1: No, I didn't. Speaker 2: Oh, that would have been something else. Speaker 1: That was somebody that somebody that I thought I would raise to see if you knew her. Speaker 2: She was something else (laughter). Alberta was something else, we'd be in Japan, and your food, you get--they feed you, but at nighttime you get hungry, so she'd get--she'd get this canned food, and she'd eat from the can and if she didn't eat it all, she'd close it up, she'd eat it maybe the next day or the next day. It was a wonder she didn't get poisoning, she had a cast iron stomach. Speaker 1: I'll say, that sounds like it to me. That's something that I wouldn't try. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Eat out of the can, and eat some of it the next day, huh (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, but she was great. Story_ID: 608309 Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you about some of the other personalities and stuff that may have been in Europe in those days, you said you met--you went to Bricktop's place [Chez Bricktop, Paris, France], but you, you didn't really know her [Ada "Bricktop" Smith]. Speaker 2: No, I didn't know her. Speaker 1: But you did know Alberta Hunter. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You never met Josephine Baker? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: She was very, very popular over in Europe. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, she was the queen-- Speaker 1: Right, exactly. Speaker 2: --in France--Paris [France]. Speaker 1: Now did you, did you--were you able to bask in any of that glory yourself, because you're a black woman in Europe? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: It didn't make a difference (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, they were used to blacks by that time. Speaker 1: Okay, I was just-- Speaker 2: And when you went, when you went to Paris, the commoners, they didn't like you--blacks, when I was there, but the professionals would accept you, but the commoners, like you ask for directions, they look at you like you're a piece of dirt, that was the commoners, professionals treated you like you were human. Speaker 1: That's in- that's interesting because there's so many of the black people that went over there, who are artists, you know, said that it was so much better than in the United States, but-- Speaker 2: But these were white. Speaker 1: Yeah, but this--it was better if you were amongst the educated elite. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Not necessarily if you were among the regular people. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you would have been treated better, but I mean, it didn't matter, Paris is Paris, I didn't see where it was that great. I didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you ever take the show to the Caribbean or anything like that? Were you on a show that went to the Caribbean islands? Speaker 2: Did I ever take a show? Speaker 1: Yeah, the show to Jamaica or Trinidad (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I didn't take it, but the 'Shades of Harlem' ['Shades of Harlem: The Musical Revue of the Harlem Renaissance,' Jeree Palmer] went to St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands]. We went to St. Croix and did a show, that's the only one that we went to. Speaker 1: Were you ever on a show with Billie Holiday in those days? Speaker 2: No, no, only show I did was--with all the big stars was 'Motown Returns to the Apollo.' Speaker 1: Okay, that's in the, that's in the '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: Yeah, '84 [sic. 1985]. Speaker 1: Yeah '84 [1984]. Right, right, oh, I didn't ask you this, did you know the International Sweethearts of Rhythm? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were the all-woman orchestra, I didn't know them, but I think I knew the--I think I knew the pianist--or the drummer or something like that though. I heard, you know I knew of them. Story_ID: 608310 Speaker 1: You said you danced professionally until 1989. Speaker 2: 'Til I was eight- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Until you were eighty-nine, right, that's right, I'm sorry. Until you were eighty-nine. Speaker 2: That was two thousand and what? That was six years a- I mean, eighty-nine, I'm ninety-four, eighty-nine, five years ago. Speaker 1: Okay, so 2004, yeah? Okay, well how did you--do you have any advice for how you were able to dance that long? Speaker 2: Not really, I just liked to dance and they'd come and asked me would I go with the 'Shades of Harlem' ['Shades of Harlem: The Musical Revue of the Harlem Renaissance,' Jeree Palmer], naturally you know, we went off and on, and they said they was going to Little Rock [Arkansas], so I went to Little Rock. I told 'em, I don't think I could do my number, my specialty, but I did do 'Sweet Georgia Brown,' that was the thing, that was the dance that Juanita [Juanita Boisseau] and I did, we were the renaissance ladies, and I did do that one, but I didn't do my specialty in that. Story_ID: 608311 Speaker 1: Now you were honored in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was this in 2004 or-- Speaker 2: This was two thousand and--what's on that thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, we had the paper a few minutes ago, but-- Speaker 2: Here. Speaker 1: You got it? Okay. Speaker 2: Two thousand eight [2008]. Speaker 1: Two thousand eight [2008], that's just two years ago. So, they honored you in St. Louis. Speaker 2: Yeah, they honored me, I had the proclamation they gave me, and they, they named a day, Saturday, they named that Ludie Jones Day, holiday (laughter). Speaker 1: How did it make you feel to have the honors (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh good, very good. Speaker 1: Is this the greatest honor you ever had do you think? Speaker 2: Oh, it was, and teaching, you see I went there to be honored, and also to teach. So I had a class, and I used to teach the children, they could dance before I even saw them, but you know, I taught them what I knew. Speaker 1: Now, during the years when you were a telephone operator and a supervisor [at New York Telephone Company; Verizon Communications, Inc.], did you, did you teach class in Harlem [New York, New York] at all? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: So, you were just away from it altogether for a long time. Speaker 2: I think I did a show, I think, or something like that. I don't, I don't know, no, I didn't do any shows, no. Story_ID: 608312 Speaker 1: Well, do you have a particular philosophy of dance, about in terms of what you-- Speaker 2: Well, as far as tap is concerned, I, like I said before, to me, they have no style, that's my philosophy. The tap--they have very good feet and they can tap. Speaker 1: Some of the new one people (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, some of the new ones, the younger ones, but I don't go for their style. So, that's my only philosophy about that, they do have good feet and they can tap, in fact, they tap better than I do, but the style is not there, the presentation, to me, is not there. Speaker 1: Okay, it's athletic, but not, not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, right. Speaker 1: Now, so, you think that's how dance really has changed then? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it has changed. Speaker 1: It's more athletic now, than ever. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's hardcore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what I call it. Speaker 1: What kind of music do you listen to now? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't listen to bop, I don't listen to--what's that thing where they talk? Speaker 1: Hip hop, rap. Speaker 2: Rap, you got it, I don't listen to that. I like old fashioned music, with four bar- thirty-two bars and love songs, and what have you like Billie Holiday sings and Ella Fitzgerald, even in the younger ones, Sarah Vaughan, I like all that, Billy Eckstine, these are all stylists, they have a voice, to me. Frank Sinatra had a voice, Dean Martin, had a voice, but I mean, these kids nowadays, they just up there, they making money, glory for them, but I mean, I wouldn't go two steps to see 'em, really, cause I don't like what they do. Story_ID: 608313 Speaker 1: In terms of the Harlem [New York, New York] community, now, you lived in the place we are now, for twenty-three years? Speaker 2: No, forty. Speaker 1: Forty years, okay. Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. All right, that's right, and well, you've been here a long time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the Harlem community today? Speaker 2: My concern, is that the mothers, these young mothers are not teaching their children, and they're growing up without any teaching. They have no manners, they wanna fight, they're course, they're dressing--well I really--the dress they wear now, the pants hanging below their butts, no good, that's, that's like an insult, to me. Story_ID: 608314 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: No, not really, no. I don't have any regrets, I just go along with the program. I'm not a person who initiates things, initiates things, but I'll go along with your program. Speaker 1: Okay, now if you, if you could do anything that you wanted to do today, and you knew you wouldn't fail if you tried it, what would you do? Speaker 2: Dance (laughter). I go to the center [Lt. Joseph P. Kennedy Community Center, New York, New York], (cough) excuse me, and they have a line dance, they call it the line dances, I used to be able to dance--do that, but now, my balance is off, and I can't make turns, so, and my legs are bad, but I would love to. I get up and dance with 'em sometimes, but I don't--I just move, like this, move my hands or something, but that turning, I'll be like this, or that (laughter), but as far as turning, I can't turn, but I love to dance. Speaker 1: Well, you danced a long time and I, I just, I know that dancing can be hard on people, some of the great dancers of the past cannot move, and they're much younger than you are. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And dancing, I have a friend that danced in Broadway shows and-- Speaker 2: Oh, that's hard. Speaker 1: The description of dancing in high heel shoes, for hours on the stage (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's hard, that's hard, that's hard. Speaker 1: --that's gotta be hard on your back, your legs and everything. Speaker 2: Well, I danced--I have my shoes, if y'all want to take a picture of them. They're forty years, thirty years old (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you do anything, did you do anything special to avoid injury, during all this time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, and I didn't like some people, some actors, and actresses, dancers, they warm up, I never used to warm up. Just go on point blank, soon as I hit that stage, that's it, I'm a ham. Soon as I hit that stage, I'm warming up. Speaker 1: Okay, so you just, just do it, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I love it. Story_ID: 608315 Speaker 1: Well, these are two questions we always ask, and the first question is what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy? Dancing, if they have pictures of me dancing, that's--is that what you mean? Speaker 1: Yeah, what do you consider, you know, your legacy of things that you left behind? Speaker 2: That, and I think I'm a nice person. I have friends, and they think I'm nice, so, what else (laughter)? Story_ID: 608316 Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to that one actually-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it's just phrased differently, and-- Speaker 2: Ask Jeannie [Jean Miller], she'll tell you (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) The last question is, and we ask everybody this, ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered? As a nice person, and what else, just for my personality, I'd like people to say about me, "Well, she was a nice person and she had a wonderful personality," and that's ego (laughter), but that's the way I would like to be remembered. Story_ID: 608317 Speaker 1: That's me when I was about a year--almost a year old, taken in downtown where I lived, at 248 West 64th Street [New York, New York]. And-- Speaker 2: It's about 1916? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's about 1916. Speaker 2: That's my father, Luther Jones, and that was taken--what year, I don't know. That's my father, that's all I can say (laughter). Speaker 1: He's got grey hair there, he must have been older (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, he was about, daddy was about--but he, he, had grey hair young too, so he might have been about sixty. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That glare is in the photo right? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's in the photo. Speaker 2: He's about sixty, um-hm. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: That's he again, again, turn up. Speaker 1: Well, we always do 'em long ways. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Oh, that's my father again (simultaneous). Story_ID: 608318 Speaker 1: That's me, [HistoryMaker] Ludie Jones, taken in Small's Paradise [New York, New York], 135th Street and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard]. And I was one of The Swinging Seniors, and that was in, that was in the year 1984. I'm sixty-eight there. Speaker 2: That's pretty good for sixty-eight. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Those are The Three Poms doing a show on television with Louis Armstrong. And that's Sylvia [Sylvia Warner], Pom Pom [Geraldine Ball] and Ludie, we did the show in about 1947--just adlibbing there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISUCCSION) Speaker 2: That's the act I was in. That's Sylvia on the left--on the right, and Ludie's on the left, Pom is in the middle, that's on television. Speaker 1: What show was it, do you remember? Speaker 2: With Louis--that was like with the bands of the week, I think. They used to have them with bands of the week, in the '40s [1940s], not, not, 'Bands of America' ['Cities Service Band of America']. Speaker 1: Oh, a '40s [1940s], television show? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I didn't know--'48 [1948]? Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere around there. Speaker 1: This is my brother, Earl Jones, Stephen Earl Jones, he was about twenty-four, I guess, taken at a picnic. Speaker 2: That's my oldest sister, Gladys [Gladys Jones]-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's Gladys Beatrice Jones, my sister. That was taken in a bedroom looks like, nah, what year, probably in the '30s [1930s], late '40s [1940s], late '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's my older brother, Julius P. Johnston [Julius Johnston], taken at--it looks like Atlantic City [New Jersey], what year, I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, that's me, that's Ludie Jones, me, we're at a picnic, some park, I was about thirty, thirty-three. Speaker 2: That's me again, Ludie Jones, at some dance--actually have a dress on, (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Why do you say it like that? 'Cause you were a tomboy? Speaker 2: 'Cause, the fella I'm with, I don't know who he is (laughter). Speaker 1: That's Ludie Jones' family, mother's [Lottie Watkins Jones] in the front, Ludie's on her right, and I have a friend there named Shorty [ph.], my nephew Billy [ph.], my niece- niece-in-law, Sarah [ph.], my niece, Juanita [ph.], and my sister Vivian [Vivian Jones Stanley], on the left, on my left. Speaker 2: This, I don't know where it was taken (laughter), that's Ludie Jones anyhow. It was at a dance I think, yeah, had to be at a dance, and my hair was black, brown (laughter). Speaker 1: That's Ludie Jones, receiving an award, has my name on it, I was at Pace College [Pace University, New York, New York], Ludie Jones. Speaker 2: That's The Swinging Seniors, doing a show, and that's Chickie Martin, Alice Wilkie, Ludie Jones, Myrtle Hawkins, Juanita Russell [sic. Juanita Boisseau], and Ruby Riley, going from right to left, my right to left. Speaker 1: These are my Swinging--my tapping seniors. These--we are doing a show at some home, it's on there somewhere. Name them all, I can't do that right now. That's Bernice [ph.], Meg [ph.], Margie [ph.], D- Dee Dee [ph.], I can't name 'em all, and that little woman with the white blouse on, that's--oh, I can't think of her name, can't think of her name (laughter). Speaker 2: It's The Swinging Seniors, in costume. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: They're the tapping seniors, tapping seniors, these are my pupils. Speaker 1: My godchildren, that's Gloria Sexton [ph.], and Cynthia Alexander [ph.], and naturally that's me on the end, on my left. I look fat (laughter). Speaker 2: Coliseum [London Coliseum] in London, England, that's my first show--not my first show house, but this is where 'Lew Leslie's Blackbirds' ['Lew Leslie's Blackbirds of 1934'] worked. Coliseum in London, England, I think that's me standing outside too. That was 19--I don't know what year it was, but the Coliseum was in 1934. Speaker 1: Swinging Seniors, that's Myrtle, Ludie, and Ruby, starting from my, my left, Myrtle, Ludie and Ruby, Swinging Seniors. Story_ID: 608319 Speaker 1: Swinging Seniors [The Swinging Seniors] in Atlantic City [New Jersey], I can't see them from here. We're at the Atlantic City in Club Harlem. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Did you want to call out the names of the people? Speaker 1: I can't see them from here. That's Tempie [Tempie Fletcher] on the end, on my right. That's Ru- it's the same picture? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's just blown up a little. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. That's Ruby Riley, Lyle [Lyle Smith], Tempie, oh, going from my right, to left. That's Ruby Riley, Lyle, Tempie-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): At the bottom row? Speaker 1: Yeah, right here, and this one is Myrtle [Myrtle Hawkins], and Chickie [Chickie Martin], and I think I'm in the back, right here. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So, you're second from your right in the back? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great, thank you. Speaker 1: Okay? Speaker 2: I can't see that one. That's 'Shades' though, I'm pretty sure. Yeah, that's 'Shades of Harlem' ['Shades of Harlem: The Musical Revue of the Harlem Renaissance,' Jeree Palmer]--no, this is Swinging Seniors. That's--on my right, Myrtle, in the middle is [HistoryMaker] Ludie Jones, Alice Wilkie, and Juanita Boisseau, Swinging Seniors. I made a mistake. No, it has to be Swinging Seniors, 'cause Myrtle was not in the show. Okay, has to be the Swinging Seniors. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's Ruby and me receiving flowers in one of our shows, at the school--what's his name? LaGuardia High School [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] had a show there, that's Ruby and me receiving flowers. Speaker 1: That's Juanita and me, this is, this is in Swinging Seniors, Juanita on my left and Ludie on my right. I don't know where that is, make this one here 'Shades of Harlem.' Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. You wanna keep holding that? Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: This is Ludie, dancing at Madam Walker's--honor to Madam Walker, Madam T. Walker the hairdresser. Speaker 1: C.J. Walker [Madam C.J. Walker]? Speaker 2: Huh, Madam Walker, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is Ludie Jones at a dance, it's all I can say (laughter), when she was with 'Shades of Harlem.' Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Ludie Jones, at the age of nineteen, graduating from high school, Wadleigh High School [Wadleigh High School for Girls; Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts, New York, New York], 1934. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): How do you spell Wadleigh? Speaker 2: W-A-D-L-E-I-G-H, W-A-D-L-E-I-G-H, okay? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: 'Shades of Harlem,' now from my right, in the front, is Allison [ph.] and Nina [ph.], and it's Delphine [ph.], Alice Wilkie, Ludie Jones, Jeree Palmer Wade [Jeree P. Wade], she's the author of the musical, and Juanita Boisseau, Ruby Riley--uh, what is her name? Ty Stephens, she was one of the stars, and the musical director on my right, is Owens [Frank Owens]--what is his first name? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Oh, I forgot one-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Say who you forgot. Speaker 2: Branice, Branice McKenzie, is next to the director. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Here? Speaker 2: No, she's next to the director on my right, down here, on the right, my right. You see the man? That's Branice, that's Branice. Speaker 1: Everybody sees my finger here. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's me at a dance. I was at a dance at the Alhambra Ballroom [Harlem Alhambra, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Beauty, beauty-- Speaker 1: What, what's the name of your group? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE 2): Honeys and Bears [Harlem Honeys and Bears]. Speaker 1: The Honeys and Bear dance, from the community center I attend [Lt. Joseph P. Kennedy Community Center, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That was on the National Tap Dance Day--what's her name? The woman beside me on my left is Helen Banks and she was also honored, and I was honored. Delilah Jackson was the sponsor of it--honoring. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's 1934, 'Blackbirds,' Blackbirds of 19--'Lew Leslie's Blackbirds' ['Lew Leslie's Blackbirds of 1934'], I was a chorie then, Valaida Snow was the headliner, in the middle, and I am, from my right, third, I was nineteen years old. Story_ID: 608320 Speaker 1: This is 'Blackbirds of 1934' ['Lew Leslie's Blackbirds of 1934']. Speaker 2: Okay. That one right there. Speaker 1: And this is Renetta [ph.], her sister Lil- Precious [ph.], Ludie--no that's not Ludie, I don't know, I can't see. No, I'm on the top, I think, I don't know. I don't know the others, all I know is this is from 'Lew Leslie's Blackbirds.' Speaker 2: You're probably on the top. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, you're not in any of the ones here (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm here, here I am. Speaker 1: Oh, is that you? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's me right there. Right here, this is me. Speaker 1: This one? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's [HistoryMaker] Ludie Jones in Japan. What city was I in now--Tokyo [Japan], northern, I forget where I was, but I was with the USO show [United Service Organizations], that was 1948, USO show in Japan. That's the outfit we had to wear. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, okay-- Speaker 2: Khakis, khakis. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Oh, that's my ninetieth birthday, on my right, is--on my right is Ruby [Ruby Riley], I'm blowing out the candles, that's another Ruby [ph.], and that's, that's--what's her name--Mae [ph.] is on--Dorrice [ph.], and then Mae. Mae is the teacher of the line dancing. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Oh, that was just recently. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's 'Shades of Harlem' ['Shades of Harlem: The Musical Revue of the Harlem Renaissance,' Jeree Palmer] again, my name is on there, that's Umbrio [sic. Umbria Jazz Festival], that's Italy. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's where I received my proclamation, and Saturday was my day, named for me, Ludie Jones holiday...