 Story_ID: 98057 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The History Makers. Our Videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Beverly Elaine Johnson, B-E-V-E-R-L-Y, E-L-A-I-N-E, J-O-H-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: All right and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 10th, 1953, Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Occupation is talk show host. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so that's the title. Speaker 2: I'm a talk show host. Well news director, talk show host. Speaker 1: News director. Speaker 2: And talk show host. Speaker 1: At WDIA. Speaker 2: WDIA. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: It is April 25th, 2014. Speaker 1: I think it's 24th I think, right. Speaker 2: Is it the 24th? It's 25th. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yeah, April 25th, 2014, yeah. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Are at WDIA Radio in the studio here at our Clear Channel offices in Memphis, Tennessee. Story_ID: 98058 Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: Greens and hot water cornbread. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, red. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Winter. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: Caribbean. Speaker 1: A favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: As you treat yourself, you'll treat others. Story_ID: 98059 Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but, but separately. So we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Julia Atlas Danner Johnson, Julia, J-U-L-I-A, Atlas, A-T-L-A-S, Danner, D-A-N-N-E-R, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: All right now is there a story behind the Atlas in your mother's name? Speaker 2: The Atlas, she was named after her uncle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her uncle's, her mother's [Maybell Rodgers-Danner] brother was named Atlas. Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story behind his name? Speaker 2: He was named after his father, his father was Atlas. Speaker 1: Okay, so this name runs in the family. Speaker 2: Right, yes. Speaker 1: And how far does it go back, do you know? Speaker 2: I don't know how far it goes back, but it was her mother's brother and her mother's father. Speaker 1: Yeah, there seems to be an indication of strength. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, holding the world up. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, and what is your, your mother's date, date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: October 27th, 1932 [sic, 1931]. Speaker 1: Okay and where was she born? Speaker 2: Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family and what were they doing? Speaker 2: I can only trace it back to her grandfather, which was my great-great grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That I, I knew of. I knew him. And that's as far as I can trace it back. I knew some of her mother's sisters and her--I didn't know her grandmother. She had died before I was born. But I remember my great-great-grandfather, E. B. Danner, Sr. Speaker 1: E. B. Speaker 2: The initials E. B. Danner, D-A-N-N-E-R, Sr. Speaker 1: Did E. B. stand for anything? Speaker 2: Enoch Burl [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right and what did he do for, for a living? Speaker 2: He was a preacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A minister, yeah. Speaker 1: What denomination? Speaker 2: Methodist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal]. Speaker 1: C.M.E., all right. Speaker 2: And then he, then he changed over and went to the Baptists. Speaker 1: All right. And then he--now he goes back to, let's see your mother was born in '32 [1932] [sic, 1931]. I would guess he's got to go back to, what, the 19th century, 1880's, 1870's. So he would-- Speaker 2: I think, yeah. Speaker 1: Was he the generation after the Civil War or after Emancipation? Speaker 2: Could have been, yeah, cause I'm thinking his father--yeah. Speaker 1: So his father might have been a slave. Speaker 2: Yeah, exact--well, or close to it, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: All right are there any, any stories from your mother's side of the family about Emancipation or the end of slavery? Speaker 2: No, never, never talked about it. Never heard anything. Speaker 1: Okay, and does your--does your mother's family have a tradition of always having originated in Memphis or, or is there some other location? Speaker 2: I, I heard my mother say that her grandfather came from Milan, Tennessee and they never--just, just Milan, but really didn't know anything else but he came from Milan, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To Memphis. Speaker 1: And where is Milan in relationship to Memphis? Speaker 2: It is going, going I would say from Memphis you would go north, north Speaker 1: Okay. Is it, is it close, or is it-- Speaker 2: No, it's not that close. It, it's not far, but it, it's not close. It's, it's--I think it's past Covington, Tennessee, in that area, around maybe Henning [Tennessee], somewhere in that area. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now okay so that as far back as you can go. Any stories about your great-grandmother at all? Do you know anything about her? Speaker 2: I don't know anything about her. I've heard that she was a very stern woman. I also know her name was Julia, which is my mother's first name. That she was also one of the founders of our church that I attend now here in Memphis. She was one of the founders that founded that church, Mount Pisgah C.M.E. Church. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so she was one of the founders of Mount Pisgah CME. Now did your--then did she move along with your great-grandfather to the Baptist church? Speaker 2: No she didn't. She didn't, no. Speaker 1: Okay, so he moved along. Speaker 2: He moved along, but they stayed Methodist, and my mother grew up in, in the Methodist church. Speaker 1: So did they stay together? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah they stayed together for a while and I understand--I think they divorced later on. But the grandchildren stayed in the grandmother's house. Speaker 1: Okay, Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then the family stayed at Mount Pisgah. Speaker 2: Exactly. Story_ID: 98060 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right so, so now your grandparents were who? Grandfather and grandmother. Speaker 2: My grandmother was Maybelle Rodgers-Danner. Speaker 1: Okay, and about what year was she born? Speaker 2: Gosh, you know what? I, I don't know. Really don't know [1911]. Speaker 1: Okay, but do you have any idea what she, what she did for a living or what she-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah she was--my, my grandmother was a domestic, she was a maid. Speaker 1: Okay, and any stories about her? Speaker 2: A lot of stories, very wise woman. Cause I remember her--I mean she, she helped make me who I am today. So I have a lot of wonderful stories about my grandmother. She was a great cook, a very wise--lot of stories. Had wisdom, you know. She could dress, loved to dress. Always--and I think that's where I got liking to shop. Always--people say she was always sharp and-- Speaker 1: Now did she work for the same family? Speaker 2: She worked for several different families. I remember her working for Dr. Alan [ph.], who was a pediatrician, who took care of my sister [Angela Johnson-Dorsey] and I. You know if anything went wrong. And then she--after that, I recall her working for the Dobbs family. They were the people who owned the Dobbs International, the Dobbs Houses back in the day. And I can remember those people that she worked for until she became ill and couldn't work anymore. Speaker 1: Now the Dobbs Houses, were they hotels or-- Speaker 2: They were, they were like, like they were like the Waffle Houses, you know kind of, they were kind of like that and they were called the Dobbs Houses and they--and she worked for the man who owned those. Speaker 1: Okay, we didn't have those in Ohio, that's why I'm thinking (unclear). Now I understand. Okay now [unclear] restaurants. Speaker 2: More like the Waffle Houses, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about your grandfather? Speaker 2: He was E. B. Danner, Junior, Enoch Burl [ph.], Junior. And my grandparents were divorced. And my grandfather left Memphis [Tennessee] and migrated to Detroit [Michigan]. And end up working for a factory, the car company you know, General Motors, General Motors, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now was he a minister as well? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, he, he played jazz and played the piano. He was jazz, no he wasn't--no. Speaker 1: So this is almost like the jazz singer (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. I understand that he, he, he could play--played in all the little clubs in Memphis and but soon after that left and had to get out of Memphis so he went to Detroit. Speaker 1: So what did he play? Speaker 2: He played piano. Speaker 1: Okay. Now yeah I've heard lots of stories about Paradise Valley in Detroit where all the jazz musicians played. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so he was on that scene as well as working in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, working at General Motors, yeah. Speaker 1: Like a lot of people had two or three things they were-- Speaker 2: Exactly, had to, had to make it during those times. Speaker 1: Okay. So did, did he have a family, another family there? Speaker 2: Well he eventually did remarry. He did remarry, and but he didn't have any other children. He, he married a woman who had been married before, grown children, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so did your mother [Julia Atlas Danner Johnson] stay in contact with her father? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, did, very much, very much stayed in contact. Story_ID: 98061 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what did your mother [Julia Atlas Danner Johnson] say about growing up? What was it like for her growing up in Memphis? Speaker 2: I think it was, it was, it was pretty good. She was a very, very talented woman. Could sing, could act. You know I'm, I'm thinking that during that time it was segregation and there was some--probably some hard times, but basically as a child--and they grew up in the community, Orange Mound community [Memphis, Tennessee], which was one of the first black communities in the United States with homeowners. So life was pretty good as far--you know they lived in the community, went to church in the community, went to school in the community as well. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like a middle class place. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes they were. Speaker 1: All right, all right so Orange Mound, never heard of it before. Speaker 2: Orange Mound, yeah, yeah Orange Mound, Tennessee they called it. Speaker 1: Okay. This is really a suburb of Memphis, or-- Speaker 2: Well exactly. It was a community. It was the first community here black people owned their own homes. So it was basically black people in the community. If there were stores, they may have had a few white merchants in the area, but basically it was black folks owning their own stores. They had movie theaters, you know the dentist, the doctor, the teachers. If you look, if you go back in some history, I think the Smithsonian has done a, a piece on Orange Mound. You'll see there's pieces out now about that community, how strong it was. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Orange Mound, okay. And now what high school did she go to? Speaker 2: My mother? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Melrose High School. It was a school that went from one through 12th. Speaker 1: Now I've interviewed a lot of people where that's true and you know you don't--especially in the South. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You don't hear about in the North so much. Speaker 2: Exactly, but they had--it was all one stop shop. And it's interesting that my mother's first grade teacher there was my first grade teacher there at Melrose High School. And now it's--now that's school is now--it's only a high school, from nine to 12. But, but back then it was one through 12. Speaker 1: Okay, now you say your mother was--could sing and she could act. Did she have any outlets for--I know for singing you can--you can sing in the church or you can sing in the-- Speaker 2: Well basically she would sing in church and in, you know basically they would sing around in different churches. But they were known for their--she and her sister, she had one sister that--known for their singing. They were kind of like a duo. Speaker 1: Okay, so would they, would they sing like secular and gospel music? Speaker 2: Yes, both, yes. Speaker 1: All right, okay. So did she--did she have any professional success with singing? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she could have, but no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. But she had--she was talented. Speaker 2: Yes, very talented. Speaker 1: And what, what about the act, the acting? Was there any outlet for-- Speaker 2: I think basically she did was what I'm hearing in high school and college. That she did, did her acting. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now let's see. So now college, where did she go to college? Speaker 2: She started off at LeMoyne-Owen College [Memphis, Tennessee]. It was LeMoyne College then. And eventually graduated from Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi. LeMoyne is located here in Memphis. Speaker 1: Right. Rust College, Holly Springs is right over the border right (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, just right in Mississippi, yeah it's not too far. It's about, Rust is about 27 miles from here, Holly Springs. Speaker 1: All right, where John Rust, was his name--Hiram? I mean Revels was the president, who had been the Senator from Mississippi, was it. Yeah, yeah first president [sic, Revels was the first president of Alcorn State University in Lorman, Mississippi and was a theology professor at Rust College]. So--yeah, Hiram Revels. Okay so now what did your mother major in in college? Speaker 2: Education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Elementary education. Speaker 1: All right, so did she go on to teach school? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Here in the Memphis area? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 98062 Speaker 1: All right now we'll leave her there for a minute and go to your father's side and then put them together. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: William Van Johnson, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Van, V-A-N, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay now is there a story behind Van Johnson? Cause I know there was a famous actor. Speaker 2: Actor, right. Everybody always brings up that. Yeah, the story is my father's original, the name he was born with, he didn't like it. And he changed his own name to Van after the actor Van Johnson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, he was not born with the name Van. He did not like his name--middle name. Speaker 1: Do you know what that name was? Speaker 2: Virginius [ph.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a mouthful, yeah. Speaker 2: Virginius. Speaker 1: Virginius. Speaker 2: William Virginius Johnson. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And so he, he didn't like that and so yeah he changed it to Van and has been known as Van ever since. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is March 7th, 1931 [sic, 1930], born in Germantown, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay, and that's, that's nearby as well. Speaker 2: Yes, that's nearby. Speaker 1: Okay, now how far back can you trace your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: I can trace it back to his father. His mother [Catherine Einley-Johnson] died when he was a young boy, so he really didn't know his mother. I think she died when he was about four years old, yeah four. But I remember his fa--I remember his father, my grandfather who was Herbert, Herbert Johnson. And he was a minister, a C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] minister. Speaker 1: All right, and was he from Germantown. Speaker 2: Germantown as well. Speaker 1: Is there any other origin for your father's side of the family, or, or place that they can go back to that's not Germantown? Speaker 2: I have heard the stories that some of the ancestors, you know they--Jamaica, they came--Jamaica when they--Jamaica. But as far as I know, Germantown and this area and Tennessee, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you might have some Jamaican an--ancestors, okay, all right, okay. Okay, that would go back like a generation before your father, or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: On your, on your mother's side, on, on his. Speaker 2: On, on his father's side, his father, his father's side. And his father's mother, on that side. Story_ID: 98063 Speaker 1: Now what did your father say about growing up? Speaker 2: He was a country boy, from the country. And they moved out of the country, what was Germantown [Tennessee], to Orange Mound. And, and I, and I laugh because he was known in high school as "country gentlemen." Say he was very mannerable young man and they called him country gentleman. But he said--I can say it was a little hard but they made it through. Not a--they didn't talk a lot of stories on, on childhood. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did your fa--your father have any special talents? Speaker 2: He, yeah he played football and basketball and he ran track. Speaker 1: So was he good? Speaker 2: Yes, I understand he was good. I understand he was very good, very good. Speaker 1: All right, okay, all right. So now--and he went to the same high school? Speaker 2: Same high school, Melrose High School. Graduated from Melrose. Speaker 1: Okay, and did he-- Speaker 2: He graduated from LeMoyne College [now LeMoyne-Owen College in Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this next question may seem obvious, but is--where did they meet? High school or-- Speaker 2: At the high school. Cause my mo--I remember my mother [Julia Atlas Danner Johnson] telling, telling me that how she met, she met his--met my father's sister first. She was in her class, eighth grade. And new girl coming, you know, move into the community and coming to class. And she said she, you know be--befriended his sister and they became friends. And she told him about how I like your brother and the rest was history. So she really met my, my aunt, my dad's sister first. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did they, did they get married before they went to LeMoyne or, or after? Speaker 2: They got married after they enrolled in LeMoyne. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then they got married and my dad went on and my mother dropped out just to be a housewife. And then I came along. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so what did your dad major in? Speaker 2: Biology. Speaker 1: Okay, did he go on to be-- Speaker 2: He went--he came out and graduated and was a biology teacher a couple of years at Jeter, [E.E.] Jeter High School here in Memphis. Speaker 1: And did he do something else after that? Speaker 2: Yeah, he left Memphis and migrated to Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay and then Ann Arbor Michigan, did, did, did he have a job waiting for him there? Speaker 2: No. He went there and because his sister it's great opportunities here. So when he first got there he worked at the post office. He didn't go into teaching, he worked in the post office. Then he eventually started his own company, a painting company. Speaker 1: Okay, painting houses? Speaker 2: Painting houses. Speaker 1: Okay. All right so, so is that, is that what he did for the rest of his-- Speaker 2: He painted houses and yeah, that was the rest of it, yeah. And then he went into--he had a contract working for the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], was the last thing. Speaker 1: As a painter basically? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98064 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you think about your parents' talents, their personalities, their sense of humor, what they look like, what they walk like, what they talk like. Who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My mother [Julia Atlas Danner Johnson]. My mother had the sense of humor. Loved to laugh, loved to hear jokes, tell jokes. And I think I, I got that from my mother. My dad [William Van Johnson] had a sense of humor, but my mother is the one who--with the laughter. Laughter was always in our home. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Some things she would see and would make it funny. You know whether it was somebody walking on the street, or somebody in the church, you know. We, we could laugh. It was always something that we could laugh about. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Now what kind of personality did your father have? Speaker 2: My father was stern disciplinarian. You know he wanted to--as my mother would say, he wanted to be a big shot, you know. So he had that, that air about him you know. He was, he was a no-nonsense kind of guy, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now and apparently he had a, a strong business sense to be able to sustain a business. Speaker 2: Yeah he did. Speaker 1: And then even, you know, get this relationship going with the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 98065 Speaker 1: Well tell me about your brothers and sisters. Can you name them from the oldest on up to the--and, and put yourself in order? Speaker 2: I'm the first. And then it's my sister Angela [Johnson-Dorsey]. My parents had two girls, so I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's just the-- Speaker 2: Yeah and my sister. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you grew up then, did any other relatives live, live, live with you or was it just you, you and your, your parents and your sister? Speaker 2: Basically growing up it was--now I can remember here in Memphis [Tennessee] that my mother's sister lived with us for a brief period then. You know she had gotten married and then to Ann Arbor, Michigan. And basically as elementary school, nobody, but then after--my parents [Julia Atlas Danner Johnson and William Van Johnson] separated. And then I can remember teenager, my grandmother living, her mother [Maybell Rodgers-Danner] living with us. So yeah, basically, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And what does your sister do now? Speaker 2: What does she do? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: She is an accountant for a hospital here. Story_ID: 98066 Speaker 1: Okay. All right now Ann Arbor [Michigan] always seemed to be cited as a pleasant place to live. What was--did, did you live in a black community in Ann Arbor, or how was it-- Speaker 2: We lived in a--Ann Arbor, you know Ann Arbor is a, is a college town. Everything is centered around the University of Michigan. Where I grew up in Ann Arbor, our neighborhood was, was mixed. So we had blacks and whites and other nationalities who lived in the, in the neighborhood, surrounding neighborhood. Interesting, our street was predominantly a black street. It wasn't a black neighborhood, but our street was a predominantly a black street. Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what street was it? Speaker 2: Woodlawn. Speaker 1: Okay. And okay, and you know do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: From Ann Arbor or form Memphis [Tennessee]? Speaker 1: The earliest one, if it was from Memphis-- Speaker 2: You know what? The earliest I, I can--my memory is pretty good. I can go back as far as remembering when I was about four years old. My great-uncle was babysitting me. And my parents was out. And in, in the houses here, I don't know if you remember, they had what they called the floor furnaces. And I guess he went to sleep and I got away and I fell and burned my thigh on the floor furnace. And still got those scars on there. But I can kind of remember that, I think about four years old. I can remember being in the first grade [Melrose High School]. I, I can--I see, see my first grade teacher vividly. I can name all my teachers from first through sixth grade, no problem. So those are earliest childhood memories. Good times, I always had a good time. I was a--being the first, first child, the eldest and the first child for my grandparents that, you know I was kind of spoiled. And, but I was a loner. I enjoyed being by myself and playing with my toys. And then until my sister came along three years later. Story_ID: 98067 Speaker 1: All right, so Ann, Ann Arbor [Michigan] wasn't so bad a place to grow up and you were saying, and we always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: In Ann Arbor or Memphis [Tennessee] or-- Speaker 1: Well you, you left Ann Arbor when you were how old? Speaker 2: Well I, I left Memphis, we moved to Ann Arbor when I was in the second grade. And, and was there for that year. Speaker 1: Was that 19, 1960 right? Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959], '60 [1960], and we, we moved in second grade. Whatever happened for us, what reasons, my mother [Julia Atlas Danner Johnson] decided that she didn't like Ann Arbor and she was leaving my father so she moved back to Memphis and he stayed in Ann Arbor. So my sister, we came back to Memphis. So third grade, fourth grade, fifth grade, I attended school in Memphis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So what, and that--what I, what I loved about Memphis, we had an amusement park here. The fairgrounds, we called it the fairgrounds. I loved going to the fairgrounds. I loved going shopping on Main Street downtown. Speaker 1: Okay so this would have been like-- Speaker 2: It was, it was probably about '60 [1960], '61 [1961], '62 [1962]. Yeah I'm thinking sixty--between '61 [1961], '62 [1962] and '63 [1963]. So some part of '63 [1963] that I was in Memphis. And then that, then left Memphis after fifth grade, sixth grade moved back to Ann Arbor. And I can remember that I was in sixth grade cause I can remember when President [John F.] Kennedy was killed. So I can remember that. So third, fourth, fifth in Memphis, and then back to Ann Arbor. Sounds and sights of, of Ann Arbor, the college, know the college, the campus, those sites. Speaker 1: So you spent a lot of time on the campus? Speaker 2: Well in that area because during the--around in that area they had the movie theaters, you know downtown was close to the campus. So we were always doing some activities in Ann Arbor. Quaint little-- I remember we loved the Dairy Queen. I remember it was a treat for us to go to McDonald's and remember the hamburgers being fifteen cents. That was, that was a big treat for us. My dad used to take us. And Ann Arbor was good, good, as, as a child. I remember my dad [William Van Johnson] when we would go, go on a trip you know it was, it was, it was a treat when he would take us to Detroit [Michigan] and go to those sites. But you know we used to do--back in the day families would get in their cars and drive and so we would go to Detroit and, or Ypsilanti, which was like five miles from Ann Arbor and those--always went to the drive-in movie in Ypsilanti. Can see that just, just as plain. So that was a good-- Speaker 1: Eastern Michigan University-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Eastern is in Ypsilanti, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, and in those days, correct me if I'm wrong, Detroit was like the New York City of the Midwest. Speaker 2: Yes it was. Yes it was, yeah. And Michigan Avenue, oh my goodness. It was, it was something else, it was fabulous. Speaker 1: Yeah, those the days when Motown was-- Speaker 2: Motown was, was hot, yeah. Speaker 1: Detroit had, still had the jobs. Speaker 2: Exactly, they did, yeah. It was booming, it was booming. It really was good. And then my grandfather [E.B. Danner] was still living there too. So we would go over, my father would take us over to visit my grandfather. So he was still there. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was living in Detroit. Speaker 2: My grandfather was still living in Detroit, yeah. Speaker 1: Working at General Motors, right. Speaker 2: Yes, right. Story_ID: 98068 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now so, so you--what did you like the most about school? What was your favorite subject? Speaker 2: Speech and theater, and I liked history in school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now considering the fact that you're, you host a talk show and done so for a long time, were you influenced by the talk shows on television or radio in those days? Did you pay attention to those? Speaker 2: No, no. I always say that how I got in, in the radio business is a fluke. Because my aspirations in, in high school was to be an actress on Broadway [New York City, New York]. I wanted to act. I wanted to be in New York. And-- Speaker 1: So when, when did you first have that idea? Was it in high school, or did you-- Speaker 2: Junior high. It was probably elementary cause I was always singing and, and speaking and performing for my parents' friends or church. So I was always doing that. So I think that, that started early on that I wanted to be an actress, you know. Speaker 1: Did, did, did you have a favorite actress at that time or-- Speaker 2: I can't recall, no. Speaker 1: Or a favorite performer? Speaker 2: At that time to think about, that's a great question. Did I really--no I just wanted to--cause I saw, saw these people on TV or in the movies and I wanted to do that. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite movie? Speaker 2: Yes. My favorite movie is "The Women" with Norma Shearer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I am a, I am a old classic movie buff. My favorite movie is "The Women". Speaker 1: Yeah believe it or not, I've actually seen that. So we didn't work a couple of years ago and I saw it on Turner Classic Movies one, one night. Speaker 2: Yeah, my favorite. And, and I like the Bette Davis movies and the, the Joan Crawford's movies, yeah. Speaker 1: So did your mother [Julia Atlas Danner Johnson] like movies? Speaker 2: Yes, loved movies. And I think her favorite was "Gone With the Wind". Speaker 1: Okay, all right so did you--now you said church provided some opportunities to speak in public. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know when we would--we'd have plays in churches and, and the church, and so I was always in the play. I took private, I took drama lessons. My dad [William Van Johnson] always had, had us in some kind of activities. So in the summer time, I took drama lessons so I can remember my first big play was "The Wizard of Oz". We did that, and so--and, and the community, the-- Speaker 1: Was there like a nice youth community theater? Speaker 2: Exactly, in Ann Arbor [Michigan], so we did a lot of stuff with the, the--at the community center. We called it the community center. So I would do some things there. So I always liked to act. And I always made up plays and I, I would write plays and I would always get the kids in the neighborhood and direct them. We would do a play. And we would do plays for the people in the neighborhood. And we would, you know, call them, okay, and they would come and, and watch us perform. Speaker 1: Well what were some of the themes of your plays (unclear)? Speaker 2: Basically they were mostly musicals. You know we would sing and dance. So they were, they were a lot of musicals. And I think that's why I like musicals today as well. And that's why I wanted to be on Broadway to sing in a musical. Story_ID: 98069 Speaker 1: Now I would guess, I think I'm probably right, a lot of performers came through Ann Arbor [Michigan] in those days, for the students and--as well as speakers. Speaker 2: Exactly, cause a lot of theater going on in Ann Arbor. A whole lot of theater. Speaker 1: And so, so did you get a chance to see live theater in Ann Arbor? Speaker 2: Yes, a whole lot of, yeah we did that a lot. For entertainment, yeah, go out to live theater. Did that a whole lot. Speaker 1: Can, can you remember some of the shows you saw? Speaker 2: Goodness, "Unsinkable Molly Brown", I can remember that. "Bye Bye Birdie", that was on, you know those kinds of things. "West Side Story", I remember seeing that. Speaker 1: Live. Speaker 2: Live. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a, I mean you know, living near a university [University of Michigan in Ann Arbor] provides a lot of perks and that's one of the-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Yeah, you, you, you, you learned a lot of cultures and, and, and the arts, they were big on the arts. Really big in Ann Arbor on the arts. Speaker 1: Did they show a lot of the old movies on campus in those days? Speaker 2: I don't know so much old movies. I guess the movies in that, in that time, in that era that they showed around the campus. I know now in Ann Arbor one of the movie theaters, they've closed the--it is an old theater where they do show the old classics now. The Michigan Theater, it's called the Michigan Theater. Speaker 1: Okay, so the old movies you, you saw on television. Speaker 2: Exactly, right. And then or, or like I said, the live performances. There was, there was a lot of theater going on in Ann Arbor, so we went to a lot of theaters and see the plays and different things like that. Speaker 1: Okay, and I imagine a lot of performers came through to perform for the students. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Musicians, and the bands. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Now what about lecturers? You know people like [HM] Dick Gregory and the-- Speaker 2: You know what? They came through Ann Arbor a lot, but as high school students, junior high, we didn't get a chance to see those. But I can remember hearing those performers coming on, on the campus. And then a lot of times as, as I got older and in high school you know, and it was the Vietnam War and protests. And we would go up there and protest with the students, the high school students. And, and that was fun. Story_ID: 98070 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have a favorite, favorite teachers in Ann Arbor [Michigan] or, or Memphis [Tennessee], actually? Speaker 2: Yeah, I can remember Mr. Ford who taught us--then it was called Negro History, one of my favorite teachers. And I can remember-- Speaker 1: Now this is in-- Speaker 2: Ann Arbor. Speaker 1: Ann Arbor, okay. Speaker 2: In Memphis my favorite teacher was my fourth and fifth grade teacher, Ms. Brown fourth grade, and Ms. Ware, Sophie Ware [ph.] in fifth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So now were there any African Americans on, on television in those days that you recall, doing any talk or-- Speaker 2: You know what? No talk. I remember the African Americans that would have shows. I, I think I remember Nat King Cole, his show. And in seeing the performers, singers. Basically I can't remember any other African Americans that I can recall during that time. Only time, you know we would see African Americans on TV, but not their own shows. And I, and I remember Nat King Cole because that was my, one of my dad's [William Van Johnson] favorite performers. So he had all his albums. And I can remember watching him. Speaker 1: Yeah, he--I think his show must have been on when you were about seven or so. Speaker 2: And I can remember that. Speaker 1: I think he did like three or four shows and they, you know, cancelled his show because of some kind of issue. Cause people were watching it. Sponsors were like didn't--they couldn't find the sponsors. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: At any rate, so in high school, any special teachers in high school? Speaker 2: As I said Mr. Ford was in high school. Speaker 1: Mr. Ford, okay. What was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Ann Arbor Pioneer High School. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98071 Speaker 1: Okay Ann Arbor Pioneer High School. Now this, was this--how many high schools are in Ann Arbor? Speaker 2: Well during that time it was only one. It was only one high school. There was a--they had a Catholic high school and when I got into the eleventh grade, they decided to--Ann Arbor needed another public high school. So they began to build a second high school in Ann Arbor. And the kids who were going to go the new high school, called Huron, they went to school from one to six and we went to school Pioneer from 7:30 to 12:30, that was 11th grade until finally 12th grade, they finished the second high school. Now in Ann Arbor they have I understand I think it's four high schools that are there now, public high schools. Speaker 1: Okay, so the city's grown since then. Speaker 2: Yeah, the city has really grown, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so now were you involved in--other than theater, what else were you involved in in high school? Speaker 2: In high school, theater, I was in theater, I also was part of the speaking team. That we would, we would speak. I remember it was a speaking team that we would speak. And I was in the choir. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was in the choir as well. Speaker 1: Was there a debate team? Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a debate team, yeah. I can remember a debate team. But I would--we were, we were--they had this kind of a speech kind of thing that we would go and speak and it was not debating, but just you know, saying speeches and performing. Kind of like they do now with this spoken word. Well we kind of did that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you know we would, we would recite the poems and all that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay, were you, were you a real good student, or, or-- Speaker 2: I was a pretty good student. I, well I, I say I was a, a B minus, B, B, plus/C student. I was an average student, you know. I, I got, I got, I got A's, B's and C's you know. Speaker 1: All right. Your aspirations were to perform. Speaker 2: Yeah, cause I--that was, that was my thing, to perform. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did you run for class office or anything? Speaker 2: No, never did, no. Speaker 1: All right, all right, and okay, so, so Mr. Ford taught Negro History? Speaker 2: Negro history, it was called Negro History. Speaker 1: Okay, and that's--and this is-- Speaker 2: And during that time, that was 1969. I'm thinking about--it was really, if you think about it, it was rare to, to just have a class on Negro History. Speaker 1: Yeah, they, they were starting those classes-- Speaker 2: Exactly, so that was in '69 [1969]. Story_ID: 98072 Speaker 1: Now do you remem--the, the murder of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] basically just excited a lot of changes. Speaker 2: Exactly. It did, it did. I remember, and it excited us--the, the African American students at that school. I remember that, you know we walked out of class when we heard, we protested, and then we started asking for a lot of--you know you're absolutely correct. A lot of things started happening and we started asking for that. And I think that's the reason why we--Mr. Ford came to that school. That we needed more African American teachers cause we really didn't--we didn't have any there. And we wanted that and counselors and those things. So that, that--and you're right. That sparked that after his death. Speaker 1: Now was there a black student organization at your high school? Speaker 2: We did, we started a black student organization. Speaker 1: That started after Dr. King was assassinated? Speaker 2: Yes it did, yes it did. Speaker 1: And can you remember when people started calling themselves "black?" Speaker 2: I, I think probably twelfth grade I would, I would say that we started using the word black. Cause I can remember the slogan you know, "Black Power", you know that was big. And I can remember and again as we--we would go on the campus where they, they had many protests on the campus and we joined in. And it was the black power, afros and the dashikis, so I think I was in twelfth grade when they really started saying black. Speaker 1: I think you, I think that's about right. In '68 [1968] we're still "negroes" in Ohio. I think we may have been "black" in New York and California maybe. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: But we got black in Ohio in '69 [1969] I think we finally got--yeah. And when Walter Cronkite started saying it, everybody-- Speaker 2: Started saying, yeah. Story_ID: 98073 Speaker 1: So okay, now sixty--I believe '68 [1968] was also the, the first--[HM] Diahann Carroll's show "Julia". Speaker 2: "Julia." Speaker 1: Did, did you play close attention? Speaker 2: Yeah, paid close attention to that. Cause that, that was extraordinary. You know this black woman with her own show on, on the air, on television where you got to see her every week. Yeah so that, that, that was remarkable, yeah. Speaker 1: And what about a little earlier, '66 [1966], [HM] Nichelle Nichols as Uhura on Star Trek. Speaker 2: That was good. But even before that when you think about black people on TV, I, I still remember the old "Amos and Andy" which I, you know was good, we enjoyed that. And so I remember that, "Amos and Andy". They had the whole black cast. Speaker 1: I remember the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had it. Speaker 2: Yeah, had it taken off. Yeah I, I just--when you think about these days, why? I mean it was--but I, but I understood why they did it, you know, I really do, so. (simultaneous) But, but some of the buffoonery we see now, you know "Amos and Andy" wasn't that bad, really. Think about it. It wasn't--they, they weren't that bad. Speaker 1: So well why do you think NAACP campaigned-- Speaker 2: Well you know it was the time during they were trying to more integration and they didn't want black folks to be shown as, you know, buffoonery, clowns and you know they were trying to get a certain place. And so thinking that if "Amos and Andy", you know, white folks looking at us do this and that. So you know we don't need that. We, we're trying to elevate ourselves a little higher. So--and I think that's one of the reasons it was taken off. Speaker 1: So, yeah it was a very-- Speaker 2: But it was, it was good entertainment. Speaker 1: Very image-conscious time. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 98074 Speaker 1: So you graduated from high school [Ann Arbor Pioneer High in Michigan] is it seventy-- Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970]. Speaker 1: Seventy, [1970] okay, all right. Speaker 2: Beginning of the '70's [1970's]. Speaker 1: All right, 1970, and when you were on the verge of graduation, what kind of counseling did you get about college? Speaker 2: Good counseling because at our high school we had the different kind of curriculums, and I was in the college preparatory. They had university preparatory, college preparatory, they had business, and then they had general. And so I was in the college preparatory, cause I always knew I was going to go to college. So that was counseling, but, but where to go to college. I--taking drama lessons and, and being in the theater thing, I got a scholarship to attend the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York City [New York]. And during that time, the American Academy of Dramatic Arts did not have dormitories. So you had to find your own housing. And my dad after he found out he says you think you going to New York City to be living in an apartment wherever you need to live. You better find you a school with dormitory. So that crushed my dreams of, you know, being on Broadway cause I knew I was headed that way. So I had to end up looking for, choosing a, a school with a dormitory. Speaker 1: Okay, so you couldn't find any housing to, to--now this is a-- Speaker 2: Well you had house--you could find it, but he was not gonna let me go at seventeen years old to New York City. No, I had no relatives, no folks, you were just there. And no telling where you may be living. So that was out. Speaker 1: Okay, and the school couldn't provide any, any help. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean they probably could, but I don't know if we would be living--I would be living in a one room place or what, so you don't know. And then I didn't know the city, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: So that was out. Speaker 1: Were you very disappointed about that? Speaker 2: Oh very, I was, I was devastated. And I was angry with my father for a long time about that. Speaker 1: Okay, did, did you have recomm--good recommendations and everything from your teachers to go? Speaker 2: Oh yes, because I got that scholarship, yeah, to go, yeah. The only thing was you just had to find your own housing. Speaker 1: So now I know you graduated from Rust, but-- Speaker 2: Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Did you go to Rust then? Speaker 2: Yeah, ended up going to--so end up going to Rust cause throughout--a couple of schools, you know either Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee] or I know I didn't want to attend the University of Memphis [Tennessee], which was called Memphis State [University] then. I didn't, I did not want to go to Memphis State. I did not want to go--a counselor for, for the black, black students, they were trying to get us to go to Eastern [Michigan University in Ypsilanti, Michigan]. And we could get full ride to Eastern. I said I'm not going, I don't wanna go, I don't wanna be--I'm leaving, so that was out. So as I said, my mother eventually graduated from Rust College. And so she said well Rust, and I thought now Rust, that's in Mississippi. I had never been to Mississippi in my life. And you know the stories we've, we heard of Mississippi. I could see lynching in Mississippi--no it's not. So finally--anyway went to see the school, saw it and my mother knew people and says we're gonna take care of her, we're gonna take care of her. And fell in love with Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi. So that's where I ended up and graduated, yeah. Story_ID: 98075 Speaker 1: All right, well what was Rust [College in Holly Springs, Mississippi] like in 1970? Speaker 2: Well it was, it was a culture shock to me cause thinking--keep in mind I'm coming from a high school [Ann Arbor Pioneer High school] where predominantly white students were there. So now I'm coming to a place where the majority are black students. So I'm used to dealing with--it was, you know, integration. So it was a culture shock. I had to get used to a lot of things in Mississippi. Speaker 1: For instance, what was-- Speaker 2: One of the things I think that--in Mississippi--the downtown in Holly Springs, the square. I will never forget that we went to the movie one evening and we had to go upstairs, we couldn't sit downstairs in the movie house. And that was still--and that was the early '70's [1970's], and you would think it was starting the integration, but we still had to go upstairs. And Holly Springs still had a lot of segregated places in Holly Springs, Mississippi. So had to get used to that. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah this is--yeah the South, in those days, depending on where you were-- Speaker 2: Were, cause it was still segregated. You know and I'm being--Ann Arbor [Michigan] was very integrated place, very. So you know we could go places. You know no one--no one ever called us out our names or called. But then now you're coming to the South in a place where it's still--you still have to go to the back door. I remember this restaurant they had in Holly Springs, blacks still had to go to the side to get their food, get a hamburger. Speaker 1: So how did you feel about-- Speaker 2: I didn't like it. I didn't like that. Speaker 1: Did the students organize around it or anything? Speaker 2: No. No, because it was--you know and most of the students who were at Rust were Mississippians, so and they knew that way of life. You, you had a few students who were there from Chicago [Illinois] or Detroit [Michigan], you know a few of the places up north. You did have that. But the majority of the students were Mississippi, so they were, they were used to that, so they knew what was happening. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98076 Speaker 1: So how did you--did they have a theater major there [Rust College in Holly Springs, Mississippi], or-- Speaker 2: No, no they didn't. So I had to end up--I end up majoring in English literature and my minor was speech and drama. Speaker 1: Okay. So was the emphasis of speech and drama teaching, or what? Speaker 2: It was, it was teaching. And I was also able to do several, you know, plays at Rust and I was in theater things. So I, I also enjoyed that as well. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so did you have good drama instructor there? Speaker 2: Very good drama instructor. John Johnson was, was the best, the best. Speaker 1: All right, so, so I--well what were some of the plays you were involved in? Speaker 2: I was involved in "Godspell", we did "Godspell". We did "Picnic", I remember doing "Picnic". Gosh, it's been a while back. In graduate school [Jackson State University in Jackson, Mississippi] I did "Jesus Christ Superstar". Yeah. And the biggest thing at Rust for me, I was in the choir. And Rust is known for the World Famous A'Capella Choir. And I was also in the choir at Rust College. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: That gave me-- Speaker 1: Tour-- Speaker 2: Yeah, tour, we toured, we toured. We, we had the spring and summer tours, which gave me an opportunity to see places I probably would have never, you know just gone on my own. And we did the spring tour and we would do a summer tour. Story_ID: 98077 Speaker 1: Now did you travel as a youth with your family? I mean to--I mean I, I know you went to Detroit [Michigan]. Did you get a chance to go to New York City or anything or Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, you know what? I--my dad [William Van Johnson]--I can remember going to Chicago because he had family in Chicago. I can remember him taking us to Toledo, Ohio, Canada, remember going to Canada and those places, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, up to Windsor [Ontario, Canada] and-- Speaker 2: Windsor, right across the bridge from Detroit, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98078 Speaker 1: So okay, we mentioned off-camera "Raisin in the Sun". Did, did, did you do that in college [Rust College in Holly Springs, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Did, did that in college "Raisin in the Sun". Speaker 1: All right, this is the stage version? I mean the drama version, not the musical version? Speaker 2: Right the stage version, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay so, so you had a good time. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: On this small campus doing-- Speaker 2: The plays, I enjoyed that. I enjoyed--and, and that was the, the plays and then being in the choir, the singing. So I really liked that. Speaker 1: Now did you take any other roles on campus, any leadership roles on campus? Speaker 2: No. I remember one year I was--yeah, I was a cheerleader at Rust. We had a basketball team and I was a cheerleader. And I can remember I was crowned Miss Cheerleader for the Coronation, I remember that. I was also voted Most Talented while I was at Rust, so. Story_ID: 98079 Speaker 1: Okay, so, so four years at Rust, now what was, what were your aspirations on, on leaving Rust? You graduated in 1974? Speaker 2: Five [1975], Speaker 1: Five, okay, five and you had a B.A. in English literature, and so--other than Mr. Johnson who, who else was important there? Speaker 2: At Rust? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Lassie Holmes who was our choir director. Loved Ms. Holmes, Lassie Holmes. Let's see who else was important. I think we may--her name just, just, just went across my brain, Fannie Lampley. She was really a mentor to me, a mentor. Speaker 1: What did she--was she a teacher or a counselor? Speaker 2: She was a counselor. Speaker 1: Okay. Why was she important, what did she-- Speaker 2: Because she was--you know she, she helped young women with the style and, and taught you how to be a lady. I mean she was a lady from, from top to bottom. You know the way she spoke, the way she dressed, the way she looked, the way she act. So she was a great mentor for a lot of the young women on campus. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I have a note here that you ad--admired [HM] Carole Simpson. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yes, yes. I loved Carole Simpson. And I said I'm going to go--I'm going to be a news reporter like Carole Simpson. And all of a sudden I went from wanting to be this actress now and now I want to be in--a reporter because of Carole Simpson. Loved the way she talked, her enunciation, pronunciation, she just had that look. And before Carole Simpson, we had a young woman on the ABC Network here, Carol Hall. She was a reporter. And I remember Carol coming to Rust to talk to, to talk to us. And I said okay, so okay that's, that's, that's what I want to do, I'm going to go into reporting. I'm going to be a news reporter. Speaker 1: Hall was from Memphis [Tennessee], right? Speaker 2: Hall was from Memphis and then I remember Carole Simpson, yes. Speaker 1: Right, okay. So, so Carole Simpson becomes the first African American woman to anchor a major network newscast at NBC [National Broadcasting Company] in '74 [1974], and that's when you were a junior I guess, or getting ready to graduate. And Carol Hall was the first black woman in Memphis history-- Speaker 2: As a reporter that I can remember, that, that just was poised and very good reporter. Story_ID: 98080 Speaker 1: Okay, so any, any, any of your fellow grad--graduates stand out you know at-- Speaker 2: At Rust [College in Holly Springs, Mississippi]? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, fellow students. Speaker 2: Fellow students that would stand out. My goodness. That's a great question. You know what? As I'm sitting here thinking, I also was in a little band at Rust College, we were in a little band. I was thinking about some of the fellows. But anybody that really-- Speaker 1: So were you the singer in the band, or did you-- Speaker 2: I was one of the background singers in the band. The band was called "Trudy and the Soul Ultimates" featuring the "Shades of Soul", and I was one of the "Shades of Soul". So we, we, we had a band and, and, and we were lucky enough--the, the counselors would let us, you know and would with Trudy they would get gigs on the weekend. And they gave us permission to go and you know, that we could come back in late because Rust during that time you know we did have a curfew. So-- Speaker 1: So did you? Now, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had curfews then. So they gave us permission to go do those gigs. And so I remember being in the--and going to the little clubs around town or surrounding areas that we would perform. Speaker 1: "Trudy and the Soul"-- Speaker 2: "Soul Ultimates" featuring the "Shades of Soul". Speaker 1: Trudy was the-- Speaker 2: Trudy was the leader. It was her group. And she was a woman who played keyboards, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: And the Ultimates were, was guys, were, were guys and she was a girl. And the guys--and, and we were the "Shades of Soul", three of us, we were the background singers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So we were traveling around with all these guys and then Trudy. Speaker 1: So what was your repertoire? What were you singing? Speaker 2: We would, we would do Gladys Knight, did a lot of Gladys Knight. We did Aretha [Franklin], you know back in then that was hot. We, we did a little [Patti] LaBelle, those kinds of songs you know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And then if something came out that was really hot we, you know we would fix it and do that. And I can remember going to those little clubs and singing. Speaker 1: Okay, all right and that's-- Speaker 2: Well you know you got your little money and you thought boy you, you, you were paid I think, what, $25 or something, boy you had something. So it was enough to, to buy you some food and go to the, to the, the campus center. You know, get you some hamburgers or something. Story_ID: 98081 Speaker 1: Now I might point out also that Rust College is where Ida B. Wells got her-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Degree, and she was a-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: The first black woman journalist, well now not the first, but she was--she's certainly a noted--the person that people, people thing about if they think about the beginnings of-- Speaker 2: Exactly, and they, they still have a little--they have a little museum down there named--yeah, yeah you're absolutely correct. Speaker 1: Yeah, so did they--now was there a black history course at all at Rust? How they integrated into (unclear). Speaker 2: You know what? I think in the history classes, I think it was a, a black history course at Rust. But since my, you know my major, English Lit, I think we, you know, the general electives--when you do have to take that basic history. But, but basically I didn't ever take a--just a course. But I think it was a course. Speaker 1: Did they teach African American literature-- Speaker 2: Yes they did. I, I rem--I had African American literature, yes I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98082 Speaker 1: All right so now when you're on the verge of graduation [from Rust College in Holly Springs, Mississippi], what's your plan? Speaker 2: My plan was to--say well maybe I, I need to work. So after graduation, you know looking for jobs, went and applied for jobs as a teacher. I ended up getting hired as a substitute teacher for the Memphis [Tennessee] City Schools. So from the Fall of '75 [1975] until the Spring of '76 [1976], I was a substitute teacher. And one of the high schools that--the principal there, my, my, my mother [Julia Atlas Danner Johnson] went to school with him, and lucky that she knew him, that I was able to work over there all the time. So pretty--had me study--it was Booker T. Washington High School. I did a--most of my substitute teaching over at Booker T. Washington High School. So that was--and then I was thinking like this is not for me, this teaching. And the guy who was the Director of Development at Rust, Chuck Holmes, called me. He says Jackson State [University in Jackson, Mississippi] is getting ready to have a Mass Communications Department [Department of Mass Communications] and a degree, and they're giving away money. You need to apply to Jackson State graduate school and go get that money. And I did. So when the Summer of '76 [1976], I enrolled at Jackson State University, at--for their new Mass Communications Department and again, got in as a Graduate Assistant. So I was a Graduate Assistant at the Mass Communications Department, Jackson State. And you have to keep in mind it was, it was new. The undergrad and the graduates, and it was so new that the graduate students and the undergraduate students, we were taking courses together cause they hadn't really had to figure out how you're going to put this--separate the graduates. So we were taking courses together. And then I was a Graduate Assistant, so I worked in the Mass Communications office. Speaker 1: Okay, how did you like Jackson State? Speaker 2: Loved Jackson State, loved Jackson, Mississippi. It was, it was--loved it. Very historic. You think about the history, Medgar Evers--I thought about that you know, being shot. And then on the campus of Jackson State you probably heard where those students got shot during that time [1970]. Speaker 1: Yeah. First time I heard, we interviewed Dorie, Dorie--I'm trying to think of her sister's name, her sister [HM Joyce Ladner] is President of-Lander, Dorie Ladner. She was--she and her sister assisted Medgar Evers and for the first time I never heard that there were riots after his assassination. Speaker 2: Exactly, yes. Speaker 1: And, and they were big, dramatic riots on campus. You know, you never hardly hear about it or read about it. Speaker 2: Yeah, on, on the campus of Jackson, they have a monument there. But students got shot and the shot up in the dormitory. And I thought about that as going there as a student and-- Speaker 1: That was well known--I take that back. There were riots then, but in '63 [1963], but there were, there was a--students were actually shot by police. Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: Seventy, 1970. Speaker 2: Exactly, right. Speaker 1: Same week or period of time that the Kent State [University in Kent, Ohio] shootings went down. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. So that happened there. So you know that, and that's kind of historically and you can, you know you kind of get teary eyed when you think about that and you go on the plaza now, where they have a plaza now. And it was, it was a street, [John R.] Lynch Street, that was the name of the street. And that's something. But Lynch Street would, would go straight through the Jackson State campus. And so you had dormitories on this side, and then you had the administration buildings and you had this street. Well that's where those kids got shot and stuff. So now at Jackson State now, they, they have enclosed Lynch Street so it's no thru traffic. When I got there, they had enclosed Mather Plaza and they had put a monument there, you know, honoring those students. So--but I, I loved Jack State, it was great. Have to like Jackson State cause that's where I got my start in radio. Story_ID: 98083 Speaker 1: Okay, so who were some of the instructors or mentors at Jackson State [University in Jackson, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Dr. [Johnny E.] Tolliver. Speaker 1: What was his first name, do you know? Speaker 2: Gosh, what was Dr. Tolliver's first name? Speaker 1: William Tolliver? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't William Tolliver. My goodness- Speaker 1: Richard Tolliver? Speaker 2: I can't think, it'll come, Dr. Tolliver. What was Dr. Tolliver's name? But, but he was the head of the department of Mass Communications Department at Jackson State. Was it John Tolliver? No, but it--but I remember Dr. Tolliver. And he was department [Department of Mass Communications] head as well as he, he also taught the class in mass communication. The, one of the instructors--I'm trying to--my goodness--that's a lot of, it was a lot of great instructors. Dr. Lett, L-E-T-T, taught in the mass communications. That was really good, and you got to keep in mind it was, it was, it was a young program, so they were trying to get these people in and they had a few female instructors. I can't think of their names right now, I see their faces but yeah, that, that was really inspirational while I was at Jackson State. Ms. Lackey, who was the office secretary of mass communications, really Mrs. Lackey just helped me. I fell in love with Ms. Lackey. If I needed something, she helped me and she helped me get through that. She was the one that told Dr. Toliver "We need to keep her here." And so I was a graduate assistant and she always was rooting for me. And I remember as a graduate assistant, I also one year taught freshmen English. They had me doing that. Story_ID: 98084 Speaker 1: And how I got into radio, Jackson State [University in Jackson, Mississippi] has a radio station, WJSU. And students were, were running and it was all jazz. Students were running the station. And one of my duties when a student was out, I would have to sit in for that student. And this day a student was out and I was in there playing the music and the Program Director heard me in the city and offered me a job, wanted to hire me as a disc jockey. And I told him, "No, no, no, I'm going to be a news reporter." He says but [unclear] voice. I says, "No I'm going to be--I'm not going into radio, I'm going into television to be a news reporter." And Carl Haynes at WJMI, and after the summer was over you know, came home back to Memphis [Tennessee] and I was telling my grandmother [Maybell Rodgers-Danner] about--that I was on the air and this guy had called me and offered me a job as a disc jockey and I told him, "No, I'm going to news." And I will never forget my grandmother said "Baby when somebody gives you an opportunity, you take that opportunity and make the best of it." So not knowing Carl was going to call me in Memphis, and he called me and said "are you coming back to Jackson State in the fall?" I said, "Yes I am." "Well I still want to hire you as a disc jockey." And I remembered what my grandmother said and I said "Okay, I'll take the job." So that's how I got into radio. It's really a fluke cause I really went to Jackson State to become a news reporter. Speaker 2: Okay, okay so this is--what, what, what station is this again? Speaker 1: That was WJMI, WOKJ. Speaker 2: JMI-- Speaker 1: OKJ. Speaker 2: OKJ. Speaker 1: Jackson, Mississippi. Speaker 2: All right, so, so you were able to, to do this and still you know, pursue your, your master's degree. Speaker 1: Yes. So I worked, I worked at the radio station. I had the, the midnight to six slot. Then I would, you know get up and I had to come to Jackson State in the morning cause I was working the graduate assistant in the Mass Communications Office. Then after that I had classes that I had to go to. So I did all that and I think about the young people, we can't do--I say you can, I did all that. Speaker 2: Okay, all right and the person that, that contacted you was Carl Haynes? Speaker 1: Carl Haynes. Speaker 2: Carl Haynes. Speaker 1: He hired me. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: In radio, as a disc jockey. I started off as a disc jockey. Speaker 2: Okay and what was the format over there? Speaker 1: It was R and B [Rhythm and Blues], and WJMI was the FM, WOKJ was the AM. Matter of fact, WOKJ was like the historic station in Jackson, kind of like WDIA [Memphis, Tennessee]. And so I started off at JMI as a disc jockey, spinning records, playing the 45's, the 33's, and I remember my first night on the air I was so nervous. And I played the record on the wrong speed. And Carl ran in there--"it's on the wrong speed." I was so nervous. "You gone be okay, you're gonna be okay." And then we got it together then finally I got it together; I was so nervous. Speaker 2: Now what was your favorite music in those days? Speaker 1: It was R and B, it was R and B. It was, it was R and B, loved R and B. You know it was, it was all out of--big Supreme--I was a big, a big Motown and Stax person. I liked Motown and Stax. And I tell people I always had the best of both worlds, being in Memphis and Ann Arbor back in, you know, Michigan. So, but Motown and Stax, loved it, loved the Supremes. Martha Reeves and the Vandellas, I wanted to be that. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: All right so, so you graduated in '77 [1977] I guess. Is that-- Speaker 1: From Jackson State, '79 [1979]. Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: Graduate school in seventy--yeah. Speaker 2: So you're still there when you-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I still stay there and I'm still in radio. Story_ID: 98085 Speaker 1: After I graduated from Jackson State [University in Jackson, Mississippi] because I was in--I moved up from being disc jockey. Remember I, I wanted to be this news reporter. So I kept telling Carl [Haynes] "I wanna do news, I wanna do news, I can do news, I'm a news person," you know, I really didn't want to be a disc jockey. And I remember Carl saying "Okay," came in one day. "You have worried the hell out of me," his words, "about doing the news. I need you to be here Monday morning at 6:00 a.m. to do the news." I'm thinking "Go what?" Because John Pittman, the guy who did the news on the station, he was leaving radio to go into television in Jackson. So I took his place as a news anchor for WJMI, WOKJ. So I did this--the news for both of those stations, morning shift. So that's how I got, got into the News Department. Speaker 2: So, so were you doing the other show too as well? Speaker 1: No, stop doing the disc jockey. So I'm basically news. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it was a guy there named Bruce Payne. He was like the veteran in radio there. Bruce just helped me and trained me and taught me how to deliver that news and how to put news pieces together. So I, I was the news anchor. Speaker 2: So now did you have to put together your own news and write your news too? Speaker 1: Yeah, I had to put together and write your news, right. Speaker 2: All right, so you had like a news service. Speaker 1: News, we had a news service back in those days. If the reporters would go out and you know how we--with the news, come back and put it together. Bruce would put those together sometimes and so I would have those, to play those actualities. So yeah, so I did the early morning news. I worked, you know, for both stations. I think I worked for about six to, six to 12 or six to 11. And after 12:00 I left there and went--because the campus was right up the street. So I went back to school. So during that--when I was in school until I graduated. Then I was there doing the news full time. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: On the stations. Speaker 2: All right, now in '77 [1977], tell us about this--the cable TV show "Affairs of the Heart". Speaker 1: Now that happened, that was, that happened in latter part, when cable got on. That was here in Memphis [Tennessee]. That wasn't in the '70s [1970s]. That came on--yeah, that, that started about in, in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: Well let's not talk about it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay we won't talk about that. No, that's in the '90's [1990s]. Speaker 2: On the outline as being the '70's [1970s], okay, all right. So you're, you're at, you're-- Speaker 1: OKJ and JMI. They're doing the news. Story_ID: 98086 Speaker 1: Then I got a call, I was offered a news director position at WKXI in Jackson. Speaker 2: Okay now this is a rival station? Speaker 1: Rival station. And he offered me, the Program Director offered me the news director position, and you know it was more money. And so I thought about it and keep thinking about what my grandmother said. I said well this is another opportunity, I'm moving up. So I'll have experience as news director. So I, I took the job. Speaker 2: This is 19-- Speaker 1: I, I think I went to WKXI--stayed at JMI from '76 [1976] to '78 [1978], and I think in '78 [1978] I went to KXI, 1978. Speaker 2: Okay. All right so this is, this is still in Jackson. Speaker 1: Still in Jackson, Mississippi. So now I'm the news director at WKXI. Speaker 2: So news director, you're in your last year of school. Speaker 1: Yeah, and moved on and graduated. So now I'm the news director at WKXI. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Ended up being--with WK--a rival station, yeah, it was a rival station. Speaker 2: So you had more responsibility I guess. Speaker 1: Yes, more responsibility. Speaker 2: So what did they, they--what did you actually do? Speaker 1: More responsibility; I had people that under that I had to oversee. My reporters were who did the news in the afternoon--compared to what I was doing at [W]JMI as just a news anchor. But yeah, make sure the news was presented in a certain way, gathering the news, you know. Making sure my folks were at certain places. And then I also while I was at WKXI, I became part of the morning team, "Hev and Bev, Cooking in the Morning". Heavy Herb Anderson was the disc jockey. And so I was his kind of sidekick and also I was doing the news on the morning show. So we were "Hev and Bev, Cooking in the Morning". We were the first blacks in Jackson to have a billboard. And the billboard had us--had "Hev and Bev, Cooking in the Morning", had us as toast popping out of a toaster. Matter of fact I--for you I have that picture at my desk here so you can see that. But we were the first to have a billboard in Jackson, Mississippi. We had the number one morning show in Jackson; it was on AM station. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So the population--what, what, what are the demographics of Jackson? Mississippi being the state, that has the largest black population (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah it was very, very, very heavy black population. And then Jackson, Jackson is the capital of Mississippi. So a lot of blacks there. And then you--you're right, and you had the surrounding areas where the whites also lived too, but yea. Speaker 2: Yeah, but Jackson is the biggest metropolitan center in-- Speaker 1: Yes, and it has grown now since I've left, even bigger. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's even bigger. Speaker 2: And the black population, you--would you say is like sixty-five percent, or, or is it, is it more than the white, white population? Speaker 1: I think it was a little bit more. Speaker 2: More than that? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. All right so, so you're at WKXI. How long did you stay there? Well what, what were the highlights of WK-- Speaker 1: KXI, we were known for our personalities. We were an AM station, 1300 on the AM dial. We played R and B music. We were very community oriented, out in the community a lot. KXI, it was, it was, it, it took over--JMI was FM, had been number one for so long. When we got there, when they put KXI together this AM, I mean it just blew out the water. Speaker 2: That was KXI? Speaker 1: WKXI. Speaker 2: Black owned? Speaker 1: It was--no, it was not. Speaker 2: Was the other one? Speaker 1: No it was not. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was--JMI was owned by Mr. Roden I remember and he had several stations. Well he had other stations in Gulfport [Mississippi], down in--on the Gulf. And KXI was owned by a guy who had several stations also that was in Gulfport and was in that area as well. So we had--KXI was our AM. Our FM station was 95 TXY, WTXY, which was a new FM station coming in, which was automation was coming in during that time and it was kind of an automated station, but it was FM. Speaker 2: Okay, so there weren't any disc jockeys over there, or very few. Speaker 1: No, one guy, Jim Chick and he did everything. I remember Jim would put in--but he did everything, but it was automation. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But K, but KXI, it was a black station and very community oriented. We did good work, yeah. Speaker 2: So did you have like visits from celebrities? Speaker 1: All the time. You know they would come in, celebrities come in, they would do shows and stuff for us, yeah. Speaker 2: Did you have a talk show at all at this stage? Speaker 1: We did have a--we did have--during those days you know the talk shows were known as the public affairs show. So we had one that came on Sunday, every Sunday with Frank Bluntson, and then it came on in the evenings. Matter of fact I understand that Frank, Frank Bluntson is still in Jackson, that he just--he was running, I don't know, he was running for mayor, he's a city council person. But Frank is, it's called "Straight Talk". So we had a talk show there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I never did, I never did any, any talk while I was in, in Jackson. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 98087 Speaker 1: So, so you're there like--in the '80s [1980s] and until '84 [1984] I guess, well from-- Speaker 2: Well I was, I, I left Jackson. I left Jackson, Mississippi in '81 [1981], coming to Memphis [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay. So what--why did you leave? Speaker 2: Coming to Memphis? Speaker 1: Yeah, did you, did you come to take a job here? Speaker 2: I came to take a job at WLOK. Speaker 1: Okay, all right that fills in the gap here cause we don't have that here. But--so you went to WLOK. Speaker 2: I came to Memphis. I was hired at WLOK. Speaker 1: So you, were you a news director there? Speaker 2: No, news anchor. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Was, was it for more money? Speaker 2: Little more money than Jackson, yeah. And then--and, and then it was home and then my mother [Julia Atlas Danner Johnson] was here. So I, I didn't have to worry about finding a place to stay, stay in the home house. And I was the, the--part of the morning show in the morning at WLOK, but I did the news in the morning. And then at WLOK I did do a talk show, I did do a public affairs show over there. Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what was the name of your show? Speaker 2: What was the name of that show? Well I kind of inherited it from--I can't think of the name of that show. But-- Speaker 1: But it was a public affairs show. Speaker 2: But it was a public affairs show, where I interview, you know, the community leaders. And it came on, on Sunday evenings. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a familiar pattern. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--back in those days was the Sunday evening shows, yeah on AM stations, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. What were some of the issues in Memphis that were discussed in those days? Speaker 2: Issues were busing was, was a issue then, it was still a issue then. Schools, getting the first black superintendent, some of the issues. Getting blacks on council in those--the same kind of issues they're having today, some of those issues we would talk about, community issues. A lot of the issues--we dealt with issues in the city. Story_ID: 98088 Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you were at [W]LOK until 1983, right? Speaker 2: Well eight, '82 [1982] at LOK, and then got laid off. Then I worked, got, got hired at -- wasn't K, it was, it was, was it KD AM, it was, no it was a, it was a Christian station that I got hired at. And I basically was just running the board, you know some part-time work running the board. And then I got hired in '82 [1982] I got hired at -- WWEE Radio, WLVS, owned by the legendary Sam Phillips, the man who, who, who discovered Elvis [Presley]. Speaker 1: WLVS and it almost sounds like -- Speaker 2: Well WLVS was country, and WWEE was the news talk station. So I did news for WEE Radio and WLVS. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was in, in '82 [1982] I was, I got -- I got a job there, another full time job back in the news. But it was different because it was a white station. You know previously I had been with, with the black format and so these were -- Speaker 1: Was there a different approach to the news in the two stations? Speaker 2: Big approach, because basically had to keep in mind that I'm not just targeting one population, black folk. Had to keep in mind that I'm -- the majority is white and you may have black listening, but the majority was white folks, so we did a certain kind of news. Speaker 1: Okay, I mean -- Speaker 2: When you say, yeah, we did a certain kind of news. You know you wouldn't hear the hard core stories that maybe we would talk about in the projects, on WLOK, that we did, you know. You would, you know it was basically kind of middle of the road. You, you did -- we did a lot of national stories, you know. Or, or if the stories, if the news stories we did in Memphis [Tennessee] is about the council or the mayor, those kinds of stories. Keep in mind WWEE Radio was news talk, so it was a talk, talk radio station as well as news. LVS was country. And so we had certain ways that we did the news for a country station. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, so you -- so I had to learn how to do this now with a whole new audience, white folks, it's not black folks. Cause my stations before that were, were black formatted. Speaker 1: Did you change your inflection any for, for the -- Speaker 2: No I didn't, I still had my voice. No one knew that I, I was black. The audience, they thought I was white. Matter of fact Mr. Phillips, he, he thought I was a white girl cause he told me. You know he, he was a character. He thought I was white. He never got my name right, he always called me Barbara, but -- and people thought I was white. They didn't know I was black. And matter of fact when I was working over there, it was three blacks over there. It was -- one was the receptionist, it was me, and it was one young lady who worked in -- she was the sale secretary. Speaker 1: And (unclear) Speaker 2: Of three, of, of, of that station. And I think you had a part time, one of the guys, we had a black guy part time who did, who had a talk show. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 98089 Speaker 1: All right so this is -- Speaker 2: So I work, that was '82 [1982] till I, I thought I said I got to get back in black radio. I missed black radio. I had to get back into black radio. So interesting. Remember I told you the guy that I took his place, John Pittman doing the news in Jackson [Tennessee]. John Pittman was the News Director at WDIA [in Memphis, Tennessee]. I called John you know, John, you know, we were glad to know we were both here in Memphis. I said "John, you all have any openings? You know I got to get back" and he says "No," he kept telling me "no we don't have any openings." I said well "John, you know I got to get back over there or something. I wanna get back into black radio." Finally John called me one day, he says "Look you need to make me a tape as quick as you can, get it over here to me," blah, blah, blah, and we'll go from there. And he submitted my tape to the program director and I guess the general manager. They liked it and he says you're hired. And I was hired in 1983 at WDIA, in September of 1983, and I left WWEE Radio [W]LVS. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now so, so this is -- DIA at that time, it was I guess the most popular station. Speaker 2: Yeah very popular, yes, very popular station. Very, very popular. Speaker 1: Okay so you came in as a -- you were, you were an anchor. Speaker 2: News anchor. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Came in as a news anchor. Speaker 1: And what, what time slot did you have? Speaker 2: I did the afternoon slot. I worked the afternoon slot from three to six. Speaker 1: All right, all right. This is 1980 -- Speaker 2: Three [1983]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1983. And, now at some point you become the news director, right? Is that true? Speaker 2: Yes I did. I became news director in 19 -- I would -- I'm thinking it was 1990 for WDIA. Cause I started my talk show, I started the talk show in 1987, my talk show. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you became news director in 1990 -- Speaker 2: Bout 19, cause I'm thinking about, I'm thinking about 1990. Speaker 1: Ninety [1990], okay. Speaker 2: About 1990. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now at WDIA. Now were you, were you familiar with all the, the personalities on WDIA at this point, so you pretty much knew -- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I loved the personalities, loved the personalities on WDIA. So I, I said "I got to get back in there." But yeah, I, I knew them, yeah. Speaker 1: So you actually knew them or did you know them from the radio -- Speaker 2: I just knew them from the radio -- I did -- just from radio, just listening to them and hearing. Cause I would listen to DIA, I would, I would listen to the station all the time. Speaker 1: Well some of them had been on for a long time. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well I remember as a child listening to WDIA. Matter of fact, my, my mentor who worked here at WDIA, Martha Jean Steinberg, eventually left DIA to go to Detroit [Michigan], isn't that something? And worked radio stations there. I remember as a kid hearing Martha Jean on, on the radio in Inkster, Inkster, Michigan. And loved Martha Jean. Finally as, as an adult, I was -- I met her at a radio convention in, you know the rest was history. We kind of bonded and gave me advice as my mentor and you know, she eventually owned her own station in Detroit [WQBH]. Speaker 1: Right, Martha Jean "The Queen." Speaker 2: Martha Jean the Queen. And so people, people now call me the queen, they call me the Queen of Talk here but the kind of -- yeah that was my girl, yeah. Story_ID: 98090 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So and you launched the Bev Johnson Show, and that was in -- Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-seven. Speaker 1: '87 [1987], okay and how did the -- Speaker 2: That was the brain child of, of program director Bobby O'Jay. Oprah Winfrey started her show nationally 1986. And during that time, Oprah was doing all the relationship stuff. So Bobby thought now we need to, you know, do something because during that time you know the FMs were really coming, you know. Even though [W]DIA had been number one for so long, we were -- said we need to do something different. So he -- so I -- and I remember we were going to a radio event and he says I'm thinking about doing a talk show in the mid-day. So we're listening and I think I remember the promotions director being there, Maxine Maclin and he says "Well Bev, you could do a talk show." I'm thinking no, no, no, I'm used to doing a public affairs show, which I was doing, you know, still, a public affairs show. I says "No, every day a talk show?" He says "Yeah, I'm thinking about putting that together and we're going to do that and it's going to be on relationships and all that kind of thing." So finally I guess after he talked with his superior and they said okay we'll do it. He says "Okay we're gonna, we're gonna put you in mid-day, gonna have a talk show, 'The Bev Johnson Show.'" I started a year after Oprah was on and doing the same kind of things Oprah was doing, but I was doing it on radio. Unheard of. Now it was talk shows, remember public affairs and basically they were community issues. But now I'm talking about lifestyles, from divorce to relationships, to all kinds of stuff, all kinds of craziness. In the beginning it was crazy. Story_ID: 98091 Speaker 1: Who was on the show in the beginning -- Speaker 2: Oh my gosh. Well basically I would have topics and I would throw the topics out. You know different kind of topics. And people were calling in, they had to get used to that. They were calling in and talking. So finally the relationship stuff was the hottest. And one of the co -- my coworkers, James Davis, said "I want you to meet this brother. He's a psychologist and get him on your show. We could talk about some, you know relationship, mental illness and all that." "So okay, yeah." So he introduced me to Dr. Warren Harper, psychologist, brother maybe. And Warren become -- began to come on the show. And so Fridays we, we would have that as relationship day. And Warren would come on, we would talk about, you know relationships, marry, whatever, sex. So then Warren says well I know this sister, we went to school together. She's a psychologist, Dr. Dorothy Jeffries [Jeffries-Anderson]. You know let's get her on women, so we have a woman and a man, you know, professionals answering questions. And we started doing that. That show was such a hit, peopled loved Fridays when Dot and Warren was on. So they were so good that our general manager say well we'll, we'll, we'll pay them a little stipend. So they were getting money to come on Fridays. It was so hot. We were doing relationships. People love Dr. Jeffries and Dr. Harper and so that was -- we -- relationships, all kinds of stuff. And so that kind of -- our show, the relationship that I've known for -- talking about relationships. And it just blew out, blew out the water. Speaker 1: This is in the middle of the day. Speaker 2: Middle of the day. We came on from 10 to 12, 10 to 12 Monday through -- matter of fact I was started off doing Monday through Saturday. That crazy, it was Monday through Saturday. And I think as we went on about the late '90's [1990s], we cut out the Saturdays. We cut out the Saturdays, so it was just Monday through Friday. But it was a lifestyle show that we talked about what happens in life. And then I would have guests on, entertainers on, those kind of people as well. I had politicians on. But basically people know that relationship show. And they were so influential in our community. Because you know you know how the stigma of black folks and talking about mental illness and mental health. We did that -- they did that and talked about -- we were able to start getting black folk into counseling and all those kinds of things. They were -- they influenced me so that I even went to school and go a certification in substance abuse counseling [from Southwest Tennessee Community College in Memphis, Tennessee]. So I'm a substance abuse counselor as well. So and then we all came together and started our own little business together, our mental health. And we were known for doing that mental health stuff. Speaker 1: So what was the name of your business? Speaker 2: Heart 2 Heart Collaborations. Speaker 1: Okay. So you can actually refer someone -- a listener to a place where they could actually get professional help. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And yeah, so let me see here. Now I've heard -- I haven't heard your show, but I've heard like Michael Baisden Show when he was on the air doing -- in the drive time in Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: Where he would have some of the, you know -- you get some really serious issues. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had very serious issues. And, and out of the 27 years -- I've been doing "the Bev Johnson Show" for 27 years -- and in the 27 years I've heard people who-- getting ready to commit suicide. We had that on the air. Crazy, bizarre stuff where a man would be in his house that his wife would lock him the house, and lock in the room. You know you can use the phone and the radio. Those kind of stories where -- all kinds of stories of life, as well as talking to history makers and politicians and entertainers and athletes. I've done that as well, interview them, yeah. Story_ID: 98092 Speaker 1: So what was your day like in terms of preparation for the show and, and you know looking towards the next show. Speaker 2: Well basically during that time I was doing the "Bev Johnson Show", I, I was still doing the news in the morning, I still did the news in the morning. So come in and do the news in the morning. And during that time -- Speaker 1: So you were here at six. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I had to be here at six during that time, back in those days. And so I was doing news, and my news stopped I think at like 9:00. So from nine to ten I had a, you know, hour getting together. Or usually I would try to do a day beforehand, preparing what we're going to talk about, or if I'm going to have a guest. So it was long days, long days some days. And then also I would go out and cover press conferences sometimes, you know. Get those stories as well. Story_ID: 98093 Speaker 1: Okay. Well is there a, a particular show that stands out or a particular guest that there's a story connected with -- I know there's probably a lot of them. Speaker 2: Well people say my, my show has made -- we always say that WDIA makes starmakers. Well my show has made a lot of, of the listeners in the community, we've made them stars, you know. They say you made them stars. We had the characters, we had the little daddies, we had, you know, gun fight, we had Lady D, Lady P. We, we have these people who call every day and people know them. They're just like part of our family. And you know I think we, we, we made the friends, we made the characters. But I also think that they also have learned some things over the years with, with the show. Just now one -- particular show as I told you earlier I was a big Motown and, and, and Stax fan. And I remember when I interviewed [Davis Eli] "David" Ruffin and Eddy Kendricks [of The Temptations] was on the show. And I remember sharing the story with David Ruffin that -- I said "I had a crush on you when I was a teenager, I loved you, I loved David Ruffin. You were my boyfriend" talking. And David had been drinking some coffee in a styrofoam cup. Well as we're doing the interview talking, David was drawing a picture of a man and a woman on the cup. And finally when we finished, and I had a producer at that time who ran my board, Fred Moore. And when it was over, David gave me the cup and he had a picture he had drew, David and Bev on this cup. You know like wow, you know I'm telling him that I had a crush on you. And -- but that, that show always stands out with me cause they were in town promoting their album. And then that evening we had them at a, a club and they came and, you know that always sticks out in my mind. That was a good show of entertainers. Of, of politicians that stick out in my mind -- Speaker 1: Well just on that, on that note, David Ruffin, I mean like a lot of entertainers, had a story where he's, he comes from a humble background. Becomes an entertainment superstar, you know, falls out because of drug addiction. I mean you can do that story almost over and over again (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, you can. Speaker 1: Then you -- so and the, you know, white man who cheated him out of his money. I mean that's another factor of it and you know it's a script for so many. So, so did you -- did he -- I know you, you went to school for counseling, drug counseling. Speaker 2: Substance abuse counseling, yeah. Speaker 1: Substance abuse counseling. I mean did you -- I mean how did you -- Speaker 2: And, and like I said I had Dr. Jeffries [Dorothy Jeffries-Anderson] and Dr. [Warren] Harper. But also choosing the substance abuse is that I saw a lot of friends in the industry who had died, overdosed, the drug thing, how it had gotten bad. Matter of fact, Bobby O'Jay who was our program director, he was hooked on drugs and he had to leave and go into rehab. You know he's been, been sober -- it's been some years. But, but us being in this industry seeing how the drugs have the effect on my friends in the industry in the radio and on the record side. So I said that's something interesting. So I went in and I got my certification as a drug abuse counselor so I can counsel as a drug abuse. And also a counselor of women, I do women's counseling as well, do groups. And I understand and now I have a better understanding why that happens. Speaker 1: Okay, another issue in the early '90's [1990s], I don't know if you remember this, but it -- I don't know what happened, but it seemed to be like a rash of youth suicides in the black community which we hadn't had before. We hadn't had that before. Did you talk about that on the show? Cause I know -- Speaker 2: Yeah, we talked, suicide, yes, yes we talked about the, the suicides. Talked about the, the increase of drug abuse. But the thing is with young people and suicides, people always thinking it's drugs. But it, it's deeper than that. Because we also on my show have talked about you know, things in the homes. Big, big, big topic, secrets, talking secrets where you know in the black family, you know it was always told what goes on in this home stays in this home, you don't talk about it. And then you learn of all the abuse over the years and what happened. And so with my show, we were able to bring that out and get people the help they need. So that, that has been really a, a big thing on my show, getting people help. And, and getting people to talk about those secrets. Story_ID: 98094 Speaker 1: Okay. Can you remember a story around that, that you (unclear)? Speaker 2: I remember a story, a young woman who talked about her uncles who had abused her as a child and she was afraid to talk about it. And it messed her up as an adult. She had all these kind of relationships and didn't know why. She did know why, but didn't know why, or didn't want to address why because she was trying to hide the, the sexual abuse from the uncles until as we were talking. And she heard well it's okay to talk about it or get help and have counseling when she's hearing Dr. Jeffries [Dorothy Jeffries-Anderson] on, or Dr. [Warren] Harper, or I had other doctors and, and counselors talk about it and she talked about it. I remember her crying and then finally she was able to get some help. But those kinds of stories that, that touch you that you hear. I have a lot of stories that I've heard, oh my goodness, over the years where people needed help and got it. And then another thing that I think I'm proud of, people will call me or see me and says "You know you helped me, your show helped me. I never called in, but it helped me." And that, that's my thing, that we, we're able to help somebody. Speaker 1: Now there was another big issue in the early '90's [1990's] that was discussed I think for the first time publicly was the -- it really became a big issue, the -- I think it was characterized by this song "Bill" [sung by Peggy Scott-Adams]. Speaker 2: Yes, the down low brother, my goodness, yes we talked about that. And when that song came out, "Bill", we played the song and we talked about it. And it was crazy. The, the women who would call, the wives who would call with stories that they found out that their husband were having affairs with men. And I remember this one story, this lady called. She said she had went to work, she was married. Left to go to work and that day she got sick and had to come home and she didn't tell, let her husband know she was coming home. And thinking he's at work. She got home and saw him in the bed with another man. And you know that devastation and with her she said I had to get, get into some counseling. I said you did the right thing. But that was a biggie. That, that really came out. And we talked about that. Speaker 1: Exacerbated by the AIDS epidemic that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, exactly. So we talked about it, yeah, the, the AIDS and the HIV. Oh, my goodness, and that was a big topic on my show, so we talked about that. I'm thinking anything that happens to a person in life, we've talked about it on my show. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Anything. Speaker 1: I know one national story, I think it first appears in Encore magazine about a young, black college student named Kimba, who--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --ended up carrying drugs for a drug dealer. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: She went out with and was coerced by, to carry these drugs--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --she ended up doing almost a life sentence in Virginia. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did--was that one of the stories? Speaker 2: Um-hum, we talked--everything, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah I mean and the difference in the sentencing. Speaker 2: Exactly. Story_ID: 98095 Speaker 1: And you have to keep in mind, you get the people who call in who listen, who are very, very sincere, and they want help. Then you get the other people who think it's a bunch of baloney, and, you know, you're still gonna have those kind of callers. I remember when we first started doing this show, you know, you get the people who will call in with the cranks and hang up. So you had to get used to that. But as, as--I've noticed as my show has gone on through the years, it's more--people are more serious. They wanna get help. People are more in tuned to what, their surroundings, what's happening. It's not the foolishness so much. But in the early years, it was a lot of foolishness. You know, you get the people call in and hang up or people will call in, belittle a guest on the show, you know, and I'd go crazy and have to stop that. But I noticed that on the--that has cooled down. Speaker 2: Did you have a screener? I know a lot of stations have someone to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You know what? Speaker 2: --initially screen the callers. Speaker 1: In the beginning, I didn't, so I was going naked to the phone, but as--and they found, as the time went by, I did have a screener and a producer who would produce my show, and the screener, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, so the screener initially answers the call. Speaker 1: Exactly, and then on the screen, they'll give the name--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Ask 'em what they wanna talk about. Speaker 1: Exactly, or if you talk about the subject, and I had that. Speaker 2: Put 'em on hold. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Then (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And talk. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then they come as you bring 'em up. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: That's not fool proof as--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, it's not because they--you still--somebody can lie. And a lot of people did, and then you get 'em, then they'll start talking about something else, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so that's some of the dynamics of this, and did you ever get into any trouble for some fool that called in? Speaker 1: Not really. You know, I think I got, I--you know, I could 'em straight. I used tact with 'em, and I think that's what people like about me, that I, I have tact and how I handle listeners and, and the callers. Story_ID: 98096 Speaker 1: What do you think was the most, I guess, sensitive topic, I guess, on the-- Speaker 2: I think the most sensitive topic that I've dealt with is, is with domestic violence. That's a biggie. That has been the most sensitive because in the beginning when we started talking about domestic violence, you know, you would get a lot of men who would call in, "Well, a woman needs to be hit upside the head." and "My grandfather did this", and, you know, or you would have that. But that has been the most sensitive. And then especially as we went on and then here in our community in Memphis, we've had so many women who were killed by their husbands or boyfriends. So that was the most sensitive, and then I even had women on who had been abused and tell their stories. Speaker 1: Yeah, I--correct if I'm wrong, but I think it wasn't really until the late '80' [1980s] that people really started--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --talking about this in the open. Speaker 2: Right, exactly, because, again, what went on in your home, you stayed there, and back in the day, a lot of people will say, "Well, you need to stay with your husband, you know, no matter what." Speaker 1: Yeah, I know-- Speaker 2: But now as you learn, you know, they've learned better. Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems to me too, also that women sometimes were aiding and abetting the violence against other women by saying you need to stay with your husband. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And you must be doing something wrong if he's hitting you. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: And that sort of advice. Speaker 2: So we were able, have been able to educate people on, "No, that's not right. That's not correct. You can get help." And there is a sickness. There's some kind of illness. There's a mental illness. So we have been able to educate people on that. Speaker 1: It's a mental illness that's, you know, encouraged by a lot of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --segments of the community. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: They just want it to go, you know, just not look at it. Speaker 2: Just go away. But, you know, you can get help for it. Story_ID: 98097 Speaker 1: Now, did you all discuss the Million Man March in '95' [1995]? Speaker 2: Yes, we did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, that was a big one (laughter). So, you know, you would have the Muslims who would come over. Yeah, we talked about that. Yes, we did. So, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, the, Memphis elected its first black mayor in 1991. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, Dr. [Willie Wilbert] Harenton. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, that was huge for Memphis. That was really huge for, for this community. Speaker 1: Now, was it a subject of your talk show at the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: All the time, oh, yeah, because during that time, they had, what they had the "People's Campaign", they called. They were getting together to get that right, African American candidate who was going to run 'cause they had several people who wanted to run. And Dr. Harenton also was our first black school superintendent, so an educated man in the city. So, it was really interesting. It was, it was, it was crazy. But when he won, it was like jubilation. Speaker 1: Yes, do you remember where you were when you found out he won? Speaker 2: I was on the air. We were doing--it was a race, and we were doing like the political commentary. You know, I was, I remember (unclear) the board, and we had people talking about what do you--the race the mayor's race. And then I had a commentator in there who's giving their perspective. And then I would have our people in the field who were calling in. I was on the air, and it finally came on as Dr. Harenton. I mean we went crazy. Speaker 1: Was there ever a time when there was an issue where you felt it was hard to be, you know, not neutral, but hard to be-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --you know-- Speaker 2: And I knew I had to be neutral, and being in this business, I knew that we couldn't endorse candidates, and even though I was for him, you know, there's a way that, you know, you could handle that, where people know you're for him, but--even though you didn't say it. But, yeah, it was, it got hard. It really did. And the same thing, when you think about when President Obama [HM President Barack Obama] was running. It was, it was hard, you know, but we talked about, you know, him running, and the same thing. Story_ID: 98098 Speaker 1: Now are you called upon to go out in the community and conduct forums and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: All the time, yeah. I do forums. I'm called to speak all the time. Matter of fact, I'm a motivational speaker. So I'm invited to speak at different churches, different civic clubs, different groups. Last week I was invited to speak at Wiley College, Marshall, Texas. The home of the "great debaters." And that was so fabulous. So much history. You know they, they opened their arms, but they, they told me about the campus and showed me, showed me Professor [Melvin B.] Tolson's house, the man who--the great debaters and so that was great. So I, yeah that was wonderful. And they told me about Denzel [Washington] gave the school a million dollars and, and now just found out that they hadn't had a debate team since the '30s [1930s]. Well so Denzel gave them that money to help them to start up another debate team, so they have. They just won the national championship again, out of 90 schools. Do you hear me? Again. Speaker 1: Yes I hear you. Speaker 2: And so that was exciting and I met the young man who was the head of the debate team, he was there. But after all this time and, and they won out of ninety schools again. So that was--yeah I am called to speak. I do a lot of speaking; I am a motivational speaker. I'm also--you know I write. Speaker 1: So have you written a--do you write for local papers here [Memphis, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: No, I--what I basically do is I write kind of bios for commercials. The Rock N' Soul Museum here, they have a awards program that they've been doing--well this is the second year that they honor people in the music business and the executive director called me and asked me would I write the bios on some of the, the artists that they were going to present and honor. And so I wrote on the Blackwood Brothers and Kay Starr, and also usually I'm called to write on like artists that maybe have passed and these promoters are gonna do--so I'll write bio, put something together for them, and that kind of writing. But basically write my own stuff, motivational speaker. Speaker 1: Yeah, so many greats have passed recently here. Just about--like [HM] Isaac Hayes [unclear], you know members of the Bar-Kays. Speaker 2: Recently Johnny Taylor who's gone but his, his son was in Chicago [Illinois] just-Floyd [Taylor] you know. So I'm sure that--and Floyd was on that blues tour and I'm sure the promoter now will tell me well you write something on him. But I do writing and, kinda blessed to that. But-- as a motivational speaker. And I'm an instructor at the community college here, so I teach writing as well as speech, oral communication and public speaking. Speaker 1: Is that Shelby County-- Speaker 2: Southwest, Southwest Tennessee Community College [Memphis, Tennessee]. It used to be called Shelby State, but now it's Southwest Tennessee Community College. I, I teach there. And I used to teach at my alma mater, Rust College down in Holly Springs [Mississippi], I taught radio and instrumental and Rust has a radio station now. So I was instrumental in helping them put that radio station together, so-- Speaker 1: What, what are the call letters there? Speaker 2: At Rust, WRUC [sic, WURC] at Rust. So they have a radio station there. When I was, when I was attending Rust, you know they didn't have all that great stuff they have there now. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now you started something called the Annual Soiree at Sea. Speaker 2: My soiree, my, my, yeah I do a--Bev Johnson's "All White Soiree" party on land. And, and it started off as my, my birthday party and two of my buddies, my guys, we hang out. We said let's do a birthday party together. Well you ought to put one together. So we put one--our birthdays, my birthday is in May and we started this all white soiree. And where people come in all white. And the first year we did it, I mean we had--the entertainers form--the local entertainers in Memphis. We had some of the Bar-Kays there and The Temprees and people who came in--it was beautiful. So we did the first and so it was--people loved it, so I kept doing it. Then I started doing an on, on--doing my own cruise. So then we do the soiree on, on sea so you would have the white parties there. So that's basically the parties in white. And what I do is--and the money that we get, I like to give charities and like to give back. So we, we have the soirees and I think I'm going to eleventh year almost. But I do give back to charities, help out charities. And we've helped out some charities here in the city. Speaker 1: All right, so these, these started around 2004, 2005. Speaker 2: Mmhmm. The soirees. Story_ID: 98099 Speaker 1: Now 2004 WDIA moved out here to these luxurious headquarters we're in right now. Speaker 2: Thousand Oaks [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Yeah. So I mean you got a fountain downstairs, palm trees. I mean it's really-- Speaker 2: It's really nice. We were like okay we didn't want to move cause we were downtown. And downtown--it was rebuilding back up. You know once--most downtowns, you know have a slump period. Well we were down there through the slump and now it was revitalizing back again and so Clear Channel who owns the stations, they had four urban stations on Union and three white stations on Beale Street. Well they decided well you know, we ain't gone pay, stop paying all this rent for two different locations; we all need to come together. So our general manager during that time was Bruce Demp [ph.]. So he had the task of finding a place to put all seven stations together. So he found this place. Loved downtown because you was in the midst of things. Only thing I didn't--I hated about downtown, we had to pay for our own parking. So you know how that could be. Here on Thousand Oak, it's free parking. But other than that, downtown was wonderful. Just had to pay for the parking every month. Speaker 1: Downtown, now was WDIA--was that a historic location, or-- Speaker 2: It is now because what we're--when we started there it was, was not a historic location. WDIA moved there, K97, our FM station was there before. And they had another AM station there, KDJ. Well the owners at that time who had KDJ and K97, bought WDIA. And we were on Central Avenue, WDIA by ourselves. And so-- Speaker 1: Is that the historic location I guess of the first WDIA? Speaker 2: No, the first W is on Union Avenue, which is not even--they didn't even put a marker there. That place is gone. But on Union now it is a marker that was made a historical place there. So they can never take that marker down. And at that building, and the marquee it still has the, the call letters and stuff. So--but they turned that building into condos. But the historical marker is there and you can see it and you know they can't remove that. Speaker 1: All right, yeah I just wondered if there was a historical (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we do have a--it's down--it's on Union, but it's not the original location of the station. It's the second location (unclear) WDIA. Cause WDIA has had several owners before Clear Channel. You know the, the first owners [John Pepper and Dick Ferguson], Sundalin [ph.], then after Sundalin it was, would you believe, Viacom owned WDIA. Then they sold us to a black man, a lawyer out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Ragan Henry. And Mr. Henry had us, so Mr. Henry bought us [in 1983] and so he kept us for about a year. Then he sold us. He sold us. He sold us, I'm trying to think, and the people he sold us to, they owned a TV station in Memphis and they owned the FM station K97. And gosh, can't even think of the name of the company, but anyway they, they sold--they-- Ragan Henry sold--they sold us. Then when they bought us, they sold us back to Ragan Henry. Yeah. So Ragan Henry now has these two stations. It was only WDIA AM and WHRK FM, so we were AM/FM down on Union, two, two stations. So Mr. Henry kept us, he kept us a few years, more than a few years. He kept us, and then he finally sold us to Clear Channel [in 1996]. And then Clear Channel as you know, history start buying up all kinds of stations and during that time Clear Channel had TV stations, radio stations and, and the billboard company. So once he sold us to, to Clear Channel, that was it. So we were down there for some years and then that's when we moved out here. Speaker 1: Okay, Clear Channel, you know you were saying before like at a certain point they--this place, this is a huge place we're in now, was filled with people and they had-- Speaker 2: Yeah this, this area was filled with people. It was, matter of fact, it was FedEx offices are in here. And this area kind of--we used to have a mall here. The mall left and they tore it down. After that, businesses and people started moving away from this. And basically this building only had--after people started leaving this building had one company over here, Methodist Hospital. Their offices was on this floor. And I can recall my sister [Angela Johnson-Dorsey] saying "You all getting ready to move where we are." I says "How you know?" "Cause they're fixing up over there." So they put all this stuff together for us. Story_ID: 98100 Speaker 1: Okay and 2011 they started cutting positions here. Speaker 2: Yes, cutting the personnel and that, that was, that was devastating. It really--cause we were, we were a really big family. We had started getting used to one another. All, all seven of the stations. And they start cutting. Speaker 1: It seemed the radio, I mean I'm surprised that there is a, you know there are local disc jockeys here. In so many cities-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that don't have jobs. Speaker 1: There are no disc jockeys anymore. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They play Tom Joyner in the morning- Speaker 2: Syndic-- They have a lot of syndicated-- Speaker 1: --Steve Harvey and play somebody else in the afternoon. Speaker 2: Or, or, or their voice tracking, on automation. Speaker 1: Right, just pop in a cassette or something. That's the whole day's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, just program, now they program it in that computer and that's it, it can run by itself. So, so while we've been over here, we had, we had three big, big cut backs, layoffs, which was really devastating. You know because people you had been here, grew close to, you know, they let go. And [W]DIA was interesting, we were a union station. We were the only station, radio station in Memphis [Tennessee] that was a union and the TV station, WHBQ was a union station. We were the only two union stations in radio and TV in Memphis. Well you know once they started cutting, I mean that got rid of the union. So-- Speaker 1: Along the same line as union--is there a black association of, of blacks in, in media here? Speaker 2: Well we have a National Association of Black Journalists Radio, so that's about the only thing here that we have, with blacks in the media. Speaker 1: Okay, so is it a strong chapter here? Speaker 2: They kind of dwindled, but now they're starting back up. So they're trying to get it back together again. Cause one, one while they were very strong. Story_ID: 98101 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. They have it noted here that in 2009 you had Joy Deja King here and, and so, so you do like authors of books. Speaker 2: Yeah, do authors, yeah do authors and interview them, talk about their books. Have had several authors here. [HM] Terry McMillan and her sister, her sister lives here. Authors you know from, gosh, all kinds of authors. Speaker 1: I know--I'm getting old [unclear] authors had Mississippi roots that are, Alice Walker. Speaker 2: Yeah, over the years had several authors on my show. Speaker 1: Margaret Walker used to live in this- and of course she passed away. She's been gone about ten years now. You know, yeah so-- Speaker 2: Lot of, lot of great authors here that I've had on this show. Speaker 1: [HM] Maya Angelou has a Mississippi connection? Speaker 2: You know what? I have not had her on my show, and I'm trying to think did I interview her over the phone. But I did get a chance to meet her when she came to Memphis to speak. So I did get a chance to meet her. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So now you've been doing the Bev Johnson show-- Speaker 2: For 27 years. Speaker 1: Twenty seven years. Speaker 2: I've been working at this station [WDIA], it's 31 this year, 31 years. I've been in the business 38. Story_ID: 98102 Speaker 1: Okay, so what's next? Now what, what are you--is there anything that you want to do that you have not done in the business? Have you, have you had a chance to be on television? Speaker 2: I have, I have had--well I had a, a public affairs, well not a public affairs. We had our own little cable show on, on local cable channel here, the Comcast, "Affairs of the Heart". And that, that took off from the radio show ["The Bev Johnson Show"], Dr. Jeffries [Dorothy Jeffries-Anderson] and I started that doing just relationships, talking about all kinds of relationships and called it "Affairs of the Heart", so I've been doing that. Last year I had stopped doing it because I wasn't able to get to the tapings because I had evening classes, so that was kind of a conflict. But almost had been doing that show as long as, as the radio show. Probably about 25, 26 years. People loved it. We talked about relationships, would have professionals on to talk about you know, counselors. But that, that was--men and women relationships. So that, that was good. So that kind of came out of the radio show. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And, and, and I've been on, you know, the local TV shows here. They, they have me on. I do something now--one of the channels here, the CBS channel, they have a "Water Cooler Wednesday", every Wednesday that they get local radio people to come and talk about different topics. So they usually call me to do that, so I've been doing that and done a lot of commercials and you know, I've done a little TV. Speaker 1: Okay. So do you have any plans to write a book or anything, or, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I do, I do, I do. Matter of fact, I got a biographer and we are getting ready to, to put my story down. Story_ID: 98103 Speaker 1: Now what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in Memphis today? Speaker 2: Gosh, my first concern is the crime. Our crime, it's just gotten out of hand and I don't know what's happening, why we're having so many shootings, more so. That's one of my biggest concerns. How can, how can we, we stop that, what is really happening? Is it really about gangs I'm wondering sometimes. My other biggest concern is with the young people, that hopefully that they can get their heads on straight; that they know where they're going. Get more adults to become mentors and, and try to get our young people back on the road. I would love to see Memphis [Tennessee], the citizens of Memphis really get really, really serious about education. That, that it's important; we need it. But I hope that would change, you know. That this community can really become a unit because we have so much great history here. And then when you think about [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] lost his life here. Look like, look like we got to be better than this, you know. So--and that's why I do a lot of--you know I try to go speak to groups and, and the young people I talk, to try to get them to make sure that they have their heads on straight, you know, so they can have a, a good life. Speaker 1: Okay well just this year, you interviewed Benjamin Crump and Ameena Matthews. Speaker 2: Yeah, Benjamin Crump was wonderful. Speaker 1: Does he have local roots here, is he-- Speaker 2: No, he was invited to come speak by one of the local churches. And they called me and asked me, you know, would I like to have him on the show. I said "wonderful," you know "yes." Cause he represented the Martin family [Trayvon Martin's family] and so he--very intelligent man, very, very--got some good stuff going on in his head that he would like to see. Ameena, you know she was on it as one of the "Black Girls Rock" and, and she works with young people and trying to get the communities--really enjoyed her, her interview and her testimony. And she's a hometown girl, she's from Memphis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She's from Orange Mound, so she talked about that, yeah. Speaker 1: All right and she's, she was featured in the 2011 documentary "The Interrupters". Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: About Project CeaseFire in Chicago [Illinois]. I remember seeing her (unclear), yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that was good. Speaker 1: Quelling violence in Englewood, one of the places in Chicago, yeah. Story_ID: 98104 Speaker 1: So now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would change if you could? Speaker 2: I'd keep everything the same. I have no regrets about the things that I did that maybe weren't so right. The things that I did that were right, and maybe somebody didn't think it was right, but no I don't, I don't think I would change anything. Unless if I could go back to be that actress on Broadway. I still think about that, and I still think about maybe it's not too late, maybe I still have a chance to do that; never know. But that still is in the back of my mind that I, I want to, want to be on Broadway. Speaker 1: Have you participated in any local productions or anything-- Speaker 2: No, and people get on me, say "Well why haven't you"--I, I have not done that. Speaker 1: Okay you think you might do it? Speaker 2: I may. Because we--we are building a brand new black theater in, in town [Memphis, Tennessee] and they are looking for a lot of people. And that's going to be wonderful, so I just may do it since we'll have a new black theater in a major part of town and we don't have that. So that may be something I may look forward to doing. Speaker 1: What's the name of the theater? Speaker 2: Hattiloo, Hattiloo Theatre, Hattiloo. Speaker 1: How do you spell that, H-A-- Speaker 2: H-A-T-T-I-L-O-O, Hattiloo Theatre. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So it'll be a venue for theatrical arts and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it'll be, it'll be-- Speaker 1: Is it, is it gone be the home of a company that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah the--well it's gonna be the home, you know of black, of black theatre. Right now they're in a place, but where you'll be able to see black production and theatre, yeah, from plays to musical, it's gonna be very nice. It's, it's located in mid-town. Story_ID: 98105 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Once again if you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: I think that my--if someone asked you about my legacy, they would probably tell you that I was fair with people. I was patient with people. I tried to bring them information. I tried to educate people. I had compassion for people. I had passion for my job. I tried to, I tried to do the right thing. I think people would tell you that; wasn't a hypocrite. I'm gone tell you what I think, you know. And I think that would be my legacy. Story_ID: 98106 Speaker 1: And you received honors from the National Black Programmers Coalition, right, News Director of the Year, several years. Speaker 2: Yes, several years. Speaker 1: Several different years. Speaker 2: I think but in this business my most proudest award was being nominated three times for the Marconi Award in Radio. The Marconi Award in Radio is equivalent to an Oscar or Emmy. And during the three years that I was nominated in the category of Personality of the Year, I was the only black woman in that category and woman. So--and that was--I never thought that, that I would get that honor, I was nominated. I didn't win, but I was nominated three times in a row [in 1993, 1994, 1995]. So I think, I think I'm really proud of that. I've gotten numerous awards. My Billboard Award personality, but that one Marconi, cause it means something, radio. And [Guglielmo] Marconi was the father of radio. And so when I was nominated for that, that was, that was just wonderful. Story_ID: 98107 Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell us about your family. Did, did you ever get married? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did get married, I was married for ten years, divorced. I don't have any children, nieces and nephews. Single right now and loving my life. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right now is there anything we have not--what does your, what does your mother [Julia Atlas Danner Johnson] and grandmother [Maybell Rodgers-Danner] think about your career? Did they have a chance to see you? Speaker 2: Well you know what? They did--although they're deceased, all my parents and grandparents, my, my grandmother was very much proud of me when I was radio. She was still alive, in radio. She never heard me on the radio in Memphis [Tennessee] because matter of fact, she, she passed away in '81 [1981]. But my mother did and, and she was so proud. She would tell everybody "That's my daughter on WDIA." I say mama stop telling everybody that, you know. But she was really proud. So she got to hear me on radio. So I think they, they loved that. My father [William Van Johnson] didn't because my father was, was killed in--when I was going to Jackson State in '78 [1978]. So he was murdered in Ann Arbor [Michigan]. But he never got to hear me on radio. But I think he would be proud. I think he would have-- Speaker 1: I didn't realize that. So what, what happened to him? Speaker 2: It was--from my understanding cause I wasn't there, one of the employers at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor] or something, they said he was jealous of him or something, came in and shot him on the job. Speaker 1: One of the people that employed him, actually. Speaker 2: Right, exactly. And that's something. Speaker 1: Yeah, you would never guess-- Speaker 2: Never guess that and you know that was like-- Speaker 1: Yeah, University of Michigan (unclear)-- Speaker 2: And they, they and then he, when he did that, the man ran away and left. But they finally caught him. So he, you know he did go to prison. And I understand in, in the prison he hanged himself in prison, the guy. Isn't that something, yeah. But I think my, my parents and my grandparents, I know they would be very, extremely proud of me. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I do, I do. Story_ID: 98108 Speaker 1: And is there anything we have not discussed that we need to raise before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Okay I think we basically covered everything, thinking about radio and covered the teaching. Speaker 1: Do you have a, a journalistic philosophy? Speaker 2: Try to get the whole truth, cause it's two sides to every story. Try to get to the truth. Try to get to the truth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, try to get to the truth. And I, and I believe wholeheartedly in historic black colleges and universities [HBCUs]. I support them tremendously. I think they're needed and they will be needed. So I support them. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I think we've covered everything. I'm a member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, I'm proud of that. And we do a lot of good community works. I think we covered everything. I don't think we left out anything. Story_ID: 98109 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So the last question is similar to legacy but a little different, more personal. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as Bev Johnson who treated everybody the same, no matter what. I treated everybody the same no matter what condition they were in, where they came from, where they was going; I treated everybody the same. I think I wanted to be remembered that I treated everybody right. Speaker 1: Okay. Well thank you very much for sharing. Speaker 2: Thank you so very much, thank you, thank you...