 Story_ID: 156561 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Terry Lee Jones, T-E-R-R-Y, L-E-E, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born January 23rd, 1947, in Omaha, Nebraska. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a venture capital investor and manage a vent, venture capital fund in Washington, D.C., in the Washington, D.C. area. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is June 10th--is that right--12th (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) twelfth--thirteen. Speaker 2: Thirteenth (laughter), okay, June 13th, 19--I mean 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Silver Spring, Maryland, in my office at the office of Syndicated Communications Venture Partners [Syncom Venture Partners]. Story_ID: 156562 Speaker 1: All right, okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as a warm-up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I have several favorite foods. I think popcorn would probably be ranked number one 'cause I can't pass a popcorn stand without getting it. And I used to eat it every day when I was growing up, so I'd say popcorn of all foods (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue, depending on the season which shade of blue it is. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Caribbean generally, Jamaica specifically. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, I have several favorite phrases or sayings. One of them is simply "a luta continua," which is a phrase that you may remember an organization called FRELIMO [Mozambique Liberation Front] used, meaning "the struggle continues." It kind of reminds me that the progress is only made by continuing the struggle. And it will continue, and it does continue, so we have to be a part of that, that struggle. Story_ID: 156563 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. And we'll start with your mother's side first. Can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Enolia Geneieve Jones, Enolia is E-N-O-L-I-A, Geneieve is harder, G-E-N-E-I-E-V-E, married name Jones, maiden name Bowman. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Hiawatha, Kansas, December 23, 1925. Speaker 1: All right, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family. How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing, you know, back, back in time? Speaker 2: I can trace the name Montgomery into the 1860s. I believe they were in Kansas at the time. They come from Kentucky but I believe in Kansas at that time. And Kansas being a free state at that time or in the 1860s, I don't know of any slave, you know, plantations or, or people who actually were enslaved in from her side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay, not, not even on the Kentucky side? I mean not-- Speaker 2: I don't know any, no. Speaker 1: --in Kentucky. I mean--okay. Speaker 2: No, I don't know them. Speaker 1: So they don't, they don't have a story about that at all in those parts? Speaker 2: No story that I am aware of. Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story about migrating from Kentucky to Kansas? Speaker 2: No, I just know they migrated, that, that their roots are from Kentucky and migrated to Kansas sometime in the mid-1800s. Speaker 1: Okay, this is before the Civil War or after it? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Speaker 1: You said eighteen, six--you said 1860s or-- Speaker 2: I'm saying I can trace back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know that they, my, my grandmother's grandparents I believe were born in the 1860s, late, perhaps late 1860s, but just from, you know, memory. I'm not, I'm not sure whether it was during the Civil War or after the Civil War exactly. Speaker 1: Were they born in Kentucky or Kansas? Speaker 2: Don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, were there any stories from that side of the family about what your great-grandparents were doing in, in Kansas? Speaker 2: Not that I can recall, no. I mean they moved to--they were, they, we were part of Kansas, part of Hiawatha, Kansas, for generations, stories that they were landowners and tradesmen, farmers. Speaker 1: Okay, did you meet your grandparents [Odessa Bowman and Charles Bowman]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, I grew up--the early years we lived in--after moving from Nebraska back to Hiawatha, Kansas, my grandparents were a block away, so we'd spend time with them. And then after that, we, when we moved to Kansas City [Missouri] as a family, we would spend summers at our grandparents as children. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so, so were they on a, on a farm situ--in a farm situation or in town or-- Speaker 2: No, in town. Speaker 1: In town? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: My grandmother worked as a cook at a local hotel. My grandfather was a cobbler, a shoe repairman and shoemaker. Story_ID: 156564 Speaker 1: Now, what did your mother [Enolia Bowman Jones] say about growing up in Hiawatha [Kansas]? Speaker 2: What did she say? She said that she grew up in Hiawatha. It was a very small town, as in Kansas. It was a farming community, but the town served the farm community. I believe she liked it very much. It's a quiet place, safe place, racially very intermixed. There weren't a number of--there were, there were a number of African American families, maybe eight or so that had relatives and, and cousins and stuff. So there are more than that, in terms of people in families, but generally, eight, eight to ten African Americans families in the town, if I remember correctly, town of about three to five thousand perhaps in total people. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But a good place to be a child and grow up in terms of outdoors, and you know, safety, and you know, the ability to learn a, a lot of things about nature. Speaker 1: Okay, now where is Hiawatha in, say, relationship to Kansas City [Missouri]? Speaker 2: Hiawatha is in the northeast section of Kansas. It's about ninety miles from Kansas City and maybe eighty, ninety miles from the Missouri border, going, if you move east, further east to Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, ray, race relations in the town were, were okay, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was very congenial. I mean, you know, African Americans were still black people, but they, they, we went to school together. There was no separation of the races in either in terms of education or a--(unclear)--places you could go or, or places you could eat or none of that. That, that was, in Kansas it wasn't, at least when I, to my recollection, it didn't exist. I didn't experience it until I moved to Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so did your mother have a chance to finish high school in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother finished high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did she go on to college? Speaker 2: No, my mother did not go to college. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: She was married shortly after finishing high school. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so, but she went to an integrated high school in those-- Speaker 2: Yeah, everything in Kadwatha [Hiawatha] was integrated. There was only one elementary school, one high school. Everybody went there. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's very interesting 'cause a lot of places in the North weren't, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --(laughter) integrated in those days. Speaker 2: No, Kansas, Kansas was an interesting free state, and that's the way it was. Speaker 1: Okay, did you know if they had a tradition of being, you know, ideologically committed to, I guess, you know, freedom for black people or anything like that, you know, John Brown-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so. It was, it was a-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --border state, and you know, the, the blacks crossed into Kansas in order to escape slavery. So it had a tradition of, of freedom for African Americans. And people would, you know, escape to go there. And it was a part of what Kansas was about. It doesn't mean that racism didn't exist or that prejudice didn't exist. I mean I remember being called names as a little, as we all were, I think in those days. But, again, you know, my best friends growing up were little white kids and black kids. And we all went to school together, and we all went to birthday parties together, et cetera. And this was, I was born in the late forties [1940s], so it was the way it was then. Story_ID: 156565 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Elmer Billy Jones, E-L-M-E-R, B-I-L-L-Y, Jones, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born November 6th or 7th; November 7th I guess it was, 1923. Speaker 1: Okay, and where, where was he born? Speaker 2: Atchison, Kansas. Speaker 1: Atchison? Okay, that's A-T-C-H-I-S-O-N? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Atis, Atis, Atchison, Atchison, Topeka [Kansas] in the Santa Fe, you remember that? Speaker 1: That's, that's right. I was thinking that. Speaker 2: But that still doesn't help us spell it, does it? Speaker 1: Okay, so there may not--I've heard that-- Speaker 2: A-- Speaker 1: --it may not be a "t" in it. Speaker 2: I think it's A-T-C-H. Speaker 1: A-T-C-H? Speaker 2: [Nodding yes]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so we got it down here so. Speaker 2: I, and we can find that out. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, what do you know about your father's side? How far back can you trace the, the Jones side? Speaker 2: The 1860s. I believe--well, I take that back. Am I thinking about my--when you asked me about my mother's [Enolia Bowman Jones] side, I was thinking of my grandmother's [Odessa Bowman] side on my mother's side. My grandfather's [Charles Bowman] side on my mother's side also I can, they went back to the 1860s. In fact, I've seen pictures of his great, my grandfather's grandfather, who was married in--who was born in 1960--1868. On my father's side, I am just not sure. I pra, probably can't go that far back with any certainty. My grandfather is, and his--I don't even know his father. I can't remember who my grandfather's father was. And so and my grandfather was born probably the turn of the century, and his name was Elmer Jones in Atchison, Kansas. Speaker 1: Okay, so, is there any tradition that the family came from some other place to Kansas? Speaker 2: Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there any story about that migration that was told? Speaker 2: No, I just remember stories about my aunts in Tennessee, who were apparently college-educated early in the, in the turn, in the century and were teachers at Tennessee [State University, Nashville, Tennessee], who was called Tennessee A and I [College] at the time. I think it was Tennessee A and I, Tennessee State now. So I knew I had some aunts who went to college, and they were teachers at Tennessee A and I way back then. But that's sort of all I know about the Tennessee side. And one of my uncles went to Tennessee to try to do some searching down there and did discover things, but I--he wasn't, he wasn't able to share 'em before he passed. Speaker 1: Okay, so these are your, these are your father's sisters, these aunts, or are they-- Speaker 2: Aunts, yeah, my father's brothers and aunts. The ones who were teachers were his, his aunts-- Speaker 1: His aunts, okay. Speaker 2: --his ma-- Speaker 1: So those are your-- Speaker 2: --his mother's [Madge Jones] sisters. Speaker 1: --great-aunts, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. But my uncle was my father's brother. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so they, they were from the Nashville [Tennessee] area then, right, or-- Speaker 2: The, before, yeah, before my grandfather, his folks were from Tennessee. And I don't know whether that was his side or his wife's side, but I know that my father traces back to Tennessee. My father's side traces back to Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay, and there's no story about why, why they ended up, his, his father ended up in Kansas? Speaker 2: No story that I know of other than what I can speculate: get, get to a free state (laughter). Speaker 1: Freer than-- Speaker 2: Freer than Tennessee or-- Speaker 1: --than Tennessee, yeah. Speaker 2: --Kentucky or any of those places. Speaker 1: Well, the turn of the century, I mean, I guess it--I, I don't know. I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. I mean, I mean the original people who came-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --to Kansas, 'cause they, they came, the peep--their parents, my grandfather's parents were in Kansas before. You know, he wasn't born in Tennessee and moved. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 156566 Speaker 1: We've had, we've been in--in other words, my father [Elmer Jones] and mother's [Enolia Bowman Jones] side have in Kansas probably since the late, mid-late 1800s, long time in Kansas. Speaker 2: Okay, so the roots in Tennessee are back in the-- Speaker 1: Way back-- Speaker 2: Way back. Speaker 1: --probably, probably-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --in and after, in and right after slavery. Speaker 2: And your, your father's aunts actually went back to Tennessee to go to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, no, they never, they were-- Speaker 2: Oh? Speaker 1: --they were in, they, just part of the family who stayed in-- Speaker 2: Oh, part, okay. Speaker 1: --you know, still in Tennessee. Speaker 2: Okay, all right-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --all right. Okay, so, so they taught at Tennessee A and I [College, later Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]. And that would have been, that's the early part, part of this century, right, they were teaching, I guess? Speaker 1: I have, I--it could, could have been, yeah, and should have been. Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay, well, now what, what, what did your grandparents do in Atchison? Speaker 1: My grandfather [Elmer Jones] worked for a company that--I, I forget what kind of company it was, but he was there for fifty-some years, 'cause I remember when he got his gold watch for his fiftieth year. God, what did that company do? It was some sort of, maybe a, my, like a, what do you call 'em? They dig, dig up rock and crush it. Speaker 2: Quarry or-- Speaker 1: Quarry-type, yeah, that, that kind of company, or, or maybe it was a boxy. I really, you know, have lost memory of what that company did, but he was there a long time. My grandmother worked from home, you know. My father's mother died when he was very young in a fire, unfortunately. And so my grandfather married--remarried, and his wife [Madge Jones] was actually an entertainer and singer/pianist, who stopped entertaining and doing that when she got married. But on both sides of my fa, my family, mother's side and father's side, there's a heavy involvement in music. My grandfather [Charles Bowman] on my mother's side was in a band. My grandfather on my father's side was in a band and played saxophone. And his wife, his second wife was a singer/pianist. And so growing up, we, music was a part of our culture or life. We all, as children, all had to learn an instrument. Whether you stayed with it or not, you had to take it. That was part of what you, everybody did. You passed down, you got the instrument from your big brother or your cousin or whatever, and that's the instrument you learned to play, trumpet, clarinet, saxophone, whatever it was, drums. And most, most of us didn't continue. I, I actually still take lessons and play, but coming out of that, that area, that Kansas City, Kansas, Missouri, area, jazz, and Count Basie, and Duke Ellington, and Artie Shaw and all those people were, you know, it was part of the culture. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Now what, what was your, your mother's father's name? Speaker 1: My mother's father's name is Charles Bowman. Speaker 2: Charles Bowman, okay. So and he played a horn too you said? Speaker 1: He played, he, he played piano and drums. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So yeah, that's a lot of music going on here--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, we were very musical. Speaker 2: What was the, your grandmother's, your, your, your father's mother's name? Speaker 1: Madge, M-A--I think it's spelled M-A-D-G-E, Madge, Jones. Speaker 2: Okay, and the, the singer that he married, do you remember-- Speaker 1: Oh, that was Madge. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: That was Madge Jones, okay. Speaker 1: His mom's name, oh God, I'm blanking. Oh God, I almost had it (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, that's okay we can-- Speaker 1: Yeah--(unclear)--get that later. Speaker 2: Now, now did you get--your, your dad get a chance to finish high school and go on to college or-- Speaker 1: No, he finished high school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Didn't go to college. When he came out of high school World War II [WWII] was happening, so he was drafted into the service. Speaker 2: Now was the school system in Atchison [Kansas] segregated. Speaker 1: Abs--no, it was, it was, it was one school system. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Blacks and whites lived together, went to school together. Speaker 2: All right. So they had like one, was it Atchison high school or something or-- Speaker 1: Um-hum, Atchison Senior High [School, Atchison, Kansas]. Story_ID: 156567 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Actually, you know, Atchison's [Kansas] right on the border between Kansas and Missouri. So, I told you Hiawatha [Kansas] was ninety miles from Kansas City [Missouri]. It's more like fifty miles from--well, it's ninety miles from Kansas City, fifty miles from Missouri, and Atchison's right on the Kansas, Missouri, border. You cross the river-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --different world-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from, from Atchison, Kansas, to-- Speaker 1: That's interesting that, I mean the, I guess the, the difference between, you know, the slave state and the, and the, that part of Kansas, you know, that, that-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --that was dramatized in the activities of John Brown way back in the nineteenth century. It just gives him a different character I guess than--well-- Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting because I believe it da, da, did give the people in that area different, very different kinds of backgrounds, characters, senses, sense of self and etc., etc., because if you meet folks from Kansas, African Americans from Kansas or blacks from Missouri, you could tell there was a difference; there's a real difference. I mean near here were landowners, farmers, tradesmen, whatever, you know, porters, whatever they are. And then over here, traditionally they've come out of being enslaved, and it creates a different mentality, different sets of self and all of that. And you notice it when you're, you know, when you see it that starkly defined. And I, and I can even see it today when I, in the East Coast, the difference between African Americans, in some ways, from the Southern migrated, migratory tracks here versus blacks I knew that were raised in Oklahoma and Missouri, in Kansas, and Colorado, Nebraska, Iowa, free states, different. Story_ID: 156568 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now are there any--did your father [Elmer Jones] have any stories about growing up that he shared with you, any particular stories that-- Speaker 2: Well, he was one of I think nine children. He was the second oldest. He was the first boy. So his stories would generally be of how he had to sort of take charge of things at an early age. He was the oldest boy, as I said. His mom had died when many of the other kids were younger, so he had to really step in and, and work and help support the family, sort of help guide the family, 'cause his father [Elmer Jones] was working, you know, as men had to do then, very hard to support nine kids, eight kids. And so his stories would be about work and about, you know, what you have to do to grow up quickly and be a man and those kinds of things. And, and that's what I can remember, his--you know, and, and of course, how important education was. I mean on both sides of my family education was always a prized sort of, you know, quality or, or attribute that you had to aspire to. Speaker 1: Okay, so did your father--now I didn't ask this about your mother [Enolia Bowman Jones] either, but did they have aspirations when they were in high school that they wanted to achieve that they, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think both of them would like to have gone to college. My mother got pregnant early, after high school, and my father became a dad (laughter) quickly after high school. But he always wanted to go to college. He was very, very good particular with math and numbers and just had a, just had a, you know, a, a skill there that was, that came very naturally to him. So he always felt that he would do well in, in school and, but wasn't able to attend, had to work, had to take care of the family, had to take care of his younger brothers and sisters, and you know, wanted us to always be able to have what he didn't have and that is the ability to get, you know, the, the advan, the college degrees. But he, he wouldn't--he wanted, both of 'em wanted to go to college-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I believe. I think my mother wanted to go. Story_ID: 156569 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, she [Jones' mother Enolia Bowman Jones] grew up in Hiawatha [Kansas], and he [Jones' father Elmer Jones] grew, he grows up in Atchison [Kansas]. How did they meet? Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, typically what, in that area, the small towns there are, as I said, a number of black families in each town, in Horton, Kansas, and St. Joe [St. Joseph, Kansas], and Leavenworth [Kansas], and you know, all these towns. And so the blacks would know each other; they'd get to know each other 'cause they would come to each other's parties, or high school events, or there black events that were--now, the social events were, in fact, somewhat segregated. There would be a black picnic that would attract blacks from neighboring towns, and you'd get to know each other. So the guys from the different towns twenty and thirty and forty miles away would know each other. And they'd get to know the young ladies from those other towns. And they would, you know, once they got cars, they would travel. And you know, it was probably some, some cachet of having, you know, a boyfriend from this town or a girlfriend from that town. So, they mixed, as kids sort of do now in school, you know, will go to this school, that school, and then you kind of end up mixing in college or in, in school, private schools or whatever. And since there were only, they were always in the "minority"--they weren't "minorities." I don't like that word--but they were in the "minority." In those towns, they would naturally, you know, seek each other out and, and party together, and, and socialize together, attend, you know, functions together. So that's how they met and got married (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, now, now your father is younger than your mother, right, it says-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: He was born in '23 [1923]. She was born in '25 [1925]. Speaker 1: Twenty--oh, he's a little, he's a little older, yeah; okay, he's a little older than her. I'm sorry. My mind is working in reverse (laughter). Speaker 2: That's all right. Speaker 1: But okay. So, so he'd already finished school. And was, was he in the service already when they, when they finally got together? Speaker 2: I don't know if he was in the service already. Let me see, if you're born in '23 [1923]--'43 [1943]--the war [World War II, WWII] started in '41 [1941], right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So he might have been in or just going in, 'cause he was probably eighteen when the war started, in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they met each other before that hap--(unclear)--I think before that, I believe. Story_ID: 156570 Speaker 1: So when you think about your parents' [Enolia Bowman Jones and Elmer Jones] personalities, and their dispositions, and their, their looks, and habits, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I'm a combination, more my father probably than my mother. My mother is a very, sort of, I wouldn't say shy, but then, again, I would say shy in some ways, introverted in some ways, sort of very inward, you know. She's focused on family. She focuses on, you know, the home, etc., and is not comfortable in the, generally speaking, seeking, being, you know, actively or aggressively engaged in outside activities. She, she was engaged in them but not to the extent that my father was, for example, who was a very outward kind of person, a natural leader. People were attracted to him. He was, you know, congenial. He liked to just be out there. He was always a big figure, big personality and, and you know, very knowledgeable, very interested in, in things, always willing to tell you how things should be or were. Yeah, that's just his outgoing sort of style. And so I'm, I take after both. And I say that because I'm, in some ways, I grew up being very shy initially and sort of over the years have become more and more outward and more, I guess, willing to lead, interested in being engaged. I've always had a natural interested in being, interest in being engaged in things. But really stepping to the front of those things and being engaged just was not natural for me. I had to get pushed often along the way. But I did get pushed along the way, and as a result, I ended up, you know, being involved in the leadership positions in a lot of things through my life. Story_ID: 156571 Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, tell me, can you give, give me the names of your brothers and sisters, and tell us where you fit in that order? Speaker 2: I have an older sister, Sharon Pauline Hardy. And I have a half sister. My father [Elmer Jones] had another daughter, Opal Pauline Jones. No, it's Sharon, Pauline, Opal, may be an Opal Pauline too for some reason I'm thinking. I have a younger brother. I'm second, well, third (laughter). But of the siblings I grew up with, there are four of us. My older sister, me, and then my brother, who is a year and a half younger, Ronald Paul Jones, and then my youngers, our youngest sister, Denise Elaine Jones. Speaker 1: Okay, the name Paul seems to figure a lot in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it does. Speaker 1: And is there a reason? Speaker 2: I, I, I'm sure there is, and I--you just gotta hit me too. I said you know, there's a lot of Pauls and Paulines in here. I know we had an Aunt Pauline on my father's side, so that, I'm thinking that's where that Pauline come from. The Paul, that may, she may have been the reason for that too. I don't know. Story_ID: 156572 Speaker 1: So, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: An earliest childhood memory? My earliest childhood memory is sitting in the wintertime in our house in Hiawatha, Kansas, in front of a potbellied stove, wood-burning stove with my mother [Enolia Bowman Jones] doing what I have come to believe was some sort of math or puzzles or something. But I remember working with her on the, for her working with me on the floor in front of that stove. And that, for some reason, that was indelibly etched in my mind because I've always credited her attention to doing things like that with my own, sort of, and our, my siblings, you know, seriousness about school and you know, learning and you know, that kind of just being with you to, you know, praise you when you got two plus two right or when you got, you know, stacked the blocks in an interesting way or whatever. And that's really my earliest memory. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there- Speaker 2: And I was probably two or three. Story_ID: 156573 Speaker 1: Now, what is the story about your parents [Enolia Bowman Jones and Elmer Jones] having you in Omaha [Nebraska], you being born in Omaha--(unclear)--rather than Kansas? Speaker 2: My--I was born in 1947. And during the war years [World War II, WWII], my mother and father moved to Omaha for work, because they had factories there that made war materials or you know, whatever they were making. But there were jobs here, so they moved to Omaha for work and stayed there after the war for a little while. And that's where I was born, and that's why I was born there. We also had relatives from my mother's side in Nebraska, in Falls City, Nebraska, I remember. I don't know if we had any relatives in Omaha. We could have from her, my mother's side. But I remember Fall City, F-A-L-L-S, City, Nebraska, we had relatives, which is not too far from Omaha. But that's how they got to Omaha, for jobs during the war. Speaker 1: Okay, so, after the war they moved back to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And then sometime after the war they moved back, because I believe my brother, who was born a year and a half later, was born in Hiawatha [Kansas]. My sister was born in Hiawatha, and she was born in 1945. So they moved, they must have moved to Nebraska. They did move to Nebraska after that and came back around '48 [1948]. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so then, did you grow up in ha, Hiawatha then--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Primarily, yeah, I was-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --a year old when we left Nebraska-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and grew up in Hiawatha through the fourth grade. Story_ID: 156574 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, to--now, what were--we, we always ask this question. We ask it like, like this, and there must be a reason (laughter) somewhere. But we're told to ask the question like this. What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The sights, and sounds of smell, and smells of growing up related primarily to the outdoors, being out, you know. And Kansas Cit-Hiawatha [Kansas] being a small town, we lived in a area where across the street was a big open field and you know, the, the sights of, of fireflies at night during the summer, the sights of the ditch in front being filled with water during the spring, and the sights of you know, incredible heights of snow (laughter) in the winter--that's the Midwest (laughter), you know--of tornadoes, tornado and tornado warnings in April, in May. Those were the sights and sounds. And the smells were the smells of flowers, and the smells of grass, and the smells of, of dirt, dirt roads, 'cause it was a dirt road a long time in front of us, the smells of tar, the smells of corn. There was a corn granary across that field that I talked about. So when the trains would pull up, they'd put the, the grain in the cars. I remember, you know, that, the smell of the, the, the milled corn or whatever they were putting in there, and, and smell of grass. I mean because we were kids running around barefoot in the grass a lot, and you know, again, flowers, just, just outdoor smells, and certainly the smells of food and cooking, 'cause my, 'cause Midwestern cooks are very good cooks. My grandmother was, wa, was one of the best cooks in the world I, I think. You know, she, she was famous all through that, through the of being at her bakery, baked goods. Those are a lot of, a lot of what I said--and then the sound of music, because, again, we all had to play music. My, my grandparents played music. And my father [Elmer Jones] had a pretty good record collection, you know, of old 78s. And so growing up, those were, those were a lot of the things that we heard and smell, smelled. We weren't, we weren't farmers. We didn't live in the farm. I mean I would have had a different group of smells if I was on a farm. And I do remember some of those smells. In terms of day-to-day living it was just really the, the outdoors, and the, being, being in a small town environment, and playing in the grass, and playing in open fields, and seeing the lightning bugs at night, and the, you know-- Speaker 1: Now, now, did you ever see a tornado? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah (laughter). I live in tornado alley, man, are you kidding? Speaker 1: Yeah, I know of people following 'em around now trying to get a, get a glimpse of 'em, but I, I-- Speaker 2: We, we-- Speaker 1: --just wondered if you saw-- Speaker 2: We, we-- Speaker 1: --one coming when you-- Speaker 2: --in fact, we have a company that does storm chasing. They've invited Rochelle to go storm chasing with them. We have a weather company that we have invested in, and they do storm chasing. You know, they chase tornadoes. And one of my guys went one year, and you know, said it was crazy (laughter). Speaker 1: So you ev, you never had your home blown away or anything, have you? Speaker 2: No, no, we were lucky; we were lucky that we weren't, we weren't like the 'Wizard of Oz' [L. Frank Baum]. You know, we, we would go down to the cellar though. We knew what to do, 'cause, you know, they were, they were fairly frequent in that part of the country. Story_ID: 156575 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, well, describe the house you grew up in. What was it like, and woul-- did you have any neighbors close by, or, or, and, and was it a segregated community? Speaker 2: Wasn't segre--it was--most of those communities in small towns are segregated by economics more than by race. They had, you know, working class black people or poor black people and working class white people and poor white people living pretty much in, in a similar area. The well-to-do people would live in, you know, a slightly different part of town. But it would only be a, you know, a two-minute bicycle ride from one side to the other, so I mean, you know, it'd just be a, this would be the big house over here, and these would be the little houses over here in a few, couple, three blocks away. And then we had Afri--we had blacks who were fairly well-off because they were businesspeople far--very successful farmers or, or construction, had construction companies, and they were very well off. And they had beautiful homes, rela--you know, relatively speaking, very nice homes, etc. So those people, hardworking people, they were successful, landowners, business owners. So it was, it was mixed, but, yeah, the, the, the economic group of one, so we kind of live in one part of that town, tend to live there. Speaker 1: Was there, was there a name for the part of town you lived in? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a small (laughter) town. Speaker 1: Now, now what did your parents [Enolia Bowman Jones and Elmer Jones] do, do for a living? Speaker 2: My father worked for the railroad initially, and then he became a postal clerk, a railway postal clerk, so he worked for the post office. And he later, when we moved to Kansas City [Missouri], worked, got off the, the railway postal things--you know, where they'd ride in the cars, he'd grab the mail, ride on the cars, and sort the mail between cities. He then moved inside and worked in the post office in Kansas City. And my mother was a housewife until I think all of her children were born. Then she went to work in the post office as well as a postal clerk. Story_ID: 156576 Speaker 1: Now, now you started school I guess in Hiawatha [Kansas], right? You were there until you were seven you said? Was it, was it seven you-- Speaker 2: Whatever the fourth grade is. I don't know how old you are in the fourth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, fourth grade. I guess nine. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, something like that. Speaker 1: It's use, it's usually nine, depending on when you started. Speaker 2: Well, let's see, I, I, yeah, I'm-- Speaker 1: So did you start--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We moved to Kansas City [Missouri] in 1955. I was born in '47 [1947], so I must have been eight. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: About eight, yeah, when I moved. But I was a, I was a year ahead of myself in school. My mother [Enolia Bowman Jones] put me in school early because my birthday was right on the cusp, on the other side of the cusp, and she wanted me to start earlier. So, I was always sort of the youngest person in my class, one of the youngest if not the youngest. Speaker 1: Did you have a kindergarten, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we had kindergarten in Hiawatha-- Speaker 1: Where did you start? Speaker 2: --through the fourth grade, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was the name of your school when you started kindergarten? Speaker 2: Name, Hiawatha Elementary School [Hiawatha, Kansas]. Speaker 1: Okay. I take it you liked school 'cause you were, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked school. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: It changed. Early on it was art. I liked art, and I liked pretty much everything generally on sort of an even basis. Later on, it became more science engendering kinds of--(unclear)--math and those kinds of things, but that's be, that's for a reason. I mean it's, it's, I've always felt that I was more, you know, just kind of balanced in the arts and the sciences, but I pursued the sciences. Speaker 1: So were you a talented artist as a young person you think? Speaker 2: I was okay. I was not as good as I thought I was (laughter), having seen what kids my age then are doing now, no, but I like to draw. I like to draw a lot and you know, at one point thought I would maybe make a good architect because you had to do--(unclear)--the merger of science and art, math and art, engineering and art, but quickly decided that wasn't a, a way to go either. Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers in Hiawatha? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I, I have a hard time remembering them, but there were--my second or third grade teacher I thought was very supportive and influencing, and I've forgotten her name. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so when the--(unclear)--when you were in the fourth grade, then you all moved to-- Speaker 2: Kansas City, Missouri. Speaker 1: Kansas City, okay. And where did you go to school in Kansas City? Speaker 2: Greenwood Elementary School [Kansas City, Missouri]. Story_ID: 156577 Speaker 1: Now, was this school [Greenwood Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri] segregated? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955] is when schools in Kansas City [Missouri] and in Missouri were desegregated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so there were, it was the first year or so of desegregation. And it was a very tumultuous kind of time because it was a time when schools that here--theretofore had been primarily white or a hun--a hundred percent white were now rapidly changing the demographic, you know, racial mix. And the teachers were sort of there, but the students flipped. In within a space of one or two years it went from all-white to majority black very quickly. I mean it was, it was like, it was amazing (laughter). They called it white flight, if you remember (laughter), yeah, because-- Speaker 1: Now this is the, the Supreme Court, the Brown v. Board of [Education of Topeka, 1954]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was that period. Speaker 1: --education of Topeka was the case that desegregated the-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --schools, at least on-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --in terms of the court decree. Speaker 2: And so we went in the schools when we moved to Missouri that had been all-white up to point and became all-black within a couple of years, or pretty much all black. And so it was a very big flip. Speaker 1: So were, were your parents [Enolia Bowman Jones and Elmer Jones] like keenly aware of Brown v. The Board in 1954, or were they-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I mean everybody was at that, you know, that was a very, as you know, a very big, very important, and very impactful decision. Story_ID: 156578 Speaker 1: Okay, so they, they [Jones' parents, Enolia Bowman Jones and Elmer Jones] knew exactly what they were doing when they moved to Kansas City [Missouri], huh? Speaker 2: Well, again, we moved to Kansas City for work, for, for, for economic opportunity. I mean Hiawatha [Kansas] is a small town. It's, there's limited jobs for, for young people. It's a problem of most small towns, black or white, that is you lose your young people to the bigger cities because of opportunities. There's only, you know, so many little factories or mills that can employ the young people. And of course, they're, they're pretty, you know, modest wage payers. And where you can go to the city, then you know, you can work here, there, there, there. And if you're a hard worker, then in a few years you can, you know, do a lot of stuff you couldn't do in a small town economically. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they moved to Kansas City for economic reasons I think-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --job opportunities. Speaker 1: This, is this when your father starts working for the post office basically? Speaker 2: It's, I think he was working as a railway mail clerk before that, but yeah, he transferred to Kansas City and worked as a mail clerk-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --postal mail clerk. Story_ID: 156579 Speaker 1: Now you got keenly involved in science, now, you know, so this is, you know--how, who got you involved in science early? I mean how, or how did you, what, what drew you into science. Speaker 2: Well, again, I, I always felt I was relatively balanced. I liked science. I liked art. But I think as I did things as a kid, like building things, and got, I remember getting an Erector set for Christmas one year because I'd shown this interest in it, in that kind of stuff. And I don't know if you remember Erector sets back in the day, but they used to be these beams, little beams, little aluminum beams, and screws, and bolts, and little motor you can--(unclear)--and, but you had to put things together and make a drawbridge or a this, or make a that. And so I used to do that, and I used get a lot of--what is it? People would congratulate or--I'm trying to think of the word--but you know, when people sort of pat you on the head and say that's really good; that's really good; that's really great; look at this; look at, look at what he did there. And all those kind, that was, that kind of feedback affects young people. It certainly affected me. I said hmm, this is something I'm--people think I'm good at. And you know (laughter), and I'd get, you know, praise for it because I, I growing up physically, I didn't get accolades for physical things because I was thin, and at that time short, and I just didn't have the, the genes to jump high and run fast like a lot of the other guys did. I mean I liked sports, and I did 'em, but I wasn't, I wasn't a winner. I wasn't the fastest. I wasn't the strongest. Speaker 1: But you were a year behind the other-- Speaker 2: And I was, and I was-- Speaker 1: --students there. Speaker 2: --and I was a year sort of, at least several months, behind most of the people in any class I was in. So, where I got my support and, and you know, sort of, you know, co, co--what do you call it--kudos, was, you know, people say oh, gee, look at he did this; he made that; he's, you know, is good at that, you know. And so you sort of, you sort of gravitate towards the things that you get rewarded and congratulated for. So that tended to be, you know, in engine, engineering kind of stuff, you know, little science stuff, little projects, math. And 'cause that didn't, didn't matter how many muscles you had or how high you can jump, you can do that. And so I wanted, being a seeker of adulation, decided to (laughter) to do that stuff and, and you know, was encouraged to do it as more, and the more encouragement it got and the same was with music. The more, more I played and studied music, the better I got, the more people say oh, isn't that great, the more it made me want to do it more and distinguish myself more. So, you know, it was just seeking approval. And seeking, you know, that really kind of help direct the course of, of, of things. Story_ID: 156580 Speaker 1: Now, now, what, what, what, what instrument did you play? Speaker 2: I played clarinet initially. I always wanted to play the saxophone 'cause that sort of was, you know, the jazz instrument I wanted to play. But in my day, if you wanted to play a saxophone, the purist would say, well, you need to learn the foundation of the woodwinds first, which is a clarinet, and then you can play the saxophone and the flute and other stuff. But if you go to the saxophone first, you'll probably never be able to play the clarinet because it's, the differences are, are large one, one way and not so large the other. So I learned to play clarinet, and I never got to--one of my disappointments was I never got past the clarinet to the saxophone, which is what I, you know, really initially wanted to. But I liked the clarinet and played well, and, and played it all the way through high school, and studied at the Conservatory of Music in Kansas City [Missouri], and you know, became sort of a youth orchestra member in Kansas City in, you know, in high school. (Unclear) the clarinet and did that. Story_ID: 156581 Speaker 1: Okay, now were you, you know considering what you've done later on in life, were, were you aware of the radio? I mean were, were you a radio fan when you were growing, growing up or TV fan? Speaker 2: No, no more than anybody else. I mean the radio was an important part of growing up in a small town in Kansas because that's in the evenings the way your grandfather and father would listen to sports. You know, we were Brooklyn Dodgers fans, for example, in Hiawatha, Kansas. Everybody, every black Hiawatha, Kansas, was a Brooklyn Dodger fan because Jackie Robinson, you know, in the, broke in. And so our favorite team was the Brooklyn Dodgers, and we hated the New York Yankees. And I, to, to this day, still have that (laughter) problem. I don't hate 'em, but you know, I see them as, you know, the opposite of, you know, the, what the Brooklyn Dodgers represented for us then. And so I was aware of radio growing up. As a potential area to own or invest, I was very ignorant of, of it, quite frankly. But it, it, it sort of came about later in the story that we're gonna talk about as to how, how that happened. But growing up, you know, music was important, and math was important. And math became important and science became important, again, because I remember one story when I was in the seventh grade. In junior high, in this class that I, I got a hundred on a math test. And I was oh, I was an okay math student, but I got a hundred, and the teacher held up this paper and said see this. He got a hundred, and therefore you people can do better and blah, blah, blah. It was so embarrassing to me that I was afraid that if I didn't keep getting hundreds that I would be exposed as, as that having been a fluke (laughter). So I started studying. And I always made sure I did well on my math and math tests primarily because the teacher did that and made me so exposed that I felt afraid to fail or to not do well in math. And so that I think for me, and I remember that vivi--I remember that whole thing, how embarrassed I was, you know, when she did that. But that, those kinds of things can often determine, you know, what you get excited about or what you get committed to doing. And that, that committed me to math, and to some extent science, 'cause math and science. And then, again, as you become better at it and put more work into it, and as, as to opposed to saying, "physics is hard; I don't understand it," saying, "I gotta understand this," because otherwise, I'm, you know, I'm gonna be exposed as (laughter) being, you know. And so, it's the people that say oh, you have a natural inclination. Well, no, I worked my, you know, bottom off in, in chemistry, and physics, and math, you know, to, to do well in them, because I, you know, found that: one, I got rewarded; and two, I didn't wanna, you know, be exposed as, you know, not being smart, good in 'em, and so, it just carries on and on. And the, the time, the time--(unclear)--in history when I was coming along, it happened to be a time when math and science was, was particularly being rewarded in the national psyche. It was a time when Sputnik, when I was in high school, Sputnik was being, you know, the whole arm, the whole space race was happening and you know. You know, if you were gonna be an engineer, that was important, or you're gonna be a scientist, that was important, a nuclear blah, blah, whatever. And having come from a family that didn't have in its, in its background black professionals as a standard, i.e., lawyers or doctors, you know, or even teachers, science became a way to sort of, you know, gain, you know, some economic opportunity and certainly some educational opportunity. I didn't have role models as, again, as lawyers or doctors, or you say oh, you gonna go to law school or you going to--(unclear). (Unclear)--we, President [John F.] Kennedy said if you're an engineer, you know, you're gonna be valuable to the country, so even I'll be an engineer. So I decided to be an engineer since I liked science and was decent at it, and, and it was being rewarded at that time. Story_ID: 156582 Speaker 1: Now did you go to middle school at all, or was it-- Speaker 2: Middle school or junior high-- Speaker 1: Well, junior high, yeah. Speaker 2: --yeah, we, we called it junior high-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --back in the day (laughter). Speaker 1: So what was the name, name of your junior high school? Speaker 2: Central Junior High [School, Kansas City, Missouri]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Kansas City, Missouri, so Central Junior High, and then I went to Central High School [later, Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay, so--(unclear)--Central High School, okay. So you started, so you started Greenwood [Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri] in '55 [1955], and then you would have been in, at, at Central Junior High School in '57 [1957] or--'50-- Speaker 2: Probably-- Speaker 1: --'58 [1958]? Speaker 2: --'60 [1960], no, no, no. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Central was seventh and eighth grade, right? So-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --so, let me see. I started high school in '60 [1960]. So it means I probably started Central Junior High in 6--'58 [1958]. Fourth, fifth, sixth, that's, I think that adds up, '55 [1955], fourth, '56 [1956], fifth, and '57 [1957], sixth, and '58 [1958], seventh, etc., and then '60 [1960]. And by 1960 I was a freshman in high school, graduating in '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Now did you--now this is the integrated school set, set, setting, right? Did, now, did you achieve any honors, you know, as you were come, coming along as a student? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a pretty good student and was an honor roll student. I was--in, in high school or junior high? Which one do you want? Speaker 1: Well, we can just go through them chronologically--(unclear)--(laughter). Speaker 2: When junior high, I mean I was an honor roll student in junior high. I don't, I don't remember what honors they gave in junior high, but I did well in junior high. And then when I went to high school, I was put in the honors pro--, what they call the honors program. And, and so I went all the way through high school in the honors program and did a lot of math, and, and physics, and chemistry, and science stuff, as well as the other, other courses. I also, in high school, enrolled in [J]ROTC [Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps]. My mother [Enolia Bowman Jones] had always said that if I go to the service, which at that time all of us were expected to do, 'cause there was mandatory draft, said you should go in as an officer. And you take ROTC you'll, you can become an officer quickly. And so I took ROTC in high school, and I ultimately rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel in the R--high school ROTC, which was the battalion commander of our school. And so that was, I think, an honor to be the battalion commander of the ROTC unit of our school, of our high school. We had a pretty good, pretty big high school. And in the honors classes I did well. And I was, you know, a member of the debating team and the, you know, it's academic TV team or whatever that goes on TV and competes and you know-- Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were on the TV show when they quiz--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, I was one of those. You know, they call it--what do they call it-'Categories.' That was the name of that show. Here it's called 'It's Academic,' but you know, one high school competing against another high school and, and that sort of thing. And so I was on that team. I was, you know, a member of the debating club, as I said, a member of the chess club. I was, you know, mayor for a day or whatever it was, you know, where you compete, and they choose you to go down to city hall for a day and, and be the--you know, I don't know whether I was mayor or city councilman or what I was, but I remember I happened to buy a new--my dad [Elmer Jones] took me to get a new navy, dark navy blue suit and taught me that you always, if you have one suit, it's got to be navy blue, which is what I got on today (laughter), and your shoes shined. Story_ID: 156583 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now did, did you have any special teachers or mentors in high school [Central High School, later Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri], be they in high school or out of high school or anybody that really showed an interest in you? Speaker 2: Yeah, clearly, along the way there are several people that affect you. I mean I, I believe that all of us who have been able to be safe this long have had, you know, sort of guardian angels that have kept us and helped us be that way. And I certainly have had them I believe. I've had scoutmasters that were, were that way, was that way. And-- Speaker 1: Did you go very far in the Boys Scouts before--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I went all the way to, to right before Eagle. I then, I was a life scout, and I was assistant scout, scoutmaster. I, one of my regrets, and I try to keep them as few as possible, is that I didn't finish my Eagle Scout journey. I, I stopped right before that, right before I got my Eagle Scout for some reason. I, I, maybe I just got busy or got distracted or something. And then there's, you know, have been ministers along the way who had, who--I remember Reverend Carter [ph.], who my mother [Enolia Bowman Jones] tells me always told her of the challenging conversations that I would have with him because I was, being in the sciences, somewhat of a agnostic kind of thinker, you know: well, why is this, and that doesn't make sense, and why is that and da, da and you know, try to make him explain to me why, you know, God really existed or didn't exist and, and this sort of thing. But he was an influence in terms of those kinds of conversations that I had along the way. Speaker 1: Now what, what was the name, name, name of the family church? Speaker 2: Mariah Walker A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Speaker 1: Moriah Walker-- Speaker 2: A.M.E. Church. Speaker 1: Now was, who was Mariah Walker? Do you know? I mean, you know-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I did know, honestly I--Mariah Walker was an important person in the A.M.E. church system. But I, today, would be--I'd have to research that 'cause I won't want to misspeak on exactly who and what she contributed or-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --contrib-- Speaker 1: She's an African American woman who contributed--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and Mariah I'm presuming is a woman. I mean-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --it could-- Speaker 1: --I would--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I would think it's a woman. But that church was our family church and still is. Story_ID: 156584 Speaker 1: The other, other kinds of guides and mentors along the way include teachers, as you said, all the way from elementary school through junior high through high school. In high school [Central High School, later Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri] I can think of my--oh gosh, there's so many: my English teacher; my physics teacher; my civics teacher, all of whom--I remember my physics teacher spent a lot of time with me. I won a science project that we entered into the state competition. And I remember driving with him to, to the college where the competition was being held with my project, which was the Millikan Oil Drop Experiment, which was to measure the charge of an electron using an oil drop between two electronically charged plates. And when you've got the balance, you got the--you, you put a charge--you create--somehow you spray this thing, and it would have a charge on it. And, and the oil drop you try to balance it through, and you'd see it through a microscope. And when you measure the electricity that balanced this oil drop so it wouldn't go up or down, you can measure the charge of an electron. And you had to--oh, I know. You put the charge on it with an X-ray, you had to have an X-ray machine. I remember he got an X-ray thing. Anyhow, I mean that was a big deal for me. And then he spent hours with me on this project and, and was very proud of it and very proud of me. And these were all white teachers but, and by the large, because when the white flight happened in, in the fifties [1950s], in the early sixties [1960s], at our high school many of the teachers stayed. And it's not because, it's it's not that they were good because they were white, but they were good teachers who happened to be white, they stayed. And, and so I had, I had a pretty good, I mean it was serious education. And certainly, I mean the segregated schools had great teachers as well, in fact, in some cases better, because as you know, the African American teachers in those days often had PhDs, because that's the only place they could get jobs. And--(unclear), in my experience, I had one such African American teacher who was very impactful, named Dr. Cameron, Dr. Jerome Cameron--Jeremiah Cameron. And this guy was, I mean he knew [William] Shakespeare, and he knew the classics, and he knew literature, and writing, and more--the most impress--any college professor has never impressed me the way this man did and his, and his, and his presentation, the theatrics that the class involved. I mean he made me want to come to school in the summertime to take Shakespeare, I mean, and I did, because he was teaching it. I mean it was just so exciting. And so that kind of person helped me to be, even though I, I was in science, not a stereotypical science sort of guy. You know, I mean I, I, I liked the classics. I liked writing. I'd, I'd studied 'Macbeth' [William Shakespeare] and, and all these things and can, you know, say quotes from 'em now because of him, you know, and [Geoffrey] Chaucer's letters and all these things. And I had that in high school (laughter); I mean, that was high school. And so when I went to college, I was fairly well-educated. I mean I wasn't, I hadn't, I didn't go to [Phillips Academy] Andover [Andover, Massachusetts] or [Phillips] Exeter [Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire], but I, from a public school, was able to hold my own after the first couple of months of adjustment with the kids who did go to those kinds of schools, primarily because of these teachers, Dr. Cameron and some of the other ones who were in my high school who, you know, were dedicated to teaching. You know, they were just great teachers, and, and so they influenced me a lot. Story_ID: 156585 Speaker 1: Well, the question was did, did you have to work when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked during the summers, and I worked, you know, during the school year but not a full-time job. Our full-time job was going to school. Our parents [Enolia Bowman Jones and Elmer Jones] made that clear. If we wanted the new pair of shoes or the, or the latest pants, yeah, you go, go earn it (laughter), go cut some grass, shovel some snow, go, you know, down to the local grocery store and bag some groceries. So we worked like that. We didn't work; we didn't have to go out and get a, a, you know, four hour a day job, you know, that prevented us from being able to really do our schoolwork. On weekends we did work. We would go cut grass in, in neighborhoods that were, you know, more higher income neighborhoods with either, with my father or my brother and when we got old enough to go by ourselves and take the lawnmower and stuff. But yeah, we, so we worked that way. We, we worked hard, even cutting our own grass. I mean my fa--we'd have a--I go back and look at my yard now, and it was, it looks like it's a little teeny little yard. But I remember being out there for three and four hours trimming that grass. (Unclear)--how, how can it take this long, because my father was that meticulous at, at yard work. And so, we didn't have to work, you know, to, to, to support ourselves, but we had to work to get things we wanted and to learn the value of work. And so I worked that way, and we worked during the summer. I worked during the summer before I went to college. I worked the summer as a busboy, selling encyclopedias door to door, you know. I worked in college, but, again, it was a part of the college scholarship, so, you know, the work wasn't across town; it was on campus, you know. Story_ID: 156586 Speaker 1: So what, what is, I just wondered like when you were growing up and go, going to school in Kansas City [Missouri], was there a strong black business community in Kansas City that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a relatively strong black business community, because during segregation blacks had a strong, had, had to have strong business communities 'cause they, you know, the morticians, which still exists, and the lawyers, and the doctors, and all that was segregated and, and etc., even to some extent, grocery stores and, and things like that. After segregation, some of those businesses died off. The, the small black grocery stores and shops didn't survive all that well. Of course, doctors and, and some of the professionals, like lawyers, continued, certainly the mortician, the, the--(unclear)--you know, mort--funeral homes were not segregated--not integrated today that I know of, you know, by any real, you know, measure. Speaker 1: Now was there, there a black strip in Kansas City, I mean like a business strip or, or every-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --everybody-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean Kansas City had black, had, was defined. I mean had, it did have black communities. I mean it had 12th [Street] and Vine [Street]; it had-- Speaker 1: Like in the song-- Speaker 2: --I mean you know, you know, stand on the corner, Twelfth Street and Vine. You know, they 18th Street--(unclear)--where the black negro museum [Negro Leagues Baseball Museum] is now located and the black jazz museum [American Jazz Museum] is located. I mean it had black neighborhoods. It had, you know, designated areas. You don't go across, you do not cross here and you know, 'cause you're out of the black area, and you're into a white where, you know, you're not welcome, that kind of thing. And again, I hadn't experienced that in Kansas. But in Missouri, in Kansas City, Missouri, it certain existed. And so there was a black business community inside that defined black area, which spread out and kept spreading and kept spreading. But yeah, there was a black business community. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wondered if there was a message of un, entrepreneurial ownership that, you know, was resounding when you were growing up amongst--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I found the entrepreneurial thing probably more resident--resonant in Kansas, in small-town Kansas where, where, you know, you have, had landowners, farmers, tradesmen, etc., black were in Missouri where people, you know, primarily worked for the, you know, the post office or the, or the automobile factory, or you know, there were more employees except for those few black businesses that did exist and the, and the black professionals, the lawyers and doctors. But entrepreneurs, yeah, I mean they were there but not--I mean the culture wasn't as pervasive in my opinion as opposed to getting a good job, 'cause there were jobs available, you know, labor jobs and you, you know, and once the union started opening up or once the government starting hiring in it's either, you know, through the post office or the social security, whatever the government agency that would then hire blacks. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Those were, those were the choice jobs. Story_ID: 156587 Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating from high school [Central High School, later Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri], what were you, what were your prospects? What, what was your aspiration and-- Speaker 2: My aspiration was to be an engineer, electrical engineer, and to--I felt that was a way of, you know, moving on out of the neighborhood and into something more attractive. And I mean my, my neighborhood was a, I'd say, a typical lower-middle income neighborhood that was, was black. And you know, at that time, in the '60s [1960s], there were things like gangs, as there are now. But there were, you know, it was a whole part of the culture growing up. I mean, you know, people didn't--there wasn't drugs in the way they are today. And there weren't guns in the way there are today. But they were knifing, brass knuckles and all that kind of stuff. So, you know, growing up you had to watch what you're doing and who you were around. And you know, you kind of got tired of having to do that and which, you know, walking home from school, seeing who's on that side of the street. And that's why I aspired to not have to be in that kind of neighborhood. And so that was an inspir--you know, one way to get out of that was through education, be able to get a good job and get out of the neighborhood. Also having been in, working with my father [Elmer Jones] in, in white neighborhoods, upper income neighborhoods, cutting grass during the summers and on the weekends and that sort of thing that we would do, or my brother going out and shoveling snow, you know, for a dollar fifty, two dollars, whatever, I used to look at these houses these people lived in. I said one of these days I wanna have one of those kind of houses. I want to live in one of these kind of neighborhoods. And those were the days when these new developments were, had houses that were in the like the thirty, thirty-five thousand dollar range. It was a nice house in those days, nice ranch houses in the, you know, '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s]. And I always told myself I, one day I wanna get, be able to afford a $30,000 house. That was my bogey, 30,000. I said well, how am I ever gonna get a $30,000 house. And I said well, you know, you gotta go to college and maybe become an engineer, blah, blah, blah. Then you can get you a $30,000 house (laughter). But that was a real inspiration. I mean that drove me to, you know, wanting to study and do this and that so I could get that kind of house in the kind of neighborhoods that I cut grass in. And I remember even after college and making a decision as to whether to--when I decided to go to business school--I mean go to graduate school, after I went to graduate school in engineer. But after that, after doing that, I thought about law, or, or medicine, or business. And I said well, now, what do you really wanna do? And what had came back to me was you really wanna just get a $30,000 house, so why don't you just go learn how to make money. Forget all this law stuff and medical stuff. Learn how to make money so you can get your $30,000 house. At that time it was sixty or eighty thousand dollars (laughter). But it, it was that image of those kind of houses, cutting grass that made me, you know, that affected a lot of my aspirations that you, that you asked about coming out of high school. I mean I, I just-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I wanted to get out of the, get out of where (unclear) was and move into that kind of thing. Story_ID: 156588 Speaker 1: As a senior though, like, as you were saying, you, you were in high school during the, I think when John [Glenn], you, you started around the time John Glenn orbited the earth and you--through the [John F.] Kennedy presidency, his assassination--I mean the March on Washington took, took place in that, that summer of '63 [1963]. And did anybody in your family go to [Washington] D.C. for, for, for, for the march or did your-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Did you watch it with your parents [Enolia Bowman Jones and Elmer Jones] or anything? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what, what was your, you know, feelings about the Civil Rights Movement in those days? Speaker 2: Well, I remember my feelings about the Civil Rights Movement being that progress was being made. You know, I felt various, very, gosh, I was very impressed by the bravery of people who were being, you know, attacked by dogs and beaten and that sort of thing, to walk down the street getting rocks thrown at 'em, and all because they wanted to eat a counter or because they wanted to have equal housing, or had their kids go to certain school, every, you know, equal schools. I said these people are brave 'cause I, you know, you'd always question yourself: "Would I do that? Would I do that?" You know--(unclear)--if I'm not doing that, then why, where am I, what's my relevance, you know, this whole thing? And so it was, it affected you. It affected your psyche. It affected my psyche. Did I get--you know, I was, remember, in high school and you know, not jumping on a bus to go down to Mississippi, but it affected you. So that when the time came, when it, when it escalated to where I was, in the later part of the '60s [1960s], the, you know, all of it was a culmination of things that made you do what you did then. And what I did then was, you know, get involved in some way. Story_ID: 156589 Speaker 1: Okay, well, well, let's get you to college. Now, how did--you ended up going to Trinity College [Hartford, Connecticut] for undergraduate school. How did you choose Trinity? Speaker 2: Well, I, as I said, I was doing pretty well in high school [Central High School, later Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri]. I was probably in the top five in my class. And a, an Episcopalian minister apparently dropped off an application to Trinity at my counselor's office. My counselor then said if you know of a young guy who might qualify and be interested in going to this school, you know, let me know. And so my counselor called me up and said would you--this guy, this minister dropped this thing of, 'cause Trinity is Episcopalian as the, by denomination, although it's, it's non, you know, it's not a religious school, but like most colleges were started by some religious order. And he said this minister dropped this off, asked if I knew any young men who might be qualified and interested, and so I thought of you. And would you be interested in, in applying? And I said well, okay. I really wanna go to the university of, University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas]. They have a great engineering school. And I'm gonna be near my, you know, girlfriend in Lawrence [Kansas], Kan--you know, I'll be in Lawrence, and she's in Kansas City [Missouri]. Or I want to go to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] (laughter), because Yale always took it seemed one person from my high school. And Yale [University] took one and maybe West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] took one, you know, every other year or something. And so I wanted to be the guy that got into Yale, if I--so I applied to Yale. I applied to the University of Kansas, and I ended up applying to Trinity because he gave me the application. I interviewed--well, [University of] Kansas was sort of easy to, you know, for me to get into. My grades were great, and I lived there, and etc., etc., so I wasn't worried about that. Yale had a guy who was in the area interviewing, and he came over and interviewed me. And he had, I remember--(unclear)--a blue blazer, a club tie, striped shirt, horn-rimmed glasses. 'Cause I'd never seen these. This, this is East Coast, and it's strictly preppy East Coast. I mean I, this, I'm in Kansas--(unclear)--this guy looked weird to me, looked different, you know, little red hair or something or blond over to the side. And the whole time he was interviewing me, he was sort of looking at his cufflinks. He wasn't really looking at me. I mean he really--I mean it wasn't--it was, it was like, you know, well, yeah, okay--(unclear). And I, I, I was looking at this guy, saying well, this is, this is really, this guy is really kind of a jerk, you know. But okay, maybe that's what Yale does (laughter). I don't know. And so that was my Yale interview. And then I--and then the guy from Trinity didn't, didn't even have interviews. They didn't have an interviewer coming to Kansas City. It's, it's in Hartford, Connecticut, a small college, you know, little, little Ivy League colleges. And so they said, "We have an alum who's gonna come and interview you. His name is Dr. Louis Haus, Hasbrouck, and you know, he'll call you." So he called me, and he says, "I'd like to come interview." I said, "Well, where would you want me to meet you?" He said, "I'll come to your house." And I said, "You're gonna come to my house? You mean the black neighborhood?" I said okay, and so this guy came to my house. And his name is Dr. Louis Hasbrouck. And he was an osteopath. And he came into my house, and he was very warm and very, very, just a regular, he was a really nice man. I later found out he's one of the top, he was like the most well-known osteopath in the United States or something, because there--but he came to my house. And he sat down, and he started talking to me. And he talked to me in the most wonderful tone, in the most wonderful manner, and in, in the most spiritual kind of way. You know, it was, it was sort of like, you know, I, you know, I want you, I want you to think about the value of a liberal arts education and what la--and this is what I--and then he just talked. And it was almost like I was listening to a, a, a saint speak, in a sense. I mean, you know, I'm not trying to deify the guy, but he was just so sincere and so different from the (laughter) Yale guy, in terms of real interest and real caring about what I thought about the future and why I might choose this or that. And I said to myself if, if this school produces this kind of person, that's the kind of person I want to--that's the kind of--those are the kind of qualities that I want to have. And so I was sold on it. And I said well, I'll give Trinity a try, didn't know a thing about Trinity College except that it was, you know, a pretty good men's college in the, in, in, in the New England. And so Trinity offered me a scholarship. Yale didn't, and that was important too, so I went to Trinity College. And that's how I ended up going there and you know, arrived there, you know, said oh my goodness, this is int--different (laughter). This is New England (laughter). Story_ID: 156590 Speaker 1: Okay, so, in what ways did you see it as being different from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I mean first of all, it was, it was part of a eco system of, of schools and, and, and, and a type of student that I wasn't familiar with. These were kids from private schools in New England or the East Coast primarily who were preppy. I mean, you know, this, these are prep school guys. They had public school kids there too, but a lot of 'em were, you know, kids that went to [Phillips Academy] Andover [Andover, Massachusetts] or, or Deerfield Academy [Deerfield, Massachusetts], or Choate [Rosemary Hall, Wallingford, Connecticut], or you know, those kinds of--Boost [ph.] School in Philadel--you know, those kind of schools. I'd never heard of these places, you know, but they were all prep school guys. And, and the public schools were public schools out of Shaker Heights [Ohio] or out of, you know, those kind of communities that, fairly, fairly well, well-off kids. There were three blacks in my class. It was all-men's college at that time. There were three blacks in my class. The other two guys came from Washington, D.C. And I was from Kansas City [Missouri], so it was different and socially different. You know, the, the, it was a men's college. I'd never gone to just a men, single-sex place, you know. You dated girls from girls' schools. You know, get in a car, and you drive to a mixer forty miles at holy over--Smith [University, Northampton, Massachusetts] or something. It was all weird. It's like, wait a minute, I'm in Hartford [Connecticut]. Why didn't I just go over, go to the school over here, you know. Oh, no, you gotta go to beam to the--go to, you know, Mt. Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] or you know, Vassar [College, Poughkeepsie, New York] or something--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So they emphasized that you all to go to see the women at the sister schools of the, of Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut] or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, of the, of the, that whole, that whole, it's an eco system. It's a, you know, it's these schools, they all--the kids get--I mean the, the parents send their kids to schools for a reason, so they meet each other. And so, to keep it all in the, you know, in, in the circle. And you're not part of their circle. You know, black people aren't part of their circle, quite frankly. You're--(unclear)--you're sort of an interloper, in a way. Now, you're not a threat because there are so few of you, at least in '64 [1964]. So you know, you're a novelty more than a threat. And, and you know, and you--and that's happened to blacks for generations. I mean there were blacks at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the 1800 and 19--I mean there were one or two or three--(unclear)--that's it. And so that was, that's the way it was at Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], and Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts], and Trinity, and Wesleyan [University, Middletown, Connecticut] and in those kinds of schools, Choate, you know. And you know, it was different, so it's different than going to University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], or University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], or you know, Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] or whatever. And so, but it was an important time for us to do that, to some extent, because those schools had just started recruiting and allowing any, you know, African Americans to come there and offering the scholarships. They wanted, to some extent, diversify, not really, not in a big way, but they like to say they let a coup--few of us in. And so we were able to: one, make them feel comfortable, and two, challenge and create some openings for others later. Story_ID: 156591 Speaker 1: Now, now you were part of the, I think the founder of the first black student organization on campus? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Is this the right time to talk about that, or should we talk about the academics, I mean the coursework first or what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Let's talk about the academics first. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, we'll talk about that. What, how were the academics? Where you well prepared for Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: I was, I thought I was really well prepared. I was not. I was, I had been, you know, a very high achiever in my high school [Central High School, later Central Academy of Excellence, Kansas City, Missouri]. I was a middle achiever initially in college because everybody was a high achiever (laughter). I mean, I mean it was just, you know, a different barrel of fish you're in. So, and the other side of that was in, in science I was coming to a, an institution with people who came with higher levels of math than I had been exposed to. They'd already had calculus. We didn't have calculus in my high school when I--now high schools do, but there was no calculus. I'm an engineering student, and I'm, you know, in the first, first physics engineering class, the physics majors--I mean the physics class engineering majors had to take freshman including calculus, and I had no calculus. So, over the course of the first six to eight weeks, I had to, you know, learn a lot more than they had to learn because they had already had it or seen some of it. And so it was a, it was a very difficult time. And I remember before Thanksgiving, right before Thanksgiving, not knowing how well I was gonna be able to do under the pressure and under the strain of--and I had, I had heavy course load. I had physics, I had calculus, I had math, I had chemistry, I had span--French, and English, and philosophy or something all at the same time. It was a lot, and you know, and the English classes were not like just English, but his, and you had to write (laughter); you had to read and write, you know. It wasn't no--and you had to type your papers. And I, one of the things that happened to me in high school that always affected me negative, in my opinion, was that I was not allowed to take a typing course because I was in the honors program. And the honors program the typing course was for the kids in the occupational sort of program, you know, if you're gonna be a secretary or-- Speaker 1: Business program. Speaker 2: Yeah, whatever. And so I, I said well, during our homeroom time I would want to take typing because I'll forget the homeroom. He said no, you need the homeroom to study. I said well, I'll study at home. He said no. He, they wouldn't let me take typing, and so I never learned to type. And I suffered the rest of my life not being able to type fast. Now, I blame them, although I remind myself that I could have taught myself to type if I really was serious. At some point I could have gotten, you know, a Mavis Beacon computer program or something and taught myself to type. But not being able to type was, was, was a big, a big drawback, you know, even though--and they wouldn't let me go--(unclear)--'cause of my honors class stuff. So, in high--in college, having to type papers, as you remember, we had to type 'em, and you had to have--what do you call it--that carbon paper between 'em and erase mistakes and turn it in not too smudged. I mean it was tough. And so, with all that science and all those kind of courses, it was first, tough the first six months--I mean the first six weeks to two months before Thanksgiving. I really was ver, very stressed out to some extent, and although I liked school. I liked school, but I was just, I'd never not succeeded well. And you know, but after that, I kind of caught up and you know, shot up, and ended with a pretty, you know, good grade average the freshman year and beyond and did well in the science and engineering and that sort of thing-- Story_ID: 156592 Speaker 1: All right, so, so, so what, to what do you attribute your kind of turnaround, you know? I know you always used to being a good student. But were there any particular on the campus [Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut], I mean, any teachers that helped you or other students that-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I wouldn't characterize it as a turnaround. It's not that I was doing poorly. It's just I was having to really work hard and struggle because I didn't have, you know, in the sciences, the level of math that some of the other students came there with and you needed. In order to deal with the level of first-year physics that was being presented you needed to have that background. So, you know, in English and other things I didn't, you know, I didn't falter. It wasn't a turnaround. It was I had to get those tools and have to work--had to work very hard the first six weeks to eight weeks before Thanksgiving to get that and, and to be confident, strong there, so. And you know, again, it wasn't so much teachers or anything. It was just having to do, you know, learn the stuff, get these extra, you know, this other extra calculus stuff that I didn't understand right away 'cause I was just taking it for the first time under my belt. And soon as that happened, on the sciences, I was, you know, fine after, by Thanksgiving; and on the humanities side, just learning, you know, more critical skills in writing, you know which I was fairly good at, but you know, at, at--you go to a real, a good liberal arts school, and you gotta do a lot of writing, you're gonna have to really get better. And, but all of that happened, as I said, as, as, you know, I worked hard the first six weeks and felt comfortable after that and did, I think, reasonably well going forward on all the, all those areas, in all those areas. Speaker 1: Okay, so your major became electrical-- Speaker 2: Engineering. Speaker 1: --engineering. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Had you envisioned that when you started school or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I wanted to be an engineering for a long--ever since I was a kid with the Erector sets. And ever since Sputnik happened, I wanted to be an engineer, and I thought that was a way for, you know, to achieve economic success, and, and also I enjoyed it, enjoyed science. And so, choosing, Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut] happened to have an engineering department. It's a liberal arts college, but it happened to have--as, whereas as Wesleyan [University, Middletown, Connecticut], and, and Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts], and Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] didn't have engineering departments, because Trinity had an alum who I guess gave the school an engineering department. He became very wealthy, inventing something called the, the flying shears and (laughter) which is a way of cutting metal or something, and so he, he gave the school an engineering department. So we had eight engineers in my class, four electrical and four mechanical. But we had a whole department just for us, for engineering courses. We had to take all of the other stuff that the liberal arts kids had to take, you know, so, and we had to take our math in the math department, and the physics and chemistry in those departments. So we weren't separated like you would be off and in a typical large university that had big engineering schools or University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], or Illi-Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois], M.I.T. [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], or where the engineering students do this. They even have engineering, English for engineering students in those schools and blah, blah, blah for engineering. We were integrated into the group 'cause there were only eight of us, and so we had to learn the liberal arts stuff and compete there too. And so when I came out of school with a degree in bachelor of science and engineering. I had taken, you know, a lot of liberal arts, and had to write, and had to critic, be critical, be able to critique, you know, religion and philosophy and those things. So I was slightly different I found from many of the engineering guys that I started working with when my first job, which was with Westinghouse Aerospace [later acquired by Northrop Grumman] out of college. They were really good engineering students, but I didn't find them well-rounded educationally or interest-wise as I had been and, and been exposed to, guys who were going off to, you know, being philosophy majors, and psych majors, and business majors, and lit--lawyers. I mean I'd been expo--those kind of people I'd been around and not just all engineering guys. So I was, I pry--I liked engineering, but I found that ultimately it didn't satisfy the other sort of interest I had in terms of, you know, being more holistic, I would say. Story_ID: 156593 Speaker 1: Now did you, did you figure this out after you graduated [Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut] and started-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --working? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, this happened after I graduated-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --'cause I worked as an engineer for four years. I worked for Westinghouse Aerospace [later acquired by Northrop Grumman] -- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: --I worked for Litton Industries [later acquired by Northrop Grumman Corporation]; I worked for Goddard Space [Flight] Center. And so I was in the engineering stuff. I was doing that, and it was fascinating. I loved the cutting edge science, but it just didn't fulfill all of the poten--the interest that I'd developed. Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this. Let me go back to Trinity [College, Hartford, Connecticut], 'cause there's something I alluded to in the beginning about the founding of the black student organization-- Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: --'cause you were in school in a generation that founded these black student organizations as a-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --black arts movement, the black consciousness movement was-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --was hitting. And-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --it was right after the summer of '64 [1964] and all that. And I'm-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --moving to '68 [1968] to the death of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. So-- Speaker 2: That's exact-- Speaker 1: --what was going on with him? How, how many black students were on campus, and how did you all decide to come together? Speaker 2: Interesting story I think because it, as I mentioned, there were three blacks men in my class, me, including me. I think there was one black guy in the class before, and maybe one African, and another African American in the class before. So I mean it was, it was not a history, and there were maybe 300 and some people in my class, entering class, was not history of African American involvement in the school, in any of these schools. And so by the time my senior year, by the time my--end of my--it was in my senior year--my senior year happened, the country had gotten to a state where because of turmoil in the cities in the sixties [1960s], '65 [1965], '6 [1966], '7 [1967], riots, etc., etc., I mean, things were really happening. The country is being radicalized, polarized. The black movement was happening. It had moved from Dr. King's sort of nonviolence to a more defiant, you know, I'm gonna take care of myself and my family kind of thing, which is the Black Panther, you know, movement. And, and things had just become much more heated and tense, and cities were starting to burn. And it was obvious that things needed to change and change rapidly. And the pace of progress under the nonviolent movement and those organizations, whether it as NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], or others, was considered too slow by a lot of the people coming along, like, you know, we're not just gonna take, keep taking this and turning the other cheek kind of thing. And so, and all of that festers and ferments [sic] on a college campus at a more rapid rate, as you know, because people are young, and more daring, and have, you know, less to lose, or aren't as, you know, institutionalized yet, whatever, more dreamers. And so the colleges were starting to heat up, you know. And we, not only us, the African American side, but also at that time, there was a white student movement that was happening propelled by the organizations like the SDS, Students for A Democratic Society, again, if you may remember them. And some of them became Abbie, Abbie Hoffman, all these kind of guys, Chicago Seven. All, all of these things, there's a lot of radicalization going on in the United States in the, in the '66 [1966], '7 [1967], and '8 [1968] timeframe. We decided that Trinity--by that time we had sixteen African American students. They had started opening the doors a little more to let more in and recruiting guys from urban areas like Chicago [Illinois] and, and other, other--St. Louis [Missouri], Detroit [Michigan]. And so we had sixteen blacks, and we decided it was in our interest to form a student organization. And the interesting thing was, at that time, some of the black students there--we wanted 100 percent participation--and some of the black students didn't like--and when we were deciding on a name, did not want to be called black. If you may remember, there was a time in this country when black people didn't wanna call, be called black. To them it was an insult. They wanted to be called Negros or colored or something. And, and so, we could not get a consensus from among our sixteen students for a name that had black in it. And so, instead of being TAB, the Trinity Association of Blacks, we started with the name Trinity Association of Negros, TAN, T-A-N, which was really ridiculously funny in its one sense. But it was necessary to get two or three other guys who were saying I'm, you know, I'm not black kind of guys; you know, I'm brown; I'm not black. Why are you calling me--to join. And so we started the organization as that. But within a few months, the stuff really hit the fan, and radicalization really started happening. And these guys even said okay, we're black (laughter). So, so we changed the name to the Trinity Coalition of Blacks, T.C.B., which if you remember, TCB had another name, another thing to it. You know, taking care of business used to be TCB. So we were Trinity Coalition of Blacks-- Story_ID: 156594 Speaker 1: I was elected as the first president [of Trinity Coalition of Blacks] I think primarily because, one, I was a senior [at Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut], and there was only two [other] seniors. And of the three of us, I was probably the most, you know easy to get along with. The other two, one, one was pretty radical, and the other one was just kind of out there a little bit differently. And so, okay, you're, you're it, not that I'm the great leader, but you know, this sort of happened to me. "Yeah, yeah, Terry, we want you to be it," you know. So I became the leader. [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed in '68 [1968], as you know, in April. And that became another radicalizing thing at that time in this country, very radicalizing. And you know, we got all angry; we got mad, and black people got mad. And the students said what are you gonna do about this? What are we gonna do? And we said we're gonna organize an effort to make this school create a, a program to assist underprivileged, disadvantaged students to come here, create a scholarship. And we got the, the student body to vote on having fifty dollars of their general fee go into a scholarship fund for disadvantaged students. Well, the trustees didn't wanna do it. And so at the next trustee meeting--this, the school had voted on this. The next trustee meeting we had a rally, a rally out on the campus grounds. And I was a speaker and you know, a couple of other people. But you know, we said we're gonna make 'em do it, and blah, blah, blah, and we're gonna march over there. And until they pass this agreement, provision to, to make this scholarship fund for disadvantaged students, we're gonna make 'em stay in that room, that boardroom, and, and not let 'em out. So we went there and blockaded the room, and so the trustees could not come out of their meeting. This was probably the first time that I know in the United States where, where students had taken over the administration building, quote "taken over." And we were just basically standing at the door saying: "Meeting's not over. You guys haven't approved this thing." And they said, "Let us out." And we said, "Well, we're not moving." And you know, by this time, they had led in a couple of, you know, big black guys from Chicago [Illinois], you know, Cabrini-Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois] or some place (laughter) Altgeld Gardens [Homes, Chicago, Illinois], and they were scary looking. Trustees were freaking out. And it ended up being a big story, because the school didn't know what to do. They didn't know whether--and this you can probably, you can Google this, 'cause I've seen it, and the New York Times did a piece on this. And it was like, oh my God, what is, who is these, who are these people, and what are they doing at Trinity College? And they're holding the trustees hostage, and they're taking over the administration building. And within a few hours, other students had joined. So there's maybe two or three hundred students now and teachers, some of the faculty, and some of my physics professors joined. I mean it was like--and so we--and then the, then the police got involved. It got really crazy, and, and, and people were calling up. New York Times newspapers were calling up. And Ku Klux Klan [KKK] was calling up, because it became the national story, and told me that I--that the cross hairs were on, gonna be on the back of my neck. And I mean we were just trying to get some scholarships. You know, it was great. And I say at that time, it's not that we were radicals. It's just that the system radicalized you if you tried to do something that it didn't like. It made you into a radical. You would be marching down the street peacefully, and you'd get a few dogs and a few batons on your head, and all of a sudden you're a radical, you know. You got radicalized real quick. You weren't, you didn't set out to be that or want to do that. And so, we, we keep them in there, in the building. One guy was, they say was having a heart attack or something, so we let him out. And it lasted for a day and a half, and it spread nationally. And the next thing I knew B, called Boston College [Boston, Massachusetts], then Columbia [University, New York, New York], then this school all had student uprisings. And the word, it came out. The conservatives put the word out that this was all a, a Communist conspiracy, that we were all linked together. And then, then some of the schools got rowdy and, and destructive, like Columbia. Columbia was destroying stuff. And, and we kind of said wait a minute, you know. This has gone, you know, this is getting to the point where it's out of, getting out of control and on a national level. And we're not, we're not into that. So, so we, we actually left. After two days or something we left. It was a big story. And you know, like I said, Washing--the New York Times did a story on, on me and on it, and et cetera. And it was probably, again, the first time it had happened in the United States. And--(unclear)--people know it, not that we go around trying to talk about it that big, but it's become something that I've spoken at the Trinity since. And their history department, after they tried to kick me out, they actually invited me back now to talk about that whole period and what it meant and da, da, da as part of their history. Story_ID: 156595 Speaker 1: But it, it was something that disturbed my parents [Enolia Bowman Jones and Elmer Jones], my mother, because, you know, here, you know, all this, all this work I'd gone through and she'd gone through. And, and in my senior year I'm about to get kicked out of school [Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut] for leading this thing. And I didn't lead it. It was, I was just a part of it. I was, happened to be the leader of the organization. And the school decided it was gonna put six of us on trial, three SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] guys and three black guys. And about a 120 students said if you, if you do something to them, you've gotta do it to all of us. And so, it ultimately, they held trials and this, that, and the other, and then it just kind of-- Speaker 2: These are-- Speaker 1: --disappeared. They didn't know what to do at that time. Speaker 2: These are campus-held trials or-- Speaker 1: yeah, yeah, it was the school. Speaker 2: --some kind of campus trial--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, well, see, the, the, see, the, the private schools have this concept of [in] loco parentis or something they call it, which means that they're in charge of you. And they don't want to bring in the, the, the city police because--on their private campus--'cause the city police come in and beat some rich guy's kid's head, I mean that's (laughter)--so, I mean, but we were thinking the police were gonna come in any minute and just start, you know, whipping our butts. You know, it was, it was that kind, but it was that kind of time. You didn't--it just sort of escalated. You got caught in it. It was, became about principle. It became about, you know, who you were and where you were gonna be when the revolution hit the fan, all those kinds of your--I mean I don't know how young you were then, but that was what was happening in the '60s [1960s], all right, and even on college campuses. And so it, it was an interesting period. Ultimately, they didn't acquit us. They, they gave us some community work to do or something instead of kicking us out of school, because, like I said, a number of students said if you kick them out, we're, we all got, you gotta kick us all out. But it was an important historical event for me, and for, I think for the school, and for the--and, and then the school learned how to deal with--they didn't know how to deal with--this was the first time it sort of happened to them, these kind of private schools, the Wes--you know, the Trinities [Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut], and the Wamhersts [sic, Amhersts, Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts], and the Williams [Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], and the Yales [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and the Har--they didn't know what the hell to do. Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], if you remember, really went--the brothers up there went off. They, they had rifles and shotguns and all this. This was all after us. And, but then they, the schools got wise, and they learned how to deal with it, which was basically to give the black organizations money (laughter) and a house on campus. Everything got cool, you know. Everybody got, you know, it--(laughter)--another story. But-- Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, surely you speak the truth, yes. Speaker 1: You know, I mean kind of--you know, hey, we got, we got, we got a weekend, and we got money for the weekend. We got this. We got our how--black house. We--you know, and so it's kind of, the whole movement kind of got--(unclear). The schools got very smart-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --on how-- Speaker 2: --but this was a, this was a critical time. You're a senior. [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King's [Jr.'s] assassinated on April 4th [1968]. You've only got two more months of school, right-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --to. Speaker 1: That was my mother's point. What in the hell are you doing (laughter) putting this on the line after all this. And it was like I, it's not like me. This, it's, it's history. You get, you know, you're just caught up in history. (Unclear)--the point. And I'm doing--I'm the--we're not doing anything crazy. We're, we're trying to implement a program for disadvantaged students coming behind us 'cause this stuff doesn't need to be a lily white prep school mag, you know, feeder, you know, college of elite kids. I mean it, it needs to be more diverse, and this country will benefit; the school will benefit, etc., etc. You gotta do some outreach. You gotta make it possible 'cause these are expensive places in there. And you know, and people don't know about 'em, so we're gonna set up a scholarship fund, and the students have agreed to take some of their money and do it. Why won't the trustees endorse it? You know, we just asked them to endorse it. Speaker 2: Is there anything that you take away from this experience in terms of the relationships of power to, you know, activism or, or--'cause you had--you were flying without a parachute in terms of, I mean-- Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 2: --on this, 'cause no one else had, had done it really like that before, right on, on the campus. Speaker 1: Well, yeah, I mean yeah, we were, we were out their flying. But again, you get pushed along by history if, if you're sensi--if you, if you're responding to it. I mean you can ignore, or you can, you know, be moved by it in a way that hopefully your principles allows you to choose what's good to be moved by and what's not. And I think coming from the Midwest and from the kind of family I came from, I, I felt comfortable with my principles and the things that I was about to be involved in. It wasn't for any sort of personal gain, or glory, or, or retribution. It was about a good, this is an important and good thing to do. And it's carried into the business things that I think I've been involved in in terms of that same feeling about what you get involved in and what--and how it moves the movement forward. Because, again, this movement, as you start--if we--as we started this, it started long before me. I'm just a part of it. I'm a beneficiary of it, and I'm in--also I'm obligated by it to do certain and try to do certain things. And so, you know, I had very little choice in my opinion, you know, but to try to do the right thing in that situation. Story_ID: 156596 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, but, but you were able to, to graduate on time [from Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I was--that was--you just had to believe that that would, have faith that would-- Speaker 1: So, so this is-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --also a time when a lot of jobs are opening up for black students that had not been available--I mean for black graduates that had not been available before, even for some-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, abs-- Speaker 1: --black folks that didn't graduate-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. And government, well, well--again, this was Vietnam [War] time as well. And there's another important historical context to put all this in. Vietnam was happening. It was probably middle height of the Vietnam period. The lottery had just been instituted so that, you know, instead of being dri--instead of just being drafted willy-nilly, you got lottery numbers. So I mean, you know, you had to go. And, and if you had to go to Vietnam, there's a good chance you were gonna, something was gonna happen to you. In fact, my study mate in college, the white guy who I studied with every day, another engineering guy, was dead two months after school. He was a second lieutenant in the [U.S.] Marines. And he went there, and he loved the Marines, and he wanted to parti--he wanted to help his country. You know, he had a, just had a baby, and two months later he was gone in Vietnam over this craziness. So it was a very scary time, generally speaking, the Civil Rights Movements, Vietnam, all these things happening. But you're right, there were opportunities opening up for African Americans that hadn't been opened up before because of a lot of this. For me, as an engineering, engineer coming out, it was a time when engineers were very valuable, science, you know, the space, you know, the war, the space race, all of that. And so I was offered, I got good job offers. And in fact, my job offer coming out of college--my engineering, one of my engineering, one of my engineering professors told me, he said, when he saw the offer that Westinghouse [Aerospace, later acquired by Northrop Grumman] made me, he said you know this is more money than I make. And he knew how incompetent I was (laughter). He taught me (laughter), so. My teacher was making less than I was gonna start at. That's, that's, that's how valuable engineers were. And it was not a lot of money in today's terms, but then it was. And so the opportunities were opening up. And not only did they offer me to, the job, but they offered me to pay for my graduate school if I wanted to go, and which I did. And I wanted to go in engineering and get my master's, and so they paid for that. And you know, I worked as engine, in the engineering area for four years until I decided to go to business school. Speaker 1: Now, now did you graduate from Trinity in '68 [1968] or '69 [1969]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], okay, all right, '68 [1968]. So, you started working, and did you start working that summer for-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Westinghouse? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 156597 Speaker 1: Okay. And we have here that you worked for Westinghouse Aerospace [later acquired by Northrop Grumman]? Speaker 2: Aerospace, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So what were you doing there? Speaker 2: I was a senior engineering working on projects, computer projects. I did my master's in computer science and biomedical engineering at George Washington [University, Washington, D.C.] while I was there. So I did computer science work, you know, program--building computers, designing computers, soft programming computers, primarily special purpose computer for defense systems like the AWACS system, which is Advance Warning Air System [sic, Airborne Warning and Control System], a radar system that Westinghouse did. AWACS is still being--you probably may have heard of AWACS. They do the plane (unclear). I worked on those kind of projects, worked on their computer systems, weapons delivery systems for the new F-14, F-15 fighters. So we were--you know, I didn't know the whole thing that I was working on. We just worked on a part of it, and our clearance, our, our, our security clearances were for certain amounts of information. But we worked on the computer stuff for, at Westinghouse. And then at Litton Industries [later acquired by Northrop Grumman] I did this--well, then I went to Goddard Space [Flight] Center [Greenbelt Maryland] as a, as a, to work on Westinghouse projects at Goddard Space Center in the space area. And then I worked at Litton Industries for a short time before going to business school. Speaker 1: But, so you didn't, somehow you didn't, you didn't--you weren't really fulfilled working in the engineering, I guess. That's what, that's what-- Speaker 2: Well, fulfilled, I was fulfilled, but I wanted to do other things. I guess, therefore, I wasn't fulfilled. I mean I don't know. I've, I don't understand the concept of fulfilled. I mean I understand the concept of being, enjoying what you're doing, being satisfied being involved, but there's always more. And then I wanted more things to do, and other things to look at, and other people to be around. So, yeah, I guess you could call that being unfulfilled. Speaker 1: Why--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: I enjoyed what I was doing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but it wasn't, it wasn't all there was to do that I wanted to do-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --be involved in. Speaker 1: Now were you still--you said earlier you were thinking about this $30,000 house, which is now--(unclear)--to eighty or ninety (laughter). But, so, but some point you decided to work, work on an M.B.A. because you said that the, a lawyer or a doctor you wouldn't get as much return for-- Speaker 2: No, it wasn't just that. It was just that I, I, I came to feel that I liked medicine because it was in science, and I like medicine. I, I like people. But, you know, it seemed to be a bit restrictive. I mean it's very difficult to, to have a lot of interests if you're a doctor because it's very consuming. My image of it was a very consuming occupation. A lawyer, I didn't, I hadn't met many happy lawyers (laughter). So even though I thought the law was an interesting tool, I figured it would be might, maybe better to hire lawyers and just learn law, but and learn law as a tool but not necessarily have to practice it day to day. 'Cause there were people trying to get me to go to school as a patent lawyer because of my engineering background, and I just thought that was the most boring idea in the world. The business, you know, sounded to me like an area where, you know, anything happens, and it's all business. Medicine is business; law is business, you know everything; arts are business. I mean you can take a good acumen, a good training in business in the right--and do almost--it was the most flexible of tools, and it's the foundation of all of these things, really. I mean they're all businesses that--(unclear)--in an, a capitalist system, it's, it's the foundation of the system. So learning that skill, learning those techniques, etc., seemed to me to make a lot of sense in terms of having options to do a number of things. Story_ID: 156598 Speaker 1: So, how did you choose Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] to work on the M.B.A.? Did you get a, did you get any scholarship money from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I got a fellowship from Harvard. Speaker 1: Fellowship, okay. Speaker 2: But when I got a fellowship from an organization that allows you to go to a number of schools, Harvard, Wharton [School of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Stanford [Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], etc., it was called the COGME Foundation [sic, GMAC, Graduate Management Admission Council], Council for--COGME [Council on Graduate Medical Education], Council for, Coun--Op--Organization for Graduate Management Education. I, I forget the acronym of the words, the acronym COGME But at any rate, when I was working as an engineer and I decided that business--I ruled out law, ruled out medicine, but I wanted to do more than just a master's in engineering. Business seemed to be the, give me the most options, the most interesting. Then there was a question of where. And I felt that business school, more than even law or medical school, depended on where you went and got your MBA [management business administration] It, it mattered more in people's minds than, you know, if you're a doctor, you're a doctor. You're doctor so and so. People typically don't say to you, you know, where did you get your M.D. from? They just say you're doctor so and so. And law is more where you went but not--but M.B.A., it varies widely from school to school. So I wanted to get one from a school that would be a, a top recognized place. And so I, and I wanted to stay on the East Coast, so I selected Harvard and Wharton to apply to, Wharton-University of Pennsylvania. And I applied to both of them, and I got into both of them. And so it was a selection of well, which of these two. People said well, you should go to Wharton because you're more scientific and math oriented, and they're more quantitative, and Harvard's more generalist. A-d I said yeah, but I think I want to be more of a generalist, one, and two, I think the Harvard name is sort of like having a stamp and a passport. It get you into certain countries easier than other stamps do. It's not that the education is better or worse or, or whatever necessarily, but it's just that, you know, we're on a worldwide level. And at that time I'd started becoming interested in international stuff, in, in, international areas. I, I thought, you know, the two schools that you can say, you know, if you walk into any country and say I went to da-da-da, you sort of had an opening, and those two schools were Harvard and Oxford [University, Oxford, England]. And so I said well, I'll go to Harvard if I got in. I got in, and so I went to Harvard. And sure enough, it's interesting, because when I left, when I got out of business school and went to east Africa, I was shocked to see that there was a Harvard Club (laugher) in Nairobi [Kenya]. I said oh my God, Harvard Business School Club. I said this is unbelievable. Story_ID: 156599 Speaker 1: Okay, well, well, tell us about Harvard-- Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], like how, did you find it difficult or, or, or easy after coming out of a background of being an engineer? Speaker 2: I found it challenging. It was surprisingly challenging, because after having a background in engineering, and math, and science, I figured that this stuff was gonna be a breeze, I mean, you know, and it wasn't. It was very challenging, not because of the complexity of the work but the volume of the work. The, the thing that I think they try to impart on you is, and, and, and create in you is the ability to take masses of amounts of information and process it quickly and make decisions. And that's really what the case method is about I, I think, is creating a, a way of a system a screen so that you can make decisions, good decisions, logical decisions, given a lot of inputs rapidly and come out with something that makes sense and something that's actionable. And you do that by taking case after case after case and, and analyzing it in groups, because it's the first place I've been where they--not the first; in engineering we did this--but where group homework is, is encouraged. I mean you're supposed to have a study group. You're not supposed to try to analyze all the cases every night by yourself, because the interaction is what they want. And the way, again, this, that most business schools, and certainly Harvard, is structured is that you have a group of people in a room, and a case is put out there. And somebody presents their analysis of it, and then the rest of them get to leap on him or, and come up with why that makes sense, doesn't make sense, da, da. And it's, it's that kind of interaction that--(unclear)--which is really what business often is like that develops the skill at, at taking all this and coming out with something as opposed to just studying accounting, and studying marketing, studying, you know, a class in marketing, a class in this, a class, you know. It's, it's a marketing case, but you know (laughter), well, it's not about marketing. It's about this case, and it's about marketing in terms of how you solve or, or, and there's no right solution, of course, because there's a hundred different ways you can go. It's just a question of which one make sense, can you makes sense of and succeed with. And there may be more than one, certainly more than one path for that. And learning that takes some time. I mean that's the case method; that's the system. So I did, I, I thought, found that challenging to--'cause it was different from, you know, again, engineering, and science, or even the other stuff I'd done before, education I'd done before, but it was comfortable. I, you know, I, I enjoyed it. I thought it was good, and the academic, the, the quantitative background allowed me to take the, the analytical or numerical inputs from a case and process 'em very comfortably; whereas some people had problems just seeing relationships, percentage relationships quan--you know, things that just, your mind just automatically does if you've been doing this for ten years in science classes, you know, seeing relationships. Numerical and quantitative relationships, you'll, you just see 'em. And so you have an advantage, I think, if, if, if you have the other side of it. And that is the sort of the ability to understand people, and things, and, and trends. And you know, and that comes from the more liberal art side. So I found it to be a very comfortable, educational sort of system process, and I did well in it. And you know, I didn't have much of a problem. Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers or mentors there that, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or people that, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I had some great teachers. I mean that's the other thing about Harvard, I mean, great teaches, some great, great professors. My marketing profession, I mean he was just incredible in terms of just cutting to what this was really all about, you know, and, and, and what--and it all deals with human behavior, human relationships. The thing you ultimately learn is that all, all of business really turns on human behavioral factors, not, you know, market factors or financial factors, but really it's human behavioral factors in it, you know, as these things taking, or impacted how they impact, you know, human behavior. And so the most important course is probably the one that's the easiest to analyze, and that's called, that, that was called human behavior and organizations, 'cause all you had to do was read the case and then give your opinion on why this guy should do such and such and blah, da, da, and what was really going on as opposed to a finance case or a production case where you're trying to say how you should produce this or why, why the financing structure should be that. The real important stuff was, you know, deciding why people do what they do, and don't do what they don't do, and how do you motivate 'em to get them to do what you want. You know, that, that's the key, and I found that to be the key in, in business generally speaking. It's particularly entrepreneurial businesses that we are involved in now. So professors in those areas, in the human behavioral area, and in the marketing area were some of the most impactful teachers that I remember. I had a good real estate--in my second year I took a real estate course, which kind of turned me towards real estate as a, as a area to consider in finance. And that, that kind of impacted me as well. Story_ID: 156600 Speaker 1: It says here you graduated [from Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] in '74 [1974]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Graduated in '74 [1974]. While I was there as well I got involved in school organization, was the, the head of the black, African American Student Union there at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] while I was there. Speaker 1: What was the name of that? And there's a name--I know there's a name for it. We've interviewed some other people that were in there. Speaker 2: AASU, African American Student Union. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what we called it. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Harvard, a Harvard, H--HASU. I don't know. But it was African American Student Union, and I was, I was chairman of that for, while I was there. And you know, and that was a good organization, and it. And we had an alumni event that was the highlight of the year for as far as I was concerned, where the African American alums would come back. And Harvard had more African American alums than many schools, than almost any other school because they had large, one, it was a large class. It was like 750 people in every class. And for some time, from about 1971, '72 [1972] forward, they would, they admitted a number of--they really reached out and got not ten percent but maybe five percent African-American students. And so you'd have forty, fifty, sixty, seventy in one class, until they cut back African Americans. When you do that for a few years, you've got a lot of M.B.A.'s out there relative to other schools, which have smaller class and have maybe ten or fifteen blacks in a class. And so, we would have those people come back every year and for a weekend and, and visit with, speak with, live with the students to tell 'em what's really going on out there with the, you know, give 'em the 4-1-1 of how it's gonna be once you get out and, and what you can, you know, what you think about, what you do. And it was a fabulous weekend. It still happens. It's been changed because the school has now given the organization money (laughter). So now it's a big weekend, which is not as intimate as it used to be. It's got in, entertainers; it's got, you know, national speakers, etc., where it used to be just the guys coming back, sitting down with his--(unclear)--lunch and dinner saying hey, man, this is what the deal is. And so, I'm not saying it's bad. It's just that it's changed. It's different. I, I really liked the way it was because it was sort of, you know, a chance to come back and really just get the, get the information from the guys who came, who had gone out--(unclear)--what, what it really was like working at AT&T, and really is like working at, you know, at McKinsey [& Company] consulting, or investment banking. You know, you'd, you'd be talking to these guys for two days and you know, getting the real stuff, which didn't, I didn't find happening the last ten, fifteen years in the same way. Story_ID: 156601 Speaker 1: Okay, so when, when you graduated [from Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachustts], did you--now, I, I know you went to Kenya around this time. Did you go directly to Kenya after-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you graduated? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, how, how, how was that set up? How did you find out about this and-- Speaker 2: During my (clearing throat)--excuse me--during the summer break of my first year--you know, during summer break you're supposed to go get a job. And that job often is in the area you want to be in and often with a company you hope will hire you after you graduate. So people go into, either go to Wall Street, or they go into Proctor & Gamble [P&G], or they go into a consulting firm, etc. I came to Washington [D.C.] and worked because I was starting to get interested in, in real estate and finance. I worked for a mortgage banking firm down here. One of my classmates went to Kenya for the summer. And when he came back he said well, I'm working on a project to, to build a hotel in Kenya with one of the local people, the politicians there. Would you help me, 'cause you've been working in real estate over the summer? And he said and if you do, I'll pay your way to Kenya Christmas break. So I thought about it, and I said Boston [Massachusetts] in December, Nairobi [Kenya] in December, okay, I'll go to Nairobi (laughter). And so, off I went to Nairobi. Plus, it was, you know, this whole attraction to being able to go to Kenya, to Africa for the first time, you know, after, you know, you know--at that point we were becoming very African diaspora focused. And so it was a romantic, you know, idea too to go to Africa, you know, and, and spend two weeks, Christmas break there, three weeks, whatever it was. Landed in Nairobi December twenty-third or fourth or whatever it was, immediately fell in love with the place, immediately fell in love with the weather, with the people, with the opportunities that I saw because it was a very nice, clean, modern place. But it still wasn't where the U.S. city, typical city was. But it was going right there, so you kind of knew what was gonna happen here. And I considered that to be an advantage in business, if you kind of know what, hey, this is gonna be here in, in five years or seven years, and it's not here yet. Guess what, you can, you can put it in since you know it's gonna be here. And so I thought it was a great place to, to undertake business opportunities. And it was a, it was a Western propped up kind of economy because the West wanted it to succeed because Idi Amin [Dada] was in Uganda at that time sort of dismantling things. [Julius] Nyerere in Tanzania was practicing what is called African Socialism, Ujamaa. And so the West was considered about this whole, you know--really interested in making sure Kenya followed this Western capitalist model. Again, that's just opportunity for me 'cause I know what that model is, you know. And so I got there, met some people there, went brack [back] in March for spring break 'cause we were working on this project trying to get this ho--money built to build a hotel, a major hotel at the new airport there for this politician. At least we had represented to him that we were gonna be able to do that for him. And you know, it just, just said well, you know, this is a great place to be. It's a great to be. And I met an African gentleman who had also gone to Harvard Business School who said well, why don't you come and work with me because I'm doing all this stuff, and I need some help, and I can get you a work permit. So, rather than taking the offers I got out of business school, I took his offer. And a week or so after graduating from the business school in May or June, got on a plane, went to East Africa to live and try my hand at making my, you know, fortune, future, entrepreneurial moves, whatever. And my partner, the one who take me over there first, his idea was to go to work with the bank and get the bank to send him over there, and we'd both be over there. Well, he never got sent over, so I ended up there by myself. But there were other--me--there was a number of black Americans already there who had been living there either with USAID [United States Agency for International Development] or with--what was that program that Leon Sullivan had? The-- Speaker 1: Oh, oh, oh-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Opportunities Industrial-- Speaker 2: --Center-- Speaker 1: OI-- Speaker 2: OIC. Speaker 1: OIC, yeah. Speaker 2: Opportunities Industrial [sic, Industrialization] Center[s], there was a number of those folks there. So I--you know, it was a black community there, black American community there. And there was also, again, another black American guy who had gone to Harvard Business School--(unclear)--who had started a real estate company over there. And so we all--so I hooked up with these people, and we started doing things. And I, with my African partner, who was doing trading commodities and real estate, and I did everything from renting houses to selling houses to, you know, doing, trying to do deals, or teaching at the university, anything to make, you know, my rent (laughter) payments 'cause I didn't really have any financial resources to start off with. But it was all on the come to try to develop business there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) now, now-- Story_ID: 156602 Speaker 1: What was your African partner's name? Speaker 2: Comoza [ph.] Longwe, Longwe, L-O-N-G-W-E. He's from Malawi, originally raised in Zambia, and went to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]. And he had something called Longwe & Company that I joined. And he said you come help me do this, and we're gonna, you know, trade all these commodities and do this, that, and the other. And we did some of it, and you know, some of it worked, some of it failed. I then joined with Jack Butler [John Gordon Butler], who was an African American who'd gone to Harvard Business School, who was the--been over there doing, he was building houses. And I joined him, and then we started a savings and loan, a, what's called a building society in Nairobi [Kenya] to give mortgages to people so they could buy the houses we were building and you know, just fell in love with the place and, and you know, stayed and never meant to live forev--leave forever. But it was a very wonderful place to be in the '70s [1970s], beautiful weather. The average temperature is seventy-nine degrees year-round, no humidity, you know, beautiful people, you know, wonderful people, and beautiful city. (Unclear)--(unclear)--had to go down to the coast of East African, down to Mombasa [Kenya]. You ever been to East Africa? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Yeah, Mombasa-- Speaker 1: I've heard a lot of, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, it's the, I mean the beaches--(unclear)--make anything around here look--I mean there's this beautiful white sand, beautiful light green wat--just a gor--this like--and I just felt like this is where I was meant to be; I mean it just felt that good. And, but, but, you know, he had business challenges. You know, the currency got devalued once, and you know, there was a mil--it was coup, attempt coup once. And so, you know, it was not always cookies and creme, but it was a wonderful place to try things. I met my wife [Marcella Jones] there-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)--oh, oh, oh, go ahead, well, go ahead. I'm not gonna interrupt. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, go ahead. Speaker 1: Yeah. No, I was just gonna say it's very--in those days, you know, when Jomo Kenyatta was still the president, he was still respected then, and-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --he still was stable. They were member of the com, the commonwealth. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: It was just, it was more--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, they had something called the East African Community, which consisted of Tanzania, Kenya, and Uganda. And they would share infrastructural kinds of business organizations like East African Telecommun--they had something called East African Telecommunications. It was an East Afri--it was a Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania telecommunications, East African Airways, East African Railroads, those kinds of things. Well, while I was there, they started arguing, and they broke apart the economic union. And I'm looking at this as the first time I've been in a place where from the time I came to when I'd been there, over the time I was there with, with, I felt like I was going backwards. And you know, coming from American where everything had always been progress, I didn't like the feeling of going backwards (laughter). You know, things were less attractive than it was economically be-- you know. As time went on, I said this is not good. You know, it's hard to invest your family in. So when I met my wife [Marcella Jones] there, who I met there-- Story_ID: 156603 Speaker 1: How, how did you meet? How did you meet? Speaker 2: She [Jones' wife, Marcella Jones] was walking down the street, and I was trying to figure what tribe she was with, from. And I (laughter)--(unclear)--I mean she looked like she was, she looked like [HM] Angela Davis actually with a big fro. And she was--(unclear)--you know, just looked like her walking down the street. And I'm, who is this? And I didn't know whether she was, you know, where she was from. She could from the coast of East Africa. She could have been an Ethiopian, or Somali, or Kenyan, could have been anything. And then my buddy and I were--a guy I worked with is an architect, African American, my best friend over there, walking down the street. We saw her again and bumped into her, and then we started talking and immediately saw she's an American. And she had just been there a few weeks, and she was there with this organization, o, opportun--Institute of Cultural Affairs. And I mentioned to you earlier, they were doing a pro, they had the projects in Kenya and in Nairobi [Kenya] in, in a certain area where they were giving the local people the tools to sort of uplift themselves economically, and politically, and, and culturally. And she introduced me what they were doing. I was blown away by what they were doing and what they--the way they did it. I thought of the, the methods they used is, were better than what I learned at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] in terms of creating plans, creating, you know, future opportun--I mean it just, the methods were awesome, and so simple, so powerful it just blew me away. I got very intrigued, very enamored with the program. And I think because I was interested in what she was doing and their organization was doing, she got interested in me. And plus, I had Stevie Wonder's new album. And I was the only one in Kenya that had 'Songs in the Key of Life' (laughter). So, I got her to come over to my house to hear 'Songs to the Key of Life' by Stevie Wonder, and the rest is history. (Laughter) We got, we got married not too long after (laughter). But, but, but we were both there. We were both, you know, very--we both got into the place. I mean, you know, we were, we were with the people. You know, we can, we could sit with the paupers and walk with the kings. You know, we, you know, do both and, and did both, you know, rode the buses, and walked the streets, and went into, into the, into the, you know, the real poverty areas and also the upper--you know, I mean just we were part of the system. It was wonderful. Story_ID: 156604 Speaker 1: We [Jones and his wife, Marcella Jones] were part, we, we became part of the place [in Nairobi, Kenya], you know, and it felt very comfortable. And we both recognized we had a similarity in that re, that regard. We loved just being with the people, being involved in something that was bigger than ourselves. And at that time, she was with the organization that was, you know, giving these people these human development tools in these villages and towns. And I was there sort of trying to be an entrepreneur but trying to be the right kind of entrepreneur, you know, businessperson, because to me capitalism can be a very enabling and a very much of, uplifting system. And it all, could also can be very exploitative. It's just all a question of how you practice it. And that's the true with almost any of the -isms: communism, socialism, capitalism. They can be good, or they can be bad, depending on how the practice and who practice. And so, practicing capitalism in a, in a, in a uplifting, enabling way, which I felt, you know, coming out of, again, the history of the movement in this country for, for African Americans and then for Africans, was something that was a calling almost, something to do, something that you could live well doing, make money doing, if that was what you wanted to do, and, and, and also give a lot of benefit to, to people. And so that's kind of the attraction. And so when we got married, we did a plan for our family and for our life. We did a twenty-year timeline and decided where we wanted to be in twenty years, what we wanted to have in twenty years, and created a whole story around that, and a book around that, and symbols around that, and a song around that, and you know, deciding where we wanted to be at economically, geographically, spiritually, educationally, family, children, all of that, put it in a book-- Speaker 2: What, is there a precedent for that? Had you seen that done before, or-- Speaker 1: She, the organization she's with [Institute of Cultural Affairs], they, they have these methods. I'm telling you it's the most powerful stuff I've ever seen for planning. And you know, and put it on a time, you know, created a book, really a book, you know, over a weekend, you know, doing brainstorming and you know, just deciding where you wanted to be, where. Where, where do you see yourself? Where do you see yourself being in twenty years? There's no limit on where you see yourself, really. But there is--in, in order to be here, you've got to do certain things by this point, and this point, and this point. So, therefore, what you're doing here you know why you're doing it, because it's really leading to here. And that can be--it doesn't matter what you came here with necessarily. It doesn't mean because I have a law degree that I have to do law. If I want to do this, that law degree may be used in a different way. But I know why I'm doing it. And I--you call it, you kind of call it living retrospectively, deciding where you wanna be and then living into as opposed to deciding what I have and therefore what I can be. And that's a big difference in thinking in the approach to life that makes a big difference. And I've tried to, I try to trans--communicate that, or give that to people I talk to, young people I talk to about how they can create their own future. But to create that, there's obligation that goes with that. You gotta do the things along the way and understand that it's a dynamic. You know, it, it turn, has twists and turns. The real interesting thing about our family's plan, our family's story that we told, if you look at today, what we said we would do, we would, where we wanted to be in 1997 or whatever it was--we got married in '77 [1977]--twenty years later happened. It happened almost to the letter. It was scary, you know. (Laughter) It was like whoa--(unclear)--but that just shows you the power of, of you know, deciding and then living into it, because it--and, and fortune--and you got to be fortunate enough to be in a place that allows that to happen. I mean there are certain times and places where things just won't let you do that, (laughter), you know. But we're become being American and being in America you can pretty much do that in, in a lot of ways. And, and, and that's what happened. And so we kind, we kind of do that, and we try to create, you know, a, a, a purpose for what we do and where we wanna be, and then live into that. And then whatever you're doing, you don't, you don't have any question about whether it's relevant or good. You know, you're doing it because you've decided where you wanna be. And that can change. You, you can change that, but the point is to decide--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: And this model came, came out of the organization that she, that she was at-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that, that center to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they're, they're techniques that they use. Speaker 2: --Kenya, okay. Speaker 1: Um-hum, techniques they use-- Speaker 2: And, and again, the name of it is the-- Speaker 1: The Institute of Cultural Affairs. Speaker 2: Okay, out of Chicago [Illinois], correct? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What, what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: In fact, you guys are gonna interview her. Speaker 2: Okay Speaker 1: And Joanne [sic, Julieanna Richardson] wants to interview her. She's got an interesting story, very interesting story, powerful, powerful tools, simple. But, you know, I, like I said, I, I get mad at Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] for not saying this is really what the case meant, you know; this is the way you do it, you know. And that way in one month I would have learned the whole thing and been much more effective, not that I didn't need to go through all the cases, but just, you know, I would have seen what they were--they take a long time to tell you what your--(unclear)--what the essence of what you're doing really is. They can do it much more efficiently in my opinion. And, and you can still do the work, but it, you know, I, you know. Giving you the tool, a simple tool is very simple. Yeah, like I say, they were going to towns or communities and give over the weekend local untrained people these tools. And these people would come up with, with development plans that will blow your socks off in a, by, by Sunday. They go to the on Friday. By Sunday, they--because they got, they got methods; it's the method. The method is the key. That's another one of my favorite phrases: the method is the key. Story_ID: 156605 Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, I guess a part of the plan was to come back [from Kenya], right? The first--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Part of the plan was to come back, that's right, is to come back to the [United] States. We never meant to live--I never meant to leave forever. [President Jimmy] Carter had just been I think elected. And, and you know, it looked like the United States was gonna, you know, be a good place. East Africa was starting to go some crazy, you know, not as attractive a way in terms of now that you're a married man, it's more than just sort of you riding this, you know, this adventuresome plane. You gotta be concerned about a wife and maybe growing a family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So 1976, Carter is elected, and you all come back in '70-- Speaker 2: Seven [1977]. Speaker 1: Seven [1977], okay, all right. Speaker 2: And so we said okay, we'll come back to the States. I mean we love the States too. We never meant to live--I just love Africa as well. And so we came back and plugged back into the States. But we had a, you know, we had, we could, we could decide where we wanted to be in the States. We did a whole spreadsheet on different cities and what they're ranked, every city, in terms of ten different qualities by a scale of one to ten and decided where we wanted to come to. And the strange thing is that cities like New York [New York] kept coming up. Even though we'd rate 'em very low in some things, they kept coming up. You had to just decide you weren't gonna go to New York 'cause it kept coming. I mean it's just got so much there in terms of education, in terms of opportunity, in terms of, you know, international community, all the things that you, whatever your criteria are, that even when you put in things like quality of life and weather and blah, blah, blah, it still rises to the top. [Washington] D.C. was consistently near the top. California really fell out because it was, California is a little isolated in, in terms of world connections. And we ultimately decided D.C. It was where we wanted to live, but we went through an analysis, just like we did our little book, of where we wanted to be, you know, and you know, did the whole iterations and ended in Washington, D.C., and then and decided what we wanted to plug into. And we both wanted to plug into something of service in some way. I wanted to be in the, in the business sector. I wanted to be in the entrepreneurial sector and service in some way. And she, she took a job fir--she first got the job as the executive director of the Big Sisters of Washington. And then I took a job at the Booker T. Washington Foundation. I was, I had an opportunity to go to Arthur, I mean Arthur Young [later Ernst & Young] as a consulting, their, their accounting firm as a consultant. Speaker 1: Arthur, Arthur Andersen. Speaker 2: No, Arthur--it used to be something called Arthur Young, the big eight-- Speaker 1: Was it, was it Arthur-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there was an-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Arthur Young to, yeah. And there was Arthur Young, Arthur Anderson, and Deloitte, you know, PwC [PricewaterhouseCoopers, LLP]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Peat Marwick [later KPMG], all those guys, and there are only four of 'em left. Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought you were asking me what, what the Arthur--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, no, no-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --it was Arthur Young. Speaker 1: --another part of it. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: I was kind of-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--yeah. Speaker 2: --'cause I couldn't remember it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I tried 'cause his name's kind of gone by the wayside. Story_ID: 156606 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, so, all right, you're back in the [United] States. You're working for the Booker T. Washington Foundation. Speaker 2: Yeah, Booker T. Washington Foundation. I got an off-- Speaker 1: Now what is that? What is the Booker T. Washington Foundation? Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington Foundation is a foundation of African American businesses. It was the, it was, it was a research sort of center for African--it used to--I don't know if it's still there. I hope it is. But it was a, you know, the businesses, it served the African American business community as their sort of, you know, place where acu--where business ideas, and research, and thought went on. And there was a guy named Charles Tate who was the head guy there, and Charles is still around. But they offered me a job because--and they had a program. The reason I took the job there: one, is because it was offered, and I needed a job. But two, it was with a black organization in af--coming back from Africa, I wondered if I could work with the black community, is a preference in ec, in economics and some finance in some way. And they had a program targeting, acquiring, helping blacks and Latinos acquire cable television franchises around the country. And they, they had, their research arm, it sort--and Charles Tate led this. He came out of something called the Urban Institute apparently, who looked at cable as the next gen, the next breakthrough in terms of, you know, owning communications opportunities in the country because, you know, radio had been given out--(unclear)--teens and twenties radio-wise. These things are all awarded by the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] for free to, to parties, to bits, people who applied for these licenses. And they all were awarded to white men, you know, all the radio, AM and FM, pretty much, all the television, which is awarded in '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s]. And the last sort of technology that was, you know, developing was cable in the seventies [1970s]. And they said well, you know, this is an opportunity for African American communities and entrepreneurs to get in an ownerships because Syncom [Venture Partners], our fund, was formed because, to effect this whole ownership issue of, of minorities owning communications and broadcasting properties-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)--there are some questions I need to ask you about this. And the--(unclear)--first of all, you had Charles--I, I had no idea that Charl, Charles Tate is one of my--he was in Dayton [Ohio] before he came to [Washington] D.C. or working on the cable--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Do you know Charles? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, brilliant guy. Speaker 1: The--okay, I, I often ask about him, and people don't know what happened to him. But Tate-- Speaker 2: I, I can give you-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --his number if you want it. Speaker 1: I wasn't really a personal friend, but I, I know his friends-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I mean-- Speaker 1: --simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --he's an interesting--he's somebody to interview-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --by the way. Now that I think about it, he, he's, he's seen a lot, been through a lot of store--yeah, he be interesting. Speaker 1: And he was-- Speaker 2: Have a point-- Speaker 1: --I know a good friend of-- Speaker 2: --Certainly got a point of view. Speaker 1: --Dr. Arthur Thomas, who was the president of Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. He used to bring him to talk to, to the campus to talk about cable television-- Speaker 2: Oh, get out of here. Speaker 1: --development-- Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: --of cable television. Right-- Story_ID: 156607 Speaker 1: So Charles Tate and the Booker T. Washington Foundation. There's, fir, first of all, you know, venture capitalism, you know, is, is, is the, the method that we're, we're, we're acquiring these stations and so--well, what is venture capitalism, just for those who are watching this who don't quite know what a venture capitalist does? Speaker 2: Venture capitalism, a part of the economic spectrum of capital that sort of provides money, capital, to entrepreneurial people and/or companies in the form of equity, which means it's not a loan typically. It's not, doesn't have to be paid back, doesn't have to be interest on it, but it provides equity. And for that equity, the investor, the venture capital company or fund, wants to make a higher return than he could, theoretically, by putting the money in the form of a loan or in a, you know, like a bank loan. And he's willing to take a higher risk for that to make that higher return. So, if you come to me and you need a million dollars to buy a business or a, a radio station or something, and the bank will give you, say, $600,000 in the form of a loan because that business can support that kind of loan, you've got a $400,000 gap, and you've only got $50,000 of your own money; you got a 350 shortfall, a venture fund may say I'll, I'll give you that equity that the bank is looking for. But I want ten percent of your company or twenty percent of the equity of this company, or fifty percent, whatever the negotiation is. And so an institution was created out in the '50s [1950s] in this country out of, well, early, early venture capital funds to provide that kind of money to spur business development, to provide equity, patient money, money that doesn't have to be paid interest on, money that doesn't have to be paid in three years back. It can be patient, but it's looking for a high return, higher return. And it's looking to participate in the upside and certainly willing to suffer the downside. And that's ven, what a venture capitalist does. It analyzes companies or opportunities and puts that money in in the form of equity. Speaker 1: Okay, so to, to be a successful venture capitalist you will, you have to know what you're invest--you have to really study I guess on some level or have-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, you theoretically are supposed to know what you're putting your money or your people, whoever's money you're, you know, investing to off-- Speaker 1: Or be able to see beyond the, what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you trying-- Speaker 1: --today-- Speaker 2: --you're to judge whether this business is going to be successful, which really boils down is this person likely to be successful, because you can take--as I talked to you about business school, and what was really important was the classes on human behavior, you know, as it turns out, not the finance and not the marketing alone but really human behavior. You can take the same opportunity, same company and put two different people in charge of it, and you'll have two diff, very different results. So what you, as a venture capital, as much as anything are deciding because understanding the market and the financial analysis, all of that we've got the tools to do; we're going to school to do it; we've got experience doing it. And you can make mistakes, but pretty much you don't get that too wrong. What you're bettin' is the person. And do I feel this person can make it work? Can I help this person it work and become a success? Will this person get close to success and run away in fear of success? You know, all of those kinds of things are really a part of learning, the quote "art," of being a venture capitalist because it's not just cut and dried as a lot of human stuff that goes on in making the decision and in succeeding or failing. And so, but that's supposed to be our job, to, to, to make those decisions. Typically, the, a, a venture capital--I can describe a venture capitalist, for example, as a, a brother who gives his brother or sister some money to start their little business. That brother has just became a venture capitalist by put, investing money in his child, or his uncle, or his, his sibling, right, in his business. He gave him $10,000. Well, he, he's made a venture investment. You know, it can be in the form of a loan. You call it what you want. It's a venture investment because it may not get paid back. You know what I'm saying? And so, that's what we do, but we do it on an institutional level. We have much more money, and we try to do larger investments. They can be small investments, which angel investors do--we call it angels--or it can be institutions like ours or others, like Kleiner Perkins [Caufield & Byers] or, or, you know, KKR [Kohlberg Kravis Roberts], those kinds of funds that become venture cap, that are venture capital companies that start things like FedEx, or, you know, Microsoft, or, or tweeter, Twitter, or Groupon, or you know, Google. Those are all venture capital. And the companies that invest in those companies, put equity in those companies and entrepreneur--early stage companies, typically early stage, and you know, slug it out and see if they can make 'em into something very valuable. Story_ID: 156608 Speaker 1: There has not been a lot of venture capital targeted at and available to African American entrepreneurs and businesspeople. It just hasn't. That, that's almost--you know, just hasn't been there. And so we were formed in order to invest in those kinds of underserved entrepreneurs in companies. But we specialize in doing it in radio, television, cable, so in telecommunications and media. Speaker 2: Let me ask you this now. You're talking about Syncom [Venture Partners], right-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --and, and why Syncom was formed. But there was something before Syncom, I was told, that's called an Urban National [Corporation]. Do you know anything about the Urban National? Speaker 1: Urban National was a venture fund that was created in Boston [Massachusetts] before Syncom was created, yeah. Syncom was created in 1977. Urban National was created before that, but there were funds before Urban National. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: There was a whole program called the SBIC [Small Business Investment Company] Program, which had a special component of it called the MESBIC [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company] side of it or minority-SBIC stands for Small Business Investment Companies. They start, they, it was created in 1955 [sic, 1958] out of the Small Business Investment Act of the SBA [Small Business Administration]. And that really is what created and spurred the, the, the creation of the venture capital industry in the United States, which has now spread globally. It was really a government sponsored program that, that was the impetus, although there were some private venture funds even before that that-- Speaker 2: And so the SBIC Program was-- Speaker 1: Created out of an act of-- Speaker 2: Created-- Speaker 1: --Congress-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --SBA pro--what is it--bill, SBA bill, whatever it was, in 1955 [sic, 1958]. And in 1972, I think it was, as a result of, again, civil unrest, civil disturbance in the, in the black communities and the Republican primarily, the Republican response to it was what they called black capitalism. Let's create black capitalism. Let's let people participate in this, at least some of 'em, and cool this down, you know. And to their credit, the Republicans, [President Richard] Nixon and others, created these programs, the SB--the, the MESBIC Program, the Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment [Company], which is a subset, is a section of the SBA law that was amended so that you got special preference or special terms if you agree to create an investment company that was licensed by the SBA under the SBIC Program but agreed to invest in minority companies. And, and then they changed it to socially and economically disadvantaged companies 'cause they can't use the word--they can't--they aren't supposed to differentiate based on race. But those were all Republican initiatives, you know, 'cause Republicans believed in black capitalism. They promoted black capitalism, and the Democrats, quite frankly, were sort of into the welfare kind of thing as opposed-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --to capitalism. Speaker 2: --those are Nixon Administration initiatives, right? Speaker 1: [Nodding yes]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Most of, most of the business initiatives that have benefited the African Americans, quite frankly, have been Republican initiatives. Story_ID: 156609 Speaker 1: Did, did you know Art Fletcher [HM Arthur Fletcher]? Speaker 2: Of course. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yep, yep. And so it was a good program. And so the SB, so the SBIC [Small Business Investment Company] Program stated in '72 [1972], and then MESBIC [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company] program, rather, started in '72 [1972]. Ultimately, it had a hundred and some investment companies that were licensed by the SBA [Small Business Administration]. Urban National [Corporation] started in the early seventies [1970s]. I don't, I'm not sure it preceded the MESBIC Program. Urban National was not a MESBIC nor was Syncom [Venture Partners], our fund, a MESBIC when it was formed. We created a MESBIC subsidiary but were, we were a private venture fund that was created to invest in telecommunications and media. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so Urban National, I've--did you know, [HM] Clarence [B.] Jones, Tyrone Dickerson, Lawrence Holt [ph.]-- Speaker 2: I knew Tyrone-- Speaker 1: --Horales [ph.]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Dickerson. I still know Tyrone. My partner, the guy who hired me and who was the first president of Syncom, Herb Wilkins [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], who you know or heard of-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --was--I--why would--I don't know if he and, and Tyrone were classmates. I think they were. And all of those guys--in, in fact, Herb Wilkins worked at Urban National-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know. And he probably will tell you if you did his interview--you did do his interview. Did he tell you about Urban National, that they fired him? Speaker 1: That was, I think it's in there. I believe it's--(unclear)--a long time ago. Speaker 2: Yeah, that he-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --they didn't want him to do Eugene Jackson's deal. You know, you heard of Eugene Jackson, right? Speaker 1: Tell us about it, no. Speaker 2: Eugene Jackson? Speaker 1: No, you tell, tell us. Speaker 2: Oh, Eugene [D.] Jackson was an entrepreneur in telecommunications and media who's, now lives in South Africa. Eugene used to own radio stations in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], WDAS AM and FM. He owned a cable system in, in Queens [New York, New York] with Percy Sutton. He owned the black--what's it called--the National Black Network? Speaker 1: Yeah. That, that name was-- Speaker 2: National Black--(unclear)--with Sid Small [Sidney L. Small]. Speaker 1: --MEC [ph.]. It was Mutual Black Radio [sic, Mutual Broadcasting System]-- Speaker 2: And it-- Speaker 1: --National Black Network. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, he and Sid Small started that. So he's a real entrepreneur, brilliant guy, Kansas City [Missouri] guy like me. His sister was in my class but an engineer as well, went to Rolla School of Mines [later, Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, Missouri] in, in Missouri. But he, he had--when he was starting his National Black Network with Sid Small, I think Urban National--Herb wanted to do investment. The guys that were up there didn't want him to do it. He said he was gonna do it in, they were gonna do it anyhow. And they apparently--he says that's the reason they fired him. And then he decided to be an entrepreneur, and then he ultimately took the job running Syncom, and then brought me in a year later. Story_ID: 156610 Speaker 1: Now, in 1970--you just came back in '77 [1977]. But in 1978, that's when the F.C.C.'s [Federal Communications Commission] Minority Tax Certificate policy, you know, was initiated, right? And that was, that, that--tell, tell us about that and why that is big in this discussion. Speaker 2: Well, it was an initiative by the government to provide a reason for white owners of radio, broadcast licenses, radio-television licenses, to even consider selling those licenses 'cause it was a pretty much a closed system. They would sell to each other, these licenses. Be, by offering the sellers, the white sellers in most cases 'cause they were owned by whites, a tax deferral on the gain on the sale, they gave these owners a reason to call or listen to offers from black entrepreneurs or, or, or buyers when they, you know--and since, since these guys were about money, they would often sell properties to blacks or Latinos in, in order to get the tax certificate. It's like a how--It's like a certificate that defers the gain. And if you reinvest it, it's deferred and--it's like your house. If you sell your house, your home, your gain is de, is tax deferred. The, you know, these--you bought it for a hundred. You sold it for two hundred. That hundred thousand dollar profit is taxable as in capital gains rate. Well, that gain--that tax is deferred if you reinvest that, that money, that gain in a, in like property, what they called like property. So you can--that spurs homeownership. You can keep reinvesting it without paying taxes on the gains and keep building big, buying up bigger houses. In this instance it allowed blacks to be--to bid for properties and provide the seller with a reason to sell it to you 'cause they can get that tax certificate and buy a bigger station or whatever. And so it was very important in terms of bringing black owners into, you know, the view of the sellers, and give them a reason to, to--and which allowed blacks then to get into the industry, learn the industry, and build what they've been able to build in many cases. In the case of Radio One, it's been a public company. So it was very important. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And, and the government uses tax code all the time for purposes of spurring whatever initiative it has, whether it's, you know, the tax code for education, the tax code for real estate development, tax code for oil exploration, tax, you know. The tax code is used all the time, and like I say, for homeownership. So it's not an, you know, unusual thing. Speaker 1: Now did we--did the National Association of Black, NABOB [National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters] I guess-- Speaker 2: Black Owned Broadcasters-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Black, Black Owned Broadcasters. Did, did they play a role in push, pushing the government and the, the FCC to do this or did they-- Speaker 2: I'm sure they did. They were a lot of us. I mean Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] and I both testified on this, you know and, and at the--I'm sure all the organizations, the National Media, Black Media Coalition, that doesn't exist today-[HM] Pluria Marshall [Sr.] ran that organization--did; NABOB, National--did. I think, I think, I think it was a lot of players. [HM] Tyrone Brown, the FCC commissioner, black F.C.C. commissioner did. So I think all the, all the guns were blazing to try to get something done because the, the paucity of ownership, black and white in broadcasting in this country was, was enormous. I mean it was, out of 7,000 radio stations there were maybe a 140 owned by blacks that were minorities from 7,000. Out of two or three thousand television stations I think there was one owned by blacks and in Detroit [Michigan] or something. So I mean there was a tremendous disparity, and it was, and this was a, this was a public resource. This was not something people paid for. This was given out by the government to people were, who said I'm gonna serve the public interest better than this guy, and so the, they won the comparative hearing, and they got the license for free. What's happened now, of course, is the government is now auctioning license for tel--for the electromagnetic spectrum. So when you were for cellular licenses and these new spectrum licenses, the highest bidder, which of course what drives blacks out of the market again because the guys who got the licenses before, the AT&T's, and the Sprints, and the whatever, they can bid, they, they can bid what you can't bid. So, again, things came back around and stopped that. Speaker 1: Yeah, we're, we're in a state that's not as, there's, it's not as much opportunity now you would say--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh, much--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --as much as it was in 19-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --'78 [1978]. Speaker 2: Nah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, so this was a tremendous victory and opportunity for the black community. Speaker 2: Yes, and it created wealth in the black community. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 156611 Speaker 1: So Syncom [Venture Partners] was created in '78 [1978] as well, right? Speaker 2: It did what? Speaker 1: Syncom was also created in '78 [1978], right? Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977], okay. It's just on the eve of this F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --rule, okay, all right. Okay, and, and Syncom hired you basically from Booker T. Wash, Washington [Booker T. Washington Foundation], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. How, how did that come about? I mean how, when did you first meet Herb Wilkins [HM Herbert P. Wilkins Sr.], and how did this happen? Speaker 2: Herb had a--Herb was in Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] as well. And one, some of his best friends, one of his best friends, a guy named Len Fuller [Leonard Fuller]--and Len be another guy to interview (laughter)--Len offered me a job. He worked for a consulting firm here. And when I was in business school he offered a summer job to work with them. I didn't take it. I took the real estate thing, mortgage banking job, for the summer. And then when I came out of school and I went to Africa, Len was in Africa, in Nairobi [Kenya], just vacationing. And he and I hooked up together, and we just became friends. And he was impressed with what he thought I could do, and I was impressed with him. And he and Herb happened to be classmates and real good friends. When I took the job with Booker T. Washington Foundation, we were, as I said, doing cable television. We were getting franchises for cable television opportunities around the country. And when the job opening here came up in '78 [1978] at Syncom, I said, "I'm interested in getting, transitioning into venture capital, and Herb Wilkins is the guy." And so Len told me, he said, "Well, I know Herbert. He's one of my best friends. Let me tell him about you. Let me write him about you," blah, blah, blah. And so he kind of said, "Herb, you really need to talk to this guy," blah, blah. So I applied and talked with Herb, and we, he finally felt comfortable enough to hire me, so I became the vice president. But that's how that happened. That's how I came to Syncom. It was sort of I was in the cable area. Syncom was created to do cable and other broadcasting things. They needed a vice president. Herb with the Harvard Business School. I went to Harvard Business School. Len Fuller went to Harvard Business School. We knew each other. You should talk with each other, talked with each other, and ultimately came over. Story_ID: 156612 Speaker 1: Okay, and now Syncom's [Venture Partner] mission to diversify the ownership of minority ownership of media in the United States. That's from what I've read. Is that--it doesn't seem like a stretch to--I mean, but I, but I was told to ask this anyway. (Laughter) Why, why did you choose to be involved in that niche? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think having to, having talked to me now. you kind of see it was a natural oppor, an attractive opportunity for me, giving where I was sort of mentally coming from and had historically come from, just having grown up in the '60s [1960s] and dealt with what we dealt with, etc. It was important, and I believe that--you know, I remember the Marshall McLuhan book, "the medium is the message" [from 'Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man']. And that, always that title just always hit me. I mean it's like, in other--if you control the medium, you can deliver the message; you can control the message. And of course, not, not owning media, not controlling media mens--means that you're not con--in control of the message. So ownership of broadcasting of radio-television, which is the primary way messages are distributed, were distributed at least at that time to the populous, was a very noble undertaking. And anything that would affect that, to me, moved the movement forward. And so, but you had to own in order to really determine, you know. You, you can't just be a newscasters 'cause they write your scripts (laughter). If you say the wrong thing, you know, you're out. But if you own it, you know, it's pretty hard to lose your license-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --unless you really do some-- Speaker 1: This was actually being dramatized with Max Robinson, when-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --in those days. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: ABC [American Broadcasting Corporation] had a big conflict with Max about what he-- Speaker 2: What, about what he-- Speaker 1: --what, how he referred to, he referred to black fighters in Africa as freedom fighters, and they-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, that's right. Speaker 1: --referred them as terrorist and/or guerrillas or something, you know. And-- Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Speaker 1: --that actually happened during those days. Speaker 2: That's right. So, so that be--you know, you're right. It was, it was like, oh gosh, I really would want to do this, plus, it's financed; plus, it's vent--it's de, doing deals. I mean I got into doing deals during the real estate stuff, and I, I was, you know, your time horizon is, is, is determined by a deal not by a calendar. I mean, you know, I, you know, this deal took this long or lasted that long. That's, that's what life is--that, that became your, your, your measurement stick as oppo--and I, I just liked that. I liked, you know, you don't need to be, you know, whatever it takes to do the deal. I mean you know, if you read Donald Trump and all those guys, you can see that they're deal guys. And if you like deals, then, you know, there's a lot of risk, but there's a lot of reward; and there's a lot of freedom; and there's a lot of creativity; and you can do a lot of potential good if, if it's directed in the right way I think. So, it became a real opportunity for me. And it opened, and I happened to be at the right place at the right time. And Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] was a, you know, an incredible guy to be mentored by in a way because it was his--he's one of the most brilliant people that I ever, I've ever met and one of the most charismatic, you know, in terms of just the largeness of his presence. So I learned a lot from him, and I think he learned something from me in terms of our styles are very different but complementary. And we were able to be successful. Speaker 1: Yeah, a person on your staff was commenting about how you two complement each other, you know, with the-- Speaker 2: Did complement each other. Speaker 1: Or did, yes, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, 'cause he's been gone for a while. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, we did. I mean, you know, I was--I mean people would come to me for sympathy (laughter) after he got through with them (laughter). Story_ID: 156613 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about some of the deals now and the dynamics of these deals. I know, I think the first big deal was in '78 [1978] with Radio One. Is that true? Speaker 2: Actually, it's, the first, the, the first, first deal that Syncom [Venture Partners] did was a company in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], which is on the map today because of Thunder [Oklahoma City Thunder, National Basketball Association franchise] (laughter). But we did a deal-- Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] did a deal with a guy named Jimmy Miller who was, has an FM radio station in Oklahoma City titled Program Black. And, and that station, you know, became the, the deal that sort of, we cut our--he cut its, our teeth on it in radio. And we were, we were successful. I mean it was, it was an interesting, interesting deal, but it wasn't Radio One. It was that, that deal was our first deal and our deal that we made our first profit on I think, and we sold the station successfully. Radio One happened in 1980-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when [HM] Cathy Hughes came to me and Herb, and she wanted to buy WOL Radio here, the AM station in Washington [D.C.]. She had been with WHUR and was no longer with them. Her husband had been on WOL as a program guy, pro, programmer. And the owner of the station got in trouble with the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and was about to lose the license. There was not only a Tax Certificate Policy that the FCC implemented. There was something also called the Distress Sale Policy. Okay, there was two policies that were really implemented and really instrumental. The Distress--the Tax Certificate Policy we've discussed. That's where its owner can sell and defer his gain for tax purposes. The Distress Sale Policy said that if we're getting ready to take your license, you can sell it for no more than two-third, third, 'cause if you take your license, you got nothing. The FC--'cause you've violated the FCC rules. That's why we take your license. Well, instead of that, if you sell it to a ethnic minority, then we can let--you can sell it for two-thirds of the price and keep the money and go away. So WOL had violated FCC policy by theor--supposedly some people were giving the number out on the radio or something, some of the deejays, or it was payola or something. And so Cathy and Dewey [Hughes] said well, we want to buy it. And a lot of other people said we want to buy it at two-thirds its value, AM station, get started in the market. They came to us, and we said, "Well, Cathy, you know, you're since with WOL and blah, blah, blah. Where's your plan?" And she says, "What do you mean plan?" I said, "Where is your business plan?" She said, "My business plan is to be successful in business. That's my plan. I mean what do you want (laughter)?" I said oh God. But we ultimately ended up doing the deal with, you know, with them. And Cathy, because her plan was to be successful, she decided to be successful. And she went through some really tough times, but she stuck it out. She'll tell you that she slept on the floor in the station. She did this, that, and the other. She finally brought her son in, and the thing finally started working. It was just an AM station. At that time, whites were selling AM stations to blacks and keeping the FM because FM was starting to happen. Well, this was an AM station. We were hoping to get the FM. We were able to buy an FM station, WMMJ, the 102.3. It was a small amp and signal, and but we were able to super serve our audience with it. And it became the most successful class A FM in the country I think. And then we were able to grow from there as she brought [HM] Alfred [Liggins, III] in, and Alfred sort of took over the reins and had a big vision. Speaker 1: That's Alfred Liggins, right? Speaker 2: Liggins, yeah. So the two of them really worked well together. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 156614 Speaker 1: So, you were, you were alluding to some of the privations, that [HM] Cathy Hughes suffered trying to WOL [Radio] off the ground. You know, I've, I've, I've heard-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --her talk her sleeping in her car and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, I was-- Speaker 1: --on the floor in the station. Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she tells it very dramatically. I mean, I don't know, but I know that it was a tough go because AM stations, as I said, were, were on the decline in terms of advertisers support and revenue. And the audience was shifting to FM, and so that's why the bli--whites were selling the AMs to, you know, they would sell 'em to blacks 'cause they were going down anyhow. And now, as you know, they're basically used as talk stations, or sports stations, or whatever, religious stations. So, that was what was happening, but we knew we--you know, if she could be successful with this, if we were able to buy an FM, get an FM station, her dream was always to get, buy WHUR. I mean, for some reason that was her big dream--and weren't able to buy WHUR, but a little class A FM in the station in the market became available, bought it, and made it very successful. And it's called Magic 102.3. And then we bought some stations in Baltimore [Maryland]. And with [HM] Alfred [Liggins, III] there, and Alfred is a very, very talented salesperson, very talented thinker, and motivator, and interesting guy, relationship connect, we were able to continue to grow and got Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then this place and that place. And all of a sudden we had several stations. We were limited as a venture fund by the amount of money we could put in to support the expansion because the banks, there wasn't a lot of this equity capital available to them because the white venture funds weren't gonna, weren't doing it. We had limited resources, but we were able to, I was able to syndicate a number of investment companies, MESBICs [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Companies] with a couple of, of white venture funds that finally saw the light, and create enough capital to, to accelerate the growth of the company in terms of acquiring stations. And finally the stations were successful enough so that we--Alfred was able to get 'em, get it public, to get First Boston to take the company public, which happened in 1999. And the rest is sort of history. Then we created TV One, which was Alfred's idea. He and I sort of noodle on that a long time, but he was really the impusis--impetus on getting that done. And that was to create--he knew that, that radio alone was not gonna be enough. One platform wasn't enough. He wanted another plat, he wanted a video platform, so he wanted to be on cable. So he created a ca-- the second cable channel, after BET [Black Entertainment Television], targeted to blacks. Story_ID: 156615 Speaker 1: Did you play any role in the creation of BET [Black Entertainment Television], since--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] did in particular. Herb was actually an advisor to Bob [Robert L. Johnson]. He was on Bob's board. Speaker 1: That's Bob, Bob Johnson? Speaker 2: Johnson's, board, yeah, sorry. And Bob actually asked us to put the money in, the first money in with John Malone. And it was the only deal that at, at time in our first fund we had a board of directors. It was the only deal that the board of directions declined that we recommended to do, Herb and I. And of course, it was the mother lode (laughter). We were pissed. I mean they had their reasons. It was a little off target from what we were doing as a cable network. It wasn't a cable system. You know, he didn't own any, any franchise or anything. He was puttin' just programming up. But we felt it was the right thing; you know, it was a good deal, and it turned out to be a multibillion dollar deal. And you know, and after that, we just sort of decided we would, we need to buy out our shareholders and board and make decisions ourselves, which we did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, yeah, we, so we were involved in that early on in terms of the thing. We didn't put money in, but we did put money in when the company decided to go public. We did invest in it then. But all along, Herb was probably at least half of the brain power that Bob used in making any decision about BET. He wouldn't do anything without pretty much Herb Wilkins being a part of the discussion or the--(unclear)--and he would do things, and Herb would tell him what to do. But he and Bob turned out to be a very good team. I mean they're both very bright and both strong, and so that BET was able to take advantage of that relationship. And I believe [HM] Tyrone Brown also completed that, that threesome that really, you know, was able to shepherd BET through its first several years. Story_ID: 156616 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you play a role in Inner City Broadcasting in New York [New York] with Percy Sutton at all? Speaker 2: Nope. Speaker 1: No, okay. What about [HM] Don Cornwell's Granite [Broadcasting]? Speaker 2: Nope. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. But, let's see, well, that's, well, tell me about some of the deals that, that stand out, you know, and some of the dynamics on some of the deals that you did make. Speaker 2: Well, we, we invested in probably most of the black and Latino-owned radio and television companies in the United States from 1978, '9 [1979] to now. So, most of them or many of them were Syncom [Venture Partners] investments in some way. We invested in, in my, not just the black mark--area, the black entrepreneurs but Latinos. We invested in Latino entrepreneurs in business, in radio and television, as far back as the early eighties [1980s], including putting the first Univision affiliate on the air in Houston, Texas, from scratch. We had radio stations in Houston and owned by Latino entrepreneurs in Houston and-- Speaker 1: That's Z-Spanish [Network]? Is that it? Is that-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, okay. Speaker 2: That's another Latino company. This was El Dorado Broadcasting [El Dorado Capital, LLC], Tom Castro [Thomas H. Castro]. We had stations in Houston [Texas]; we had stations in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] with El Dorado, you know, again, sold the company very successfully. And he went out and did it again. We had Z-Spanish, which was a California-based company with Amador Bustos. Amador came to us, and he wanted to buy a station or something in the Central Valley [California] to broadcast to the sort of Latino workers in the, in that valley, in the valleys there. And we said well, why not, why don't we create a national thing? Why just do three stations here in the valley? Why don't we use, you know, create a whole network and put programming upon the satellite and call it a network and you know, own stations and pro--broadcast stations. So, we expanded his thinking, his concept, and created Z-Spanish, which was sold very successfully later. So, on the Latino side, we were very involved with, in terms of cable, as cable tele--and then on the broadcast side with, by blacks, as I said most of the black radio and television we were involved in. On the cable side, as cable was, was developing, we invested in, we were the lead investor and raised the money, equity money for the cable systems built in Newark, New Jersey, Washington, D.C., Chicago [Illinois], Columbus, Ohio, which was our first cable deal, Seattle, Washington-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember Columbus [Ohio] being early on involved-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Tone, Tony Brown [ph.], the journal, used to broadcast from Columbus to do electronic voting or something I think at one point in Columbus. Speaker 2: Well, cue--yeah, well, yeah, cue--Columbus had a--what was it called? What company was that? Speaker 1: Was that Viacom or-- Speaker 2: Warner, Warner Cable, Time Warner, it used to be Warner Cable I think is--I don't know if I was Time Warner that we were--but they had something called QBE [ph.] I think it was called, which, which was an interactive kind of a box that you could do voting and stuff like you're saying. Story_ID: 156617 Speaker 1: But we used to go around, Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] and I, and testify before city councils that they should give what we called multiple franchises in those urban, in those cities, not de, not just give the whole city to one cable company, but divide up the city. It got built faster. You could create local entrepreneurial wealth by, by giving this area to this un, this, this company or this group and not the whole thing to one. And we were successful in some cities and unsuccessful in others. And in Columbus [Ohio] we were successful. And, and where else did we testify? We testified all over the country to, to buy mul, getting multiple in Chica--in the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] where it would get Boyle Heights in East L.A.'s--they had separate systems--and then get the local business guys, 'cause the thing that Charles Tate and those guys preached and realized was that the cable franchises were different from broadcast licenses, in that broadcast licenses were awarded by the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], the federal agency. Cable franchises were, were awarded based on local city council or county councils' decision. So local politics determined who got cable. Now, as the movement happened from social to political empowerment of blacks, blacks became in the political side mayors, and city councilmen, etc., which meant they could now vote and award franchises, valuable telecom franchise, i.e. cable, to black groups, black companies, right. They didn't go to the FCC. You're in charge in Chicago [Illinois]. You can decide that this company over here can get this franchise if you're the city council. And by the way, everybody can build it 'cause it's all built, you know, you know, you get some construction company that builds cable, that builds cable, give 'em a turn, see if they can do it. So it's, and it's not a lot of risks. No cable system at that time lost money. It's just a question of who you gave the license, the franchise to. So we would go, Charles [Tate], again, and, and, and Booker T. Washington [Foundation], and when Syncom [Venture Partners] would go around telling these city council people, hey, this is a chance to create wealth in the African American, in community in the inner city. You can create, you know, successful companies, create a lot of wealth. And when these things are sold, you're gonna have some millionaires in your city that benefited that you hopefully will benefit the city. And so some of that resonated with, with cities and city councils, and others didn't. So we were able to get some cities and things one. But in cable we did those, those cities, which, like I said, which were important: Washington, D.C., Newark [New Jersey], Chicago, Seattle [Washington], Columbus, Cle-- East Cleveland [Ohio], Albuquerque [New Mexico], and we were involved in all of those. So on the cable side we were involved. Story_ID: 156618 Speaker 1: No-- I had to ask about Chicago [Illinois] 'cause it took--when I left Ohio, Columbus already had cable television. It took Chicago till 1991 I think to get (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It, was it because of the city council aspect of trying to, I mean-- Speaker 2: Politics. Speaker 1: --dealing with the politics? Speaker 2: Yeah, they didn't--(unclear)--(unclear). Those are valuable things. So, one, the city council had to decide whether to do multiple franchises or single franchises. Chicago is so big, it did make a lot of sense. It was they finally did multiple franchises. Then, then, so we went to Chicago and organized business-Herb [HM Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] did--the business, black business community there: [HM] John [H.] Johnson, [HM] George Johnson, Lee--Leon Finney [HM Reverend Dr. Leon D. Finney], Finney? Speaker 1: Yeah, Reverend Finney. Speaker 2: Al Butay [ph.], all those guys, and said hey, listen, we got to put together a group and get a cable franchise here 'cause they're awarding franchises, which they did, and they won. And of course, the question always is, well, if we give it to this group, they haven't had their own cable before. They're not Cox Cable [Cox Communications]. They're not Cablevision. How do we know they can build it? And so, something as big as Chicago, that section in south Chicago, we did a deal with TCI [Tele-Communications, Inc.], which, which was at that time John Malone's company--(unclear) the largest company. And they became joint venture partners to build south Chicago, what was called South Chicago Cable. And so that's how, but it took a long, took awhile because of the, all the, all the politics in Chicago to award a franchise, to award these franchises. New York [New York] is just the same way. New York was way after Cleveland [Ohio], because in, in, you know, the, the South Bronx [New York, New York] and those areas, you know, were the last to get cable. And were prepared to go there and do it anyhow because we knew how to do the poorer areas and the act that they were more than the other income areas. TCI did deals with us because we told John Malone instead of doing a suburban area with forty homes, with a hundred homes a miles and getting forty percent penetration, which means you had forty subscribers on a hundred homes in a mile, forty percent, I'd rather do a mile with three hundred and fifty homes in Newark [New Jersey] and get twenty-five percent penetration, you know. And do they pay? Yeah, they pay. They pay because this is their only entertainment, real entertainment option more than the suburbanite who has all kinds of entertainment options. In fact, these, these people over-index in services like HBO [Home Box Office], and Showtime, and Cinemax. So their cable bills in, in Newark in the poorest areas are higher than they are in the suburbs. People pay two, three hundred dollars a month for cable. And don't cut it off 'cause the world will come to an end. Now they may pay differently. They may, you know, they, the lady comes in and pays at the counter instead of sending that every check on the month and to some extent, but they pay. And we found this out by doing a, a census track study of the phone company bills in, in Newark. And, and we got some information for the phone--we got the information from the phone company--I remember doing this by hand--showing that the central district of Newark had a lower delinquency rate in, in paying its phone bill than the suburbs, the upper income areas because--now they, the, the, the bills might be outstanding a few days longer, whatever, but delinquency rate and, and the pay of--the collection rate is much higher. People need their phone (laughter). People need their cable. These are poor people. You know, they, they ain't got no theaters in, in inner city Newark. I, I don't think they have any there now. They hadn't had 'em for years downtown, since the riots, right? No entertainment options. So we knew that. We told John Malone that. That was our--and he started, he changed the way TCI did cable from that point on. They started going after inner city areas because they'd always been going after the suburbs because the assumption was these people will pay; they're better customers; they won't still the service, blah, blah, blah. Yeah, right, okay, give me 400 homes a mile, and let 'em still a couple of service, you know, and we'll, we'll, we'll deal with it. And we dealt with it by hiring off-duty policemen and those kinds of people from the community to go collect our cable boxes when they were delinquent or (laughter), you know. But you had to know how to deal, you just deal with it differently. And TCI learned that, and we, we learned that and we were successful in the inner city. Speaker 1: That's interesting information. What--so, was, was--now you, you all were involved in--one of the first, I guess, deals was the district cable here in [Washington] D.C.? Speaker 2: There was, there was a D.C. cable deal, yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear)--cable. Speaker 2: It was, it wasn't one of our first deals. Speaker 1: It wasn't-- Speaker 2: It was one of our later cable deals. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: First cable deal we did in 1978. District--D.C. cable probably came in '80 1980. Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981] it says here-- Speaker 2: One [1981]-- Speaker 1: --but I don't know. Speaker 2: Yeah, '81 [1981], '82 [1982], yeah. Speaker 1: So the first one was out in-- Speaker 2: Columbus, Ohio-- Speaker 1: --Columbus, Ohio. Speaker 2: --1978. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and Newark [New Jersey] was, I think we had Newark in '80 [1980], '81 [1981]. East Cleveland [Ohio] was about '80 [1980], 1980. 'Cause as you said, D.C., Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York], they, they took a little longer to franchise, to get out the franchising-- Story_ID: 156619 Speaker 1: Oh, tell me about WorldSpace, Incorporated. What is that? It says here-- Speaker 2: WorldSpace was a-- Speaker 1: --no-- Speaker 2: --a company that launched satellite to provide direct audio broadcasting over initially East Africa in the Middle East and then over Asia. If you think of XM [satellite radio], that's what WorldSpace was, but it was overseas. And as an African, African American--I say African American--as an American citizen born in Africa, an Ethiopian and Somal--and Sudanese I guess his father was Sudanese, mother's Ethiopian, and the name is Noah Samara--there in this building--came to us, wanted to launch a satellite. He'd gotten an FCC [Federal Communications Commission] license, experimental license to provide a digital audio broadcasting, which is, again, like XM, you know, radio from the satellite, over East Africa and over Africa in the Middle East. And he came to us and said, "I wanna launch a satellite. I need some money." And we said, "well, first of all, we don't have enough money to launch a satellite. And secondly, you probably can't do it any how (laughter), you know, go away." He wouldn't go away. And he kept coming back, and every time he'd come back he'd have him another piece of the puzzle solved. And we looked around and noticed that he had Richard Allen on his advisory board. Richard Allen used to be the head of the NSA in this country, National Security Agency. We said hmm, why is Richard Allen on this board. And he had Richard Nixon's law firm as his law firm. I said hmm, this is interesting (laughter). This must have been cleared by the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] or something 'cause he's got these guys involved (laughter), you know. So we started taking him a little more seriously, but we said we still don't have that much money. And he said well, I need $40 million. Initially he said $40 million. And as he kept coming back, he kept needing--the price kept going up, but he kept having more pieces of the puzzle. The piece that really kind of convinced us that there was something there is he went to what's called the World Radio Administrative Conference in Geneva [Switzerland] where they give out every four years, they divide up the la, the electromagnetic spectrum. You can have this frequencies, these megahertz from this, for you Switzerland, for you U.S., da, da, this kind of service. Then the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] will take that spectrum that's allotted the U.S. and divide it up into different services. This for cellular, this for emergency, this for, you know, radio, television, blah, blah, blah. So, but every four years at the WARC, World Radio Administrative Conference, in Geneva they do that. He went there and was able to get an allocation of spectrum from the World Radio--from the con--for his satellite. This was quite a coup because the, the, the spectrum that he was, in the yellow band, that he was vying for, the U.S. was also vying for, for. But he got it, and he got it because he got the African countries and the third world countries to all vote for him to get it. And we were very impressed. Story_ID: 156620 Speaker 1: And so we [Syncom Venture Partners] said well, okay. And he [Richard Allen], and he had a contract to build the satellite and this, that, and the other. He had Alcatel[-Lucent], the French-based agency involved. And we said listen, we don't have--by then it was like a hundred million dollars you needed or something. It kept, price kept going up. We don't have that money, but we'll put up a little bit of money to help you, see if you can raise the money. So we a, we agreed to put a half a million dollars to finance an effort to find financing. He got down to the last few dollars, and he called me up one day and said, "This is Noah Samara." He says, "We got like $11,000 left, $10,000 left, and I can either pay the rent, which is $11,000 dollars, or I can go to London [England] and meet with these Arab, this Arab, you know, investor I know and try to get him to invest." I said, "Why are you calling me?" He says, "'Cause I wanna know with your, you guys' money what should we, what I should do." I said, "I know what you're gonna do, and you know what you're gonna do, so why are you calling me?" (Laughter) So obviously he went to London (laughter). He came back a few days later, and he had, he called me and he said, about a week later, four days later, he said, "Terry, we have $11 million in the bank." I said, "What?" He said, I said, "Yeah, the investor put in $11 million dollars. It's wired into our account already." I said get out of here. I said what's the deal? He said we haven't done the papers yet (laughter), handshake. This is a Saudi [Arabian] investor. And ultimately he raised a billion dollars from the Saudis-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --a billion dollars, and launched WorldSpace, and built a satellite, and launched WorldSpace. I went down to French Guiana for the launch of the satellite. The, the French space agency, air--Ariane sp, Arianespace I, I think. I forget how you pronounce it exactly, laun, was the express--he hired the French space agency's rockets to launch it. And they launched from French Guiana. So, we went down there for the launch. And you know, five, four, three, two, one, this rocket takes off. The WorldSpace satellite's on. The thing works flawlessly. You know, we're all crying like babies. Here's a black company, African-American company launching a satellite into space. Nobody wrote about it, you know, much or anything. Ebony [magazine] never reported on it, whatever, but it was the first time and African American company had launched a satellite. Satellite worked flawlessly. It worked so good, the technology so good, developed the radios. You had to develop radios for the WorldSpace service to receive satellites, satellites radios like XM does with it now. (Unclear) Hitachi, JVC, Panasonic, and one other to build the radios--very successful technically, technologically, technically. In fact, the signal was so good--it was supposed to cover Africa and the Middle East--you could hear the signal in Europe, you know, the radio stations in Europe. And with an antenna on the back of a car in Russia, they tested and, and were able to pick up the signal and listen to this radio in Russia from this African-focused satellite on the back of a car. So, we said this is fantastic, you know. But the business plan was flawed in terms of how you make revenue from it, so it didn't really take off that, that's, come that easily, even though technically it was great. Story_ID: 156621 Speaker 1: In the meantime, there were some problems with the--the company was gonna go public. We had, now we had a license--he had a license for Africa in the Middle East, Asia, and South America to put satellites. They had two satellites already built. The third--the fourth satellite was to cover the U.S.--I mean what--the U.S. was to be awarded the satellite radio coverage from two licenses the F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission] was gonna award. One was won by a company, company called XM Radio, and the other was by a company called CD Radio, which later became Sirius [Satellite Radio], which you've heard of these, right? So--(unclear)--the FCC awarded two licenses for, for North America in the S band. These were L band in the other things. We--he, Noah [Samara] called me and said, "Listen, should we go and bid on the North American digital satellite radio system?" I said, "Can you get some money from your friends in Saudi Arabia?" (Laughter). He said, "Yeah, I think so, he said, "I've, I've talked to 'em. They said they're prepared to put up the money." I said, "Let's go bid, went and bid and won the XM license." Most people don't know that an African-American company owned XM Radio before XM Radio was owned by the current people. Once--and we paid $90 million dollars for it, the license in the auction. Once that happened, all hell broke loose, because now you had a black company that had a li--had a satellite license over Africa in the Middle East, Asia, which has four billion people or whatever, South America, and now the U.S. And it was almost like somebody, a referee stood up and said timeout (laughter). Y'all ain't going nowhere. This ain't gon' happen. And all kinds of bad things started happening to that company from that point on, including, you know, one of its investors had a, had a pharmaceutical plant in, in Sudan that was cruise missiled by the U.S. government-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --and said that they were--the claim was that the company was, that they had factories producing biological warfare, you know, products or whatever. And it was--and, and the next thing that happened is, because now WorldSpace is getting ready to go public, articles came out that this investor at WorldSpace was tied to al-Qaeda or, or to [Osama] Bin Laden, and therefore, you know, you, if you invitee, if you--this company goes public, you're gonna have Bin Laden in your portfolio--killed the offering. It was pulled the night before it was supposed to go out, killed it, killed WorldSpace's financing. And later, the U.S. government apologized and, and compensated the factory in Sudan. They paid the guy 'cause it was, it was a pharmaceutical plant. It was just a pill plant. But it hurt World, WorldSpace. WorldSpace finally was able to go public about four years later, but much--you know, it was--you know, it suffered during that time. And that's the story of WorldSpace. It ultimately, it still is there. It still works. It has changed its, its business model to providing the services to broadcasters who want to reach educational kind of things for, for African, blah, blah, blah. But, again, it was an historically important company that no, people don't know owned XM Radio in this country. It was owned by black people the first, the first award of the license. And quite frankly, you know, we were told, the company was told that if, if we owned it, they wouldn't put the cars, the radios in the cars, General Motors cars. We had, we, and we told, we were told who we're gonna sell it to (laughter). Speaker 2: That's a, well, that's a-- Speaker 1: WorldSpace is an interesting subject, an interesting com, company, and, but it's, it's, it's a story of a, of an African entrepreneur who, you know, against the odds, launched a satellite and created an incredible opportunity. Story_ID: 156622 Speaker 1: All right, yeah, you, you said it just a minute ago, hardball, that's what we're talk, talking about in terms of this story of World-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --WorldSpace. Speaker 2: Yeah, and just, but again, people need to know that, that a black company launched the satellite, created the technology for X--the reason XM was the head of Sirius [Satellite Radio] in its development is because WorldSpace developed the chipsets in, in the, in the ant--in the radios with the Japanese companies, with Panasonic, and Hitachi, and JVC. They were so far ahead of Sirius in terms of deployment that XM always had an advantage over Sirius, but that was World Space development. And when WorldSpace sold the XM license to the folks they sold it to later took it public, they had that tech--they had that advantage, and that's why they were always larger that Sirius, just because of the black company's development. Story_ID: 156623 Speaker 1: Okay, but this is, gets almost back to the, the initial problem we're trying to solve by, you know, funding, you know, black stations and getting more minority ownerships a problem of power, I guess, in some ways. But are you ever discouraged by, by the way the world is deployed? Speaker 2: No, I'm not discouraged. I mean you can't afford to be discouraged. We're very fortunate. I mean there are people who died for us to be in this position, to have this discussion, to be, to be in a position to even finance these kind of opportunities, to participate in these kind of companies. I mean, no, how can I be discouraged? I'm living, you know, a dream--(unclear)--than a lot of people had a hundred years ago, that, you know, suffered mightily to have that dream and to put us in this position, so I, no, not discovered. You get upset. You wished it would have, wish it were fairer, you wish it were hap, happening faster, etc., but you know, again, you were told when you grew up that you had to better and har, work harder, and you know, things weren't gonna be fair. And, and you know, it's not just racial. It's economic because that's really the, the war, the war that we're waging right now is an economic battle. You know, the social battled happened, and pro, pro, produced from the, the social movement in the, all the way back, Marcus Garvey to forward to [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] to whatever, the social opportunities and rights to creating the political opportunities that we got because of the social, you know, freedom, the right to vote, etc. We were able to elect the politicians, and now we're in the economic part of that struggle. And all societies are, are really made up of these three, three elements, you know, the social, we're a cul, cultural--(unclear)--the political, which is includes justice, military and all that stuff, and political power, and the economic. What we haven't, as African Americans, been able to participate in, in, in the fullness of yet is the economic area: ownership, control of financial resources. And because of the capitalist system, that's the fuel for the engine, quite frankly. And you know, so that's the part, that's the stage of the movement we're in. And we're lucky enough to be a part of that, part of that struggle. The struggle continues, as I told you earlier. It's my favorite saying. It's not over. It's, it's, it's, it's a continuing struggle and, and, and you know, we're, quite frankly, engaged in it in a way that's very comfortable compared to the people before us who had to engage in their struggle in a very uncomfortable circumstances. So how could you be upset and discouraged? I mean you, very fortunate. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--yeah. I always hate, hate the pe--to hear people say that we're in slavery today because we're--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, no, you can't, and you can't promulgate that idea because the young people will say well, the--why should I try if it's taken twenty years, and there's been no progress? Well, there's been tremendous progress, tremendous movement. But the struggle continues, a luta continua. Story_ID: 156624 Speaker 1: And, and in 1996, Syncom [Venture Partners], it says here Syncom exits BET [Black Entertainment Television] Holdings, Incorporated. Is there a story there? Speaker 2: No, we just sold our interest. I mean we had invested in, in the public offering, and we sold our interest. In mean, in the, in the venture business you have sell. You can't hold forever 'cause you gotta--the, the life of the partnerships is limited. It's a limited liability--limited partnership, which means that there's a term, and so you have to sell. And so we sold when--at a profit, and returned the profits to our limited partners. Speaker 1: Were, were you disappointed when, when BET was sold to Viacom, or did you-- Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: --expect it to happen or? Speaker 2: No, I was not at all disappointed. I think it's a part of the natural process of business development and entrepreneurial creation and recreation. It's a part of the validation of the fact that anybody, regardless of your color, can create companies and, and do what you have to do with companies, which is, you know, sell 'em, and you know, building, sell 'em, whatever, and, and return profits to your shareholders. And because you're able to do that, you're able to generate more money, theoretically, you know. If you've made money for folks, they tend to give you more money to make more money for 'em. So it's a natural process. It's a positive thing. When, when Reggie Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis] was able to buy TLC [Group], the pattern company and then sell it for a big profit, it created more opportunity for him. And he was able to take that and buy ] and you know, more opportunity. If he had just held on to it because it was a good company, and he loved it, and it was black-owned, who's gonna give him money to do that, you know (laughter)? And you need money from other people to do these things. So, BET being sold at $3 billion validated the fact that you could invest in an African-American entrepreneur, African-American company and make a lot of money at the right time and get that money returned to you, very important. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, 'cause a lot, lot of people were really upset about that, you know. Speaker 2: Well, people were upset about. And I heard people say things like, "he sold our station." And I said our (laughter)? I don't remember you making any payrolls, or, or, or taking the risks of doing this, or put--it was his company. It were his shareholders' company that, that they did. And do you believe that you can't recreate, or you have, you have such little faith in yourself, to believe that by taking the profits from a successful enterprise that you can't now with your mind and your, and your human capital create something bigger. Bob [Robert L. Johnson] believes he can. And guess what, he has. He's gone and recreating now. He's in the private equity business. He's in the, he's funded, he's got a, a, a hotel. I mean I'm not gonna, I'm not here to preach about Bob Johnson, but the idea that because it's black-owned it then cannot be sold, or there cannot be traded, or taken public. It's, it's, it's a, a, a limiting concept and, and, and doesn't work in a capitalist system and doesn't work ultimately to the benefit of people. Now you, if you can take your company and keep expanding it and keep it, fine. But most people find that there's in which you, you know, you often sell things. And you take those gains and you redeploy them. You create wealth for your aunt, for your, for your staff. You create wealth for your partners, and those people are able to multiply that wealth theoretically with their creativity. Unless you don't believe in yourself, that's the wrong way to think to me. And, and if you don't believe in the system, then you're in the wrong system. Story_ID: 156625 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us how did the Glass-Steagall Act [1933] affect what you were--the, the Federal Reserve's reinterpretation of it in '96 [1996] I think? Speaker 2: Glass-Steagall? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Was it '96 [1996]? Speaker 1: Is that important to that discussion? Speaker 2: I, I didn't know Glass-Steagall was '96 [1996], but I know, I know-- Speaker 1: No, kel--well, they-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Communications Act-- Speaker 1: --they reinterpreted it in, in '96 [1996]. Speaker 2: Well, I mean they allowed, they allowed financial institutions to get into areas that they weren't allowed to get into before. And how did that affect things? It provided more capital, and it provided more competition--competition for traditional and private equity forms. Now you had banks that could, you know, own investment companies or do venture capital investing. That's more capital to flow. It increases the risks to those institutions, to some extent, the risk profile. And there, you know, there have been some repercussions because of that. It gets out--and if it got out of hand, it allowed investments banks to become more like venture companies or private equity companies. And those companies were able to increase their profits for their shareholders tremendously and when they're successful. And when they're not successful, they lose a lot of money. They can--and so, you know, it's affected the marketplace. It brought more players into the marketplace to do the kinds of investing that they weren't allowed to do before. And if it's done responsibly, I think it's fine. The problem is greed tends to, you know, infect all areas, not because of Glass-Steagall, but because of, again, human behavior. And it can be used to exploit and because damage. And I'm not sure that Glass-Steagall can restrict that to some extent. But, you know, you're really dealing with human behavior here. It's not a, for me, it's never a question so much of the regulations as much as it is human behavior. And sometimes you need regulations to control and limit hu--(laughter) human behavior, which is what Glass-Steagall was supposed to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, just for the rec, record, WorldSpace, the WorldSpace story, Syncom [Venture Partners] invested in World Space in 1992. Is that right? That's what we have on the outline here. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so. Speaker 1: And so, so the drama that we, we went over with a little while, while, while ago took place in the early '90s [1990s] through, through what time period? So, when did-- Speaker 2: Probably in the mid-'90s [1990s]. You have to look and see when WorldSpace first launched its satellite-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --cause after the, after the successful launch of the satellite and right after the awarding of the XM license to WorldSpace. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanna make note of that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --'cause I don't think I mentioned the date-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when we talked about it Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't--I mean if I Google when, when the XM license was awarded I can, you know, pinpoint that more closely. Story_ID: 156626 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about, in 1997, you were involved, were, were you involved in Cyber Digital, Incorporated? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about that. Speaker 2: Cyber Digital was a company we [Syncom Venture Partners] invested in. It was a maker of digit, a digital switch, telephone switch, communications switch like the telephone companies uses the switch. It was a modular digital switch that was in--(unclear)--slightly novel product, had a lot of potential. One of our funds, we made an investment in it. The company ultimately wasn't able to get a lot of buyers for their switch and has just sort of limped along since then. But it's a public, it was a public company. It's probably not even traded now. It's, it's, you know, just sort of--but it's still there, from what I understand. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, I think I've got some bad information. Let me see. Oh, tell, tell us about Iridium Satellite LLC [later Iridium Communications Inc.]. Speaker 2: Okay, Iridium Satellite LLC-- Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: --Iridium, as you may know, was a--is a satellite constellation that was developed and built by Motorola in, I think it was the end of, it was built during the late '80s [1980s] and, and actually launched in '90 [1990], '91 [1991], I think was year. Was it '90--[1990]--no, no, I'm sorry. It was built and launched in, at the end of '99 [1999] or 2000, so it was, so it was developed during the '90s [1990s], 'cause it takes about eight years to develop a satellite constellation like this. But they were--so it launched in the, in let's say 1990. It cost Motorola approximately $5 billion, $5 to $6 billion to build that system. And the idea was it was to be a constellation of satellites circling the earth at low orbit. And it's called LEO satellites, Lower Earth, low-Earth-orbit satellites, which are 500 miles above the earth as opposed to a geostationary satellites, which are 23,000 miles above the earth. The geostationary satellites turn with the earth and cover a certain part of the earth like WorldSpace did, or like the HBO [Home Box Office] satellites, or Intel sat that the telephone, they turn with the earth. The LEO, the Low Earth Orbit satellites are only 500 miles above the earth instead of 23,000, and they go very, they go very fast. So you have a lot of 'em, seventy in a, in a constellation, in a, in a net, a web around the earth. And as one gets out of sight, like your cell tower, it hands off the call to another satellite coming over the horizon. So that is a--the technological challenges there are huge, but Motorola solved and created this system of seventy, seventy satellites that circled the earth and provide this communications net that allows you to have voice or data anywhere on the earth, North Pole, middle of the ocean, jungle. Anywhere on the earth you can make a phone call with a sat, Iridium phone to another phone, all right. And so that's, that's unbelievable communication feat. The, so to build that constellation costs seven, it's five, $5 billion, $5 to $6 billion. The, the premise was the business motto was that they were going to--you and I traveling around the world would have this satellite phone, and we'd be able to have one number and be anywhere in the world and talk on my satellite phone to anywhere in the world, top of the Mt. Everest, middle of the ocean I can call you. Well, you know, it didn't work in terms of the business plan because they were targeting, in our opinions, Syncom's [Venture Partners] opinion, what we call first-world travelers, you and me, or people going, businesspeople going to Hong Kong or whatever. And they thought that these guys would carry this phone. Well, they didn't really anticipate or, or, in my view, understand the ubiquitous and rapid spread of cellular digit--(unclear)--terrestrial cellular, yeah, from cell towers on the ground that in Hong Kong I could make a cell phone call at eighty cents a minute, or ten cents a minute, or twenty cents a minute as opposed to Iridium call at, they were charging ten dollars a minute, right. And only--and so people like you me really didn't find--we weren't going to the jungle that often to have to want to buy Iridium phone or on top of Mt. Everest. So, but they were targeting--so they needed, based on their business plan, two or three million subscribers to make this thing work. They got it for 30,000--60. Was it 60 or 30,000? Something like that--declared bankruptcy. It was the largest bankruptcy in U.S. history. Nobody wanted to touch it. Story_ID: 156627 Speaker 1: We [Syncom Venture Partners] sat around here and said we ought to buy it [Iridium Satellite LLC, later Iridium Communications Inc.]. And, but they were getting ready to deorbit all the satellites, take 'em all out of the air. And that was a scary proposition 'cause nobody knew if you brought down seventy satellites what the heck that was gonna, was gonna happen, 'cause all of 'em, all that stuff doesn't burn up in the atmosphere. So Motorola had unlimited potential liability. And there were articles about maybe these parts would hit schoolhouses, and hospitals, and poor kids and blah, blah, blah. But they couldn't find anybody who would bail 'em out of the system, buy the, buy the network. Craig McCaw and others, big time guys, said they were gonna do it and didn't do. We put together a group, and we went after it. And we said we're just little guys, but we were, were prepared to buy this thing out of bankruptcy 'cause we think it's an important system, an important resource. The government knew it was an important resource 'cause the U.S. Defense Department was the ones who were primary users. And they, this system allowed them to make contact, you know, do stuff that they couldn't otherwise do. But they couldn't buy it. The government could lease it. They could give a contract, but they couldn't buy it--(unclear). So they were in quandary. Nobody was coming forward, just us little guys. We found another guy who was trying to buy it as well. We hooked up together, a long story short, and we discovered that what Motorola really was motivated by was getting rid of this potential liability. And so this other guy happened to be the former president of Pan American [World] Airways [Pan Am], Dan Colussy. And he knew that--he remembered during the Vietnam War that Pan Am would fly into Saigon [Vietnam] and have bullet holes in their planes after a while and said we're not gonna fly into Saigon anymore. And the U.S. government wait a minute. Keep flying to Saigon. We'll indemnify you under this act or something, law that was passed during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] that the government could indemnify a private company if it was in the national interest. And so he says this--(unclear)--is in the national interest. Maybe the government, we can get the government to indemnify Motorola against future liability. We were able to get that done, and that's why Motorola sold it to us. We paid $25 million for a $5 billion--$6 billion system. And we paid that $6 million in cash and twenty-five they took back a note. We then raised $130 million, of which we put, Syncom [Venture Partners] put in $52 million. A former investor in Iridium, a, a, a, a Saudi shei--a prince put in $52 mallion--million. Then we found an Australian entrepreneur and a Brazilian telecom company to put in thirty combined to re, to relaunch the system. And we got the government, said to government: you had to give us a, a contract for half our operating costs for the first or three years, and we'll, we'll do this thing, stop it from being brought down. They had already loaded the software to push the button. The guy was waiting to push the button to start bringing down the satellites. The software was in, already loaded in the system, the birds [ph.], and last, last minute, we cut the, got the deal done. Story_ID: 156628 Speaker 1: We [Syncom Venture Partners] then, together with our investors, and we were the largest investor together with the Saudi guy [Noah Samara], you know, rebuilt the business [Iridium Satellite LLC, later Iridium Communications Inc.], you know, and targeted the business at what we felt should have targeted in the first place, not First World Travelers, but verticals that absolutely have to have satellite communica--have to have communications, i.e., the gas and the oil industry, maritime, aeronautical. Those kind, military, those kinds of people need a satellite for 'em. They don't care. And another thing is there's no latency. Like if you go to 23,000 miles up and back, the voice, there's a voice problem. You know, when I say something, by the time I, the other person hears it there's a little delay. You're only going 500 miles. That's no latency. So it's a very good system, but it only works outdoors. You gotta be in the line of sight of the satellite. That's why it didn't make any sense to try make it a first, you know, compete with cell phones. So, (laughter) so anyhow, we built it back, and now it's very successful. We took it public three years ago or so. It went from zero revenues to over 400 and some million now, about 200 and something million in profits. And so it's a very successful story. Again, a lot of people don't know that the reason that system--and it saved a lot of lives because as a, as a say--it's the only thing that worked during 9-11. The only way you could call into New York is--we've got letters from military commanders in the field to say if I didn't have this system, my people would be dead, you know, blah, blah, blah. I mean it's, it's a, it's an important system for safety, for communications worldwide, and it's the only thing that's global, the only thing that works everywhere. And a lot of people, again, don't know that an African American company was instrumental in making this happen, saving this for the U.S., saving this for the world. And we don't brag about it, talk about it. We, we made a good profit on the, the transaction. We just exited after ten years of being in it. We just, we exited the, the, the business, and it's doing well. It's now being, getting ready to launch its next generation of satellites. Story_ID: 156629 Speaker 1: Okay, now we talked about the launching of TV One, did we earlier? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Did, no, we didn't? Okay, all right. Speaker 2: We referred to it when we talked about-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Radio One. Speaker 1: Radio One, right. But now-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --2003 is when-- Speaker 2: Yeah, TV One-- Speaker 1: --Syncom--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --you know, [HM] Alfred [Liggins, III] wanted to get in the, wanted to diversify, as I mentioned, the--he wanted to create a media company, not just a radio company, and getting video was important. So we did talk about it briefly. And so we talked about it and decided to go forward. We put together a syndicated investors, went to get Comcast, which, as a partner 'cause you need to get--the thing about cable is you gotta get on the cable systems and the cable guys, there's only a few cable owners in the country now: Comcast, Cox, Cablevision, Time Warner, and maybe one other big one. And, and so those guys are like feudal lords. I mean if you--if they don't want you to be on the air, you won't be on the air period. I mean it's all been consolidated. The FCC's [Federal Communications Commission] let that happen, so if, if those five guys don't give you channel space, you, you don't get seen. And so he was able to get Comcast to do a deal, to, to put TV, TV--see, the reason there hasn't been another black, wasn't never another black network other than BET [Black Entertainment Television], because John Malone was in BET, you know, at, from the start. And they didn't allow anybody else to be on. They had to create a cable network targeted to black. You know, he was in with the right guy (laughter). And so this was to be the second, and that was not a small task to overcome. But we were--Alfred was able to get Comcast to do a deal, become a partner. Then we got DirecTV as a partner, and so, and then it being able to expand out so that now it's in about fifty million homes out the hundred or so million national home, cable homes, which makes it a very, you know, widely distributed channel, widely enough distributed. Be--BET's probably at eighty, ninety million, but TV One's the second behind it. And it's been a success. It was, took four years to get to break even, profitability, but it's there now. CNN took more years than that. ESPN took more years than that. I mean, but how they're worth billions. I've remember CNN almost went out of business. Ted Turner had to get the industry guys to come in and save him. But, so that's been a very successful challenge, important to the African American community 'cause it try--it's a more family-oriented offering than BET and not, no judgment there, just different. And hopefully they'll keep doing quality programming and providing value to the community. Story_ID: 156630 Speaker 1: Okay, of course, TV One was launched in 2004 on Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s] birthday I think. Tell us about SiTV. Speaker 2: SiTV? Speaker 1: Si, yeah, I guess SiTV (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, that's why we changed--that's what name we changed-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --to Nuvo[TV], yeah. We've been involved in, as I mentioned earlier, investing in Hispanic and Latino entrepreneurs in media as well as black, and Asian, and women, and older people. We're not just--you know, we, we say underserved in the sense of these people are sort of the creme de la creme, but they, you know, don't fit the pattern recognition of some of the traditional firms, so they don't get, you know, they aren't in the network. And so we, we've benefited from that, to some extent. And SiT--we, so we've invested in Hispanic/Latino companies in broadcasting since our beginning, in fact, more than any other venture fund. And so, we believed that there was an opportunity to create a English-speaking Latino cultural channel, a Latino cultural channel, young, targeted younger. In other words, there are a lot of Hispanics in the United States who are Latinos don't really speak Spanish but have an affinity for the culture, you know, Chicanos and, and Latinos in L.A. and Texas. And you know, they're, they're second generation, third generation, a lot of they don't speak Spanish. There might be Spanish-speaking in the home, but they don't speak Spanish. So, but they have a cultural affinity. They're still different culturally. So we targeted this channel at that, and they called SiTV; that's yes TV. It's now called NuvoTV. And you know, we invested in that in our fourth fund, and this investment is still outstanding. And that's kind of the story there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that was in 2004. Story_ID: 156631 Speaker 1: All right, how did, how has the financial crisis in the last few years affected you, the stock market crash, the housing bubble, all that? Speaker 2: Well, it's affected--we're, we're in the business of aggregating capital and putting that capital in the hands of deserving entrepreneurial people and companies so they can create value. And we, as I said, focus on media and telecommunications, which is an important area because the medium--controlling media, affecting media controls messages, ideas, symbols, etc. And there's a lot of power to it in terms of developing, you know, people, developing communities. The last several years of not just the financial crisis of 2008 or, but even going beyond that, from the dot-com bust, bubble back in 2000, '99 [1999], 2000, 2001 has affected us greatly because its affected the media world. The, the Internet is, is become the dominant, dominating sort of tool in communications. I mean the Internet changed everything, changes everything. And everything is, every business now is an Internet business whether they admit or not, by and large. Every business has some Internet component to it, some Internet aspect to it. It's changed the way retail is done, the way even delivery of healthcare. All kinds of things were affected by it and certainly the way you shop and the way you--you know what I'm saying? And it's and it's, it's incredible. And that whole burst because it tried to, to assume that people's behavior could be changed very quickly, that instead doing things the traditional way, because it was you could do it on the Internet, that people would just do it. And it's not quite that simple as it seems. Human behavior, again, becomes key here. And so when that bubble burst because people were assuming that everybody was gonna do everything in a certain way on the Internet or the new way, and they didn't, it affected the flow of capital into the venture area generally and to the media area in, in some ways. And so it's, it's affected all the access to capital, the availability of capital, because the returns and the loss--the losses have been great in many cases. The returns have been less than expected. In addition, the inter, Internet has grown in usage to the point where it's siphoned off eyeballs or, or, or you, in viewers from traditional broadcast companies and telecommunications companies. Instead of watching television, people play games on computers, or they look at their iPad or whatever, whatever. And so the advertising, which supports, has supported broadcast profits and revenues has been affected by, again, the Internet and to some extent and by this Internet bubble burst in terms of finansal--financial risk-taking on the other hand. So it's affected us greatly, and you have to shift. And the companies have had to shift. Investors have had to shift what they did. And making sense of this has been very difficult because you don't know what's gonna percolate to the top and be successful. You know, you have companies like Google who come along, and all of a sudden are worth more than all the broadcasting networks combined, you know, just [snapped fingers] all of a sudden. You know, (laughter) in a two or three-year span what's taken NBC [National Broadcasting Company] and CBS, you know, any years to create these white--you know, it's surpassed in three or four years. And you can see it time and again. And invest--and, but the, those investments, knowing which of those because the, the barriers to entry have been reduced so much. In other words, any--not anybody, but it takes a little bit of money to start something that could become a Twitter or become a Groupon. You know, it takes a few million dollars maybe, and you can create something that becomes worth--or a Facebook--billions of dollars, the barriers of entry are low everybody comes in. This is a competition, and the noise is very high. Story_ID: 156632 Speaker 1: On top of all of that (laughter), competition and the change in the marketplace, and the definition of what is media and how it's affected all of our business, you have an economic crash like 2008, which exacerbates the problem. I mean you've, you've got--you know, and this is really a real estate-induced crash it appears. But it affects--it ripples out in terms of people's ability to have savings and therefore invest, and therefore do a lot of stuff. It affects the, pen, the pension in the community from which we get our capital because the pension funds was invested in all these companies, and all these stocks, and this real estate portfolio is worth twenty-five percent less than it was a year ago or two years ago or whatever. And that affects their ability to deploy capital into the alternative asset class, which is venture, which, again, is challenged and, and risky. And so, it's a very negative impact, long way of saying it--(unclear)--but those are some of the reasons why. And will it come back, will, will this country? Will investors understand that unless you continue to invest in innovative technologies and innovative media companies--I think it'll come back. The question is when, because you have to invest. You can't stop investing early-stage companies because there won't be any later-stage companies to buy out. And, and the rest of the world, which now has the ability to create these same kinds of companies will create them. They will be created in China, in Korea, in Japan, in Australian, in Sweden, and you know, these places where entrepreneurs can sit at a computer and create the same things we can create if we're not funding the creation of, of these companies in the U.S. [United States] So, I hope I've kind of given you not just the answer, the, the quick answer, but, but give you some reasons why it's, why it's happened this way and how these influences, particularly the, the convergence of technology by the Internet, and media, and new ventures, how, how it kind of all plays together to create a, a very challenging environment that has to be addressed if we're gonna be competitive. And there are ways to address it, but it takes some decision-making, maybe take some government cooperation and stimulus, you know, making it more attractive for investors to invest, you know, which is not unlike what government programs have done in the past, through tax, you know, programs or whatever to stimulate the flow of capital in a direction that's needed. Story_ID: 156633 Speaker 1: Okay. Today and as we sit here in 2012, like what, what is, are you looking at I guess as a part of Syncom [Venture Partners] as, as an area that, that minority ownership--what, what area of the media I guess, you know, is, is--I, well, I guess we, we don't own a (laughter), a lot of things, but, but I'm just saying what is there, is there an area that you're looking at now for minority ownership that you were looking at years ago? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it has to be 'cause times have changed. And so you have to continue to evolve and look at new opportunities, etc., etc., you know. And, and that's why the term "new media" is used, because the old media is the old media like radio, television, cable. New media is, you know, the social networks and all kinds of other things that people pass information and create distribution platforms on. With regard to black people, Latino people, I try not to use the word minority. I think it's a demeaning term. In fact, it's--one of the funniest things to me is when people start talking, using the phrase "when minorities become the majority." I said wait a minute. That sounds like a weird thing. I mean if you're the majority, how are you the minority (laughter)--(unclear)--there's a majority and minority community here. I said wait a minute. Are we so tired, we're so brainwashed into this concept of being minor that you'll use it even when you become major? It's an interesting thing I think, the linguistic, the power of that concept of being minor. But it's a hard word not to use. And, and the be--and, and it, it does describe--I understand when we use what we're trying to say. We're talking about people, generally people of color or people of other ethnic groups. But when the future--the impact of what, what's happening on, on, on that future population, we're really at a very interesting point because, in my view, because demographic reality is that brown, and black, and yellow people are gonna be the majority of this country, and, and European descendants are gonna be the minority in this country. And they're having--and it's just a reality. They're having fewer babies, and that's what's happening. That's gonna happen--(unclear). It's already happened under thirteen years old. I think the Europeans are not the majority anymore, and the, the age is gonna keep moving up. So the, the opportunities, well, who's gonna serve those people? Who's gonna, who's gonna be able to supe--super serve their needs or their interests? Are they gonna be all acculturated into a European culture, or is there gonna be another culture? Story_ID: 156634 Speaker 1: And we can determine that. We can address that if, if we invest in it, and think about it now, and, and serve those interests, those diff--different, those niche interests, those slightly different interests. But to do that takes, again, capital; it takes belief; and it takes insight into those cultures. And I think that, that, that means there's tremendous opportunity to create tremendous wealth since you have the advantage of understanding those cultures. I think brown and black people have a special understanding that is difficult obtain unless you sort of come from that background that it gives you a competitive advantage in providing services, and providing entertainment, providing content to those communities, the demographic groups that are becoming the majority demographics in the future. The question is, what platforms are you gonna be able to serve that up on? Are you gonna own them or not? And as the barriers come down again, I keep saying well, you know, these guys have got a lot of money in infrastructure like the cable companies, the telephone companies, whatever. You can see how quickly they can get. They can really lose their audience. I mean the telephone is already happening. Younger people no longer have wire lines. That's, that's a tremendous investment to have people not run away from (laughter), you know. But of course, now they were able to use their money to buy the wireless systems, you know, so they kind of, you know, protecting themselves that way. But a lot of 'em have gotten hurt, and they're gonna get hurt. And the same is gonna be true in the other, in the other platforms, cable, etc., etc. I mean, as Internet TV and wireless TV happens and, and streaming happens, where, you know, I mean are you really gonna need your TV in the way that you had it before? I mean, as I look at young people walking around with iPads and cell phones, they're looking at this. They ain't looking at that. And they're looking at it in their bedroom. They're looking at it, and they're, they're, they're mobile. So, these changes will affect us. It's, the difficulty is picking the winners (laughter) because the winner, you know, the winners depend on having the capital to make them win. None of these companies that we hear about that are billion dollar--very few of 'em that are billion dollar companies now got there just like they sort seem to, I mean whether it was YouTube or Facebook or--they took years and, and lot--Twitter--lots of money for those companies to survive the cycles, and to get the traction, and to make the pivots that made them now (quote) "billion dollar companies." Our companies typical don't--our entrepreneurs don't have that access. And so, to the extent that we can understand that providing it is important to the future, then we have a chance to be a part of the future. Story_ID: 156635 Speaker 1: In 2011 it says here you were, you were featured on Soledad O'Brien's 'Black in America 4' [':The New Promised Land, Silicon Valley']. Speaker 2: I wasn't featured. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was, well, I was actually on the--they did a streaming, they did a cai--an Internet show after that that I was on as a panelist, as a feature. But the actual television production featured--was it ten or thirteen companies-African American entrepreneurs that were sort of put into a reality situation. They were housed in a house in Silicon Valley [California], and they were coached on their, on their businesses. And the idea was that, to make these entrepreneurs and these companies with the help of venture capitalists including Syncom [Venture Partners]. We were a venture capitalist. We were a sponsor of it, and we lent a couple of our guys to go out there and work with these entrepreneurs to get their products and their pitches together so they could pitch the Silicon Valley in, industry, venture industry and potentially get an investment, right. That was, that was the premise because the, the whole, the point is that there are very, very few African American companies or entrepreneurs that are financed out of Silicon Valley. And Silicon Valley finances a lot of the new wealth-creating companies that are created, the tech, you know, the, the, all the high-tech and social network. They are, they, they, they're Silicon Valley companies, and, and by--there's, there's an ecosystem out there. You have to go out there to see it. It's, it's unbelievable. They got buildings and complexes where they have these companies their housed in, and they all interact with each. And they all have access to the same--the venture guys have the access to the same companies. And if you're not in that ecosystem you can't--you know, it's very hard to get funded and, and so why aren't black people in that? And, and that was sort of the, the story. And can--and the answer was well, they're just not it, and those folks aren't interested in it. You don't fit their pattern recognition. They--you know, you, you do not--they--you do not compute. I've had some--we had one venture guy say--yeah, I think he was the head of--he was the editor of a venture magazine or a blog. And he says, "I don't know of any black entrepreneurs, said oh, are there any?" I mean that's the idea. And if this is where the public pension fund money is going, to finance the future, and if that's the attitude and the, and the connection to the majority demo, developing demographic, what does that say about our kids' future. They don't fit record. They aren't a dropout from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that's white and, and/or Indian, or Korean, you know, or Chinese, and therefore, we even can't trust 'em. We're not gonna fund them, and that's what happens. The show was about that. It was call "Silicon Valley, The New Promised Land?" There's a question mark. And the answer is that, yeah, they're, they're not gonna fund you. You're not part of their pattern recognition. They don't need you. They're making billions of dollars the way they do it. And, and you know, it's just not, there's no incentive to, to, for, for them to do that. It's, you can say it's a meritocracy, but it's not. And it should be of a concern because the money used to fuel those investments and those, those gambles is our money. That money comes from pension funds. The pensioners are twenty to thirty percent in many cases, fifty percent in some cases African American and Latino people. It's their money, but none of that money by the staffs of those pension funds is being put back into entrepreneurs and/or venture funds that will focus on trying to recognize our folk, all right. They, they don't feel comfortable. They don't know 'em. They aren't making any interest. They don't have to, and so they'll take the pension fund money, which is our money-twenty, thirty percent, fifty percent of it is our folks' money--and give it all to these other people. Now is that--I think it's bad because you don't--I think diversity is good. If you really believe de, that diverse entrepreneurs and diverse companies to some extent make sense for this country to compete, then I think it's a bad idea to just have this pattern recognition. If you're in the club, you're in the club. You're not in a club, you're not in a club. And you don't get enough money for company to sustain itself, to live. I think it's a bad thing for America, quite frankly, and that you pay the price down, on the road by exclusion as opposed to inclusion. Now, that doesn't mean you lower standards. I don't think you have to lower standards. We've been, been through that discussion. But you do have to affirmatively open yourself to other people than just these few folks that fit your pattern recognition or the, the, or that are in your club, and that's not happening. And it's a very, very serious challenge to the future. And again, it's being fueled by money that should--I'm not saying twenty to thirty percent of the money needs to go to, to black or Latino entrepreneurs. But how about two percent as opposed to one? You know, how about three percent? You know, that would, that would triple the, the amount of venture equity capital available to these kinds of entrepreneurs and these kind of companies who qualify. Story_ID: 156636 Speaker 1: Now, how would you--is, is there a way that you would change the way I guess the F.C.C. [Federal Communications Commission] operates now, or, or restructure how, you know, the different avenues I guess the access to ownership of media? Speaker 2: I'm-- Speaker 1: I'm talking, I'm talking about the rules and laws--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know what you're saying. Well, you know, once, once the FCC made the decision to sell the public interest to the highest bidder, I'm not (laughter) sure--I mean I, I mean once you, once you go to auctions for the electromagnetic spectrum, it's the highest bidder, you know. And you've already decided who's not gonna be in that game. Now you can say well, we're gonna do special set-asides or this or that. But when they do that, they tend to put rules and regulations around that so that what you get is not really the marketable kind of license that the other folk got, and so that tends to not work. But I don't know whether you can go back to comparative hearings to award licenses. There have been some, you know, there--I, I really don't know. I mean you need to talk with some of the people, the lobbyists. I've sort of given up on, on that whole--not given up, but I've been very disappointed on the, what's happened over the last fifteen years or so with regard to the FCC's allowance of the consolidation of interest, media interest and ownership, which, you know, just, just produce what we got, which is, you know, three or four guys can decide what you and I see on television period. They decide, and nothing you can do about it. They own newspaper. They own cable. They own television. They own 2,000 radio stations. You can elect presidents when you got that kind of power, right, and they do (laughter). So, so, yeah, I think it needs to be rethought in terms of the public interest again, as opposed to the-- Story_ID: 156637 Speaker 1: --This all came up, all this sort of happened, was spurred by budget issues by in the [Newt] Gingrich era, when, remember when the balance--they came in with this, Gingrich came in with this--what was his--conservative--what was this thing? There's rules or its commandments or whatever-- Speaker 2: It's-- Speaker 1: --it was. Speaker 2: Yeah, its contract with America. Speaker 1: Contract with American (laughter). And one was a balanced budget. Not a bad idea, but they decided to balance it on the backs of, you know, programs that were put in place to, to be a quality and a level playing field or, or some sort of compensation for past deficiencies, as opposed to balancing it, you know, on the backs of, you know, oil companies and other folks who got, still got incredible breaks, you know, or, or wealthy people who don't, you know, pay fourteen percent tax as opposed, when you're, you're paying thirty percent or, you know, or whatever. So, the balanced budget is not the bad idea. Again, it's not the idea. It's the way it's implemented, it's, it's how it's executed. And people execute 'em. And so, the intent of the people is to take it and execute it in a way that serves their interests and denies our because they don't think that ours is im--our interest is important for America. And I, I think that's where they're wrong. It's not for selfish reasons they should do things differently, because you cannot continue to create a da--this kind of divide educationally, economically in America and believe that this company is gonna be competitive and stable in the future for our children. I just think it's a stupid thing, even if you do for selfish reasons, you know, open up and make it, make it fair for, for, for this rising demographic that's gonna be in the majority. Can you imagine not educating Latinos the way they're, they're not being educated? And then they're gonna be this incredible, and are becoming this incredible part of our populate. It's absolutely ludicrous not focus incredible resources on education. You know what you think? I mean (laughter), I don't want 'em out here being the ma, you know, such a major part of the population basically uneducated. And their, their dropout rate is, you know, is large or larger than the African American youths. And, and they're becoming the majority--(unclear)--larger--(unclear)--part of the population. It's crazy, you know, to me in terms of your self-interest. Story_ID: 156638 Speaker 1: What-- this is like part of what we normally ask, and that's like, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My hope is that the community will continue to provide what it has in the past for its sons and daughters and that is a sense of pride, and, and a sense of importance, a sense of, you know, what my, what my parents [Enolia Bowman Jones and Elmer Jones] believed was values. I think, I think those values still exist in the African community-African American community generically, certainly in terms of economic areas. It's because of a lot of reasons not always there. You know, it's, it's, the culture has become very, very difficult to, to transmit in a positive way because of economic and other issues, educational issues. You know, so my hope would be that those good parts of the, of the, of the community's values would continue to promulgated and that they would--we would still stay committed to its African American leaders or fortunate people to, you know, continue to choo--bound--pound on there, reach down, pound on that, pound o that and not, and not transmit the message that you had mentioned earlier, that, you know, there's been no change, that things are aren't as bad--things are still--things are worse than they were. Yeah, that's not true. That's just not, first of all, it's not true. And secondly, it's, it's a bad message, and it gives no hope. So that was what I, what I would hope and, and my concerns, of course, that, that we still can consider the need and the importance of affirmative actions. And I'm not talking about affirmative action the way the government necessarily defines it, but to be affirmative about our decisions to do things that are necessary, to go out of our way to, you know, help each other, to help each other's children, to promote each other's children, to hire each other's children, to do business with each other, those that are worthy, and that, you know, it does make a different to support a young lady whose just got her new job at an insurance company, that, that she gets, you know, you do business with her if you can, because she's gonna have a tougher time getting clients than some of her colleagues. And that's, that to me is an affirmative action that you can practice. A lot of people say--some people say they--yeah, I believe we should have affirmative action, but then you look at their lives, they don't practice it themselves. And if we aren't gonna practice it, why do we expect white people to practice it, you know, for us. I mean, and again, all things being equal, you, you not gonna give up quality (laughter) or, or competence. But you're gonna prac--you're gonna affirmatively look for that option, and that's an important thing to do 'cause it gives our children an opportunity 'cause we know on one hand. On the other side there, there's the--their still being sort of held back in some ways because of their, who they are. And it's still not equal; it's still not there, and that's, we understand that. (Unclear)--and they have to be better and work hard, but the things that we can do is, are to be affirmative with each other and for each other. Story_ID: 156639 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back on everything that you have accomplished to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy. Speaker 2: Well, I've, you know--my legacy, I don't if (laughter) have a legacy, but certainly am proud of the way I've raised my children, you know, the fact that I've recognized in them and tried to transmit to them a part of the history my family, of, of, of our people of this country, of their place in, in history, and what the imperative they should accept as to what they should do in terms of obligation to move the thing forward. You know, many people have died and suffered for all of us to be in this place, white and black. And therefore, you can't--you know, you have an obligation as well as an opportunity, and, and you know, to benefit from it but an obligation to move it forward. And so, you know, I always want them to do that, and that would be a may--if they did that, and understood that, and transmitted that, that would be a big part of my legacy. The other, the other thing is, I would hope that the involvement in the economic part of the movement, the recognition that the movement, this, this movement--I, I think is the word movement is an important word 'cause that means that it's still continuing--that it was a social, you know, necessity, and then a political necessity, and now an economic necessity that, that my decision to be involved in that economic part of the, of the struggle and of the part--movement is, has been fruitful, you know, fruitful in terms of create, helping to create companies, you know, that are able to spread it much wider than one could by himself, whether they are companies that failed or companies that succeeded, because failure you learn a lot as well. But the successes obviously are very important, like Radio One, like Iridium satellite, like TV One, which--I mean these, these, these companies create images. They create messages. They create symbols. They, they have touch the people not only here but around the world. These are incredible--BET [Black Entertainment Television] and the, the good and the bad of 'em. I mean they're all, aren't all perfect--creating wealth in the community for entrepreneurs to believe that they can go out and follow their dream, and get capital, and create a business, and create wealth. And that wealth can be used to cre--to, to augment the, the social and the political struggle, 'cause, you know, politicians need money to support themselves to support you. And if you don't, you don't have wealth in your community, you can't elect or expect your people to get elected or be supportive. It's all a big circle, and understanding that dynamic, that, that circular dynamic, and the role that the economic movement plays in it is, you know, really what I've decided to be about. And it can become, you know, a kind of a mission, a missional engagement and provide you with a lot of personal benefits. I mean, you know, again, why, why would I be upset or, or disappointed when I benefit so much from it? But yet, it, and it, and it allows me and my family to be outward as opposed to just inward, not to worry about ourselves but to also be involved in the community and the world. And, and, and I, and I think it directly affects the well-being of the country, which you care about. Story_ID: 156640 Speaker 1: You mentioned your family. Can you tell us about your children? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll be glad to talk about them. I have three daughters. My oldest daughter is thirty-two, and my next daughter is twenty-nine, and the youngest daughter is twenty-four. They all--and I have two grandchildren by my first daughter, a four-year-old young lady and a two-year-old young man. So, all of my daughters went to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]. They went to an HBCU [historically black college or university]. And that was an interesting and important thing for our family. I, as you said, went--I, as I said earlier, went Trinity College [Hartford, Connecticut], which was, when I went there a 100 percent--ninety percent-ninety-nine percent white. And my daughter applied there and got in there, got into other schools, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] included, and wanted to go to Spelman. And when I took her down there to enroll--it was my oldest daughter--I was blown over, blown away by just the sisterhood, the place, the camaraderie, the, the, the, the presence of these young women, these African American women, in a place built for them and nurturing them, and with high academic standards. And so I right away got it and said this is great, you know. Maybe I should have went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I don't know (laughter), but, but it was fantastic. And then when she went, she, she felt it so important that, you know, my second daughter, you know, felt in love with it, and she went there. And my third daughter had no choice. Although she pretended she was gonna apply someplace else, she only made one application. So all of my daughters are from Spelman. I became actually involved. My wife [Marcella Jones] and I ended up parents' council at Spelman. We started the parents, a, a parents' council to get parents in, more involved and ult--and then I became a trustee on Spelman's board and just for nine years. My first daughter graduated from Spelman and became an investment banker at JP Morgan Chase for a year and then switched, became a trader at JP Morgan and was a very successful trader, young trader there. They, you know, considered her to be a rising star, etc., etc. And when she had her first child--she married her husband from Morehouse, married, met at Morehouse. When she had her first child, first grandchild, she decided she was gonna stay and raise her child. She wasn't gonna go back to that Wall Street thing, even though, again, it was, she was making tremendous progress and very (laughter) attractive money as a trader. It's very hard to be trader, and, but she was, she had a knack for it, and she was just was very successful a twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven. But she, she didn't go back and to this day has not gone back. She's rai, she's raising her two kids and is now ready to get back into things. But we're very proud of her and what's she's done, and the way she--the kind of mother she is. My second daughter also went to Spelman. When she got out she worked for Lehman Brothers. And Lehman Brothers, as you know, imploded after a year or two. And then after being, looking for a job for a little while, she decided to go back to graduate school and got her master's in philanthropy, fundraising and grant making. And so she works with philanthropic organizations. She now runs a, a foundation for an Australian insurance company that's headquartered here, has, has headquartered office of the United States called QBE [Insurance]. She's their, head of their foundation. And my third daughter graduated in 2010 from Spelman. And all of them majored, by the way, in English and economics. My first daughter double-majored, and my second daughter minored in English, minored in economics. My third daughter majored in English and--(unclear)--'cause they, we, we felt that liberal arts education, being able to read and write was very important. And the economic stuff is, you know, important as well. My third daughter, twenty-four years old, works here at Syncom [Venture Partners] with me for the last two. And she's an analyst. And she's, you know, considering business school, preparing to go to business school and apply. And so all of 'em have been, been great. My grandkids are not in school yet except day, except, well, except what they call a preschool (laughter). Story_ID: 156641 Speaker 1: Now, what, what are some of your other voluntary activities? I know I didn't wanna, I, I, I didn't ask you that, so. Speaker 2: Well, I'm in other organizations. As, as I said, I, I served on the board of Southern African Enterprise Fund, which was a venture investment fund put together by USAID [United States Agency for International Development], a hundred million dollar to invest in Southern African businesses. I served with, as I said, on the board of, of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I'm a member of Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity, which is the Boule, and a member of--what else am I member of? I don't know what I'm a member of. Some things that are happening recently that haven't quite happened. I get involved in youth organizations. My wife [Marcella Jones] is very involved in, in organizations, so I get involved with them too, whether they're the tennis foundation, or the youth golf, or associations or, organizations like that, that I can give time to. One of the problems is this business is a very consuming business, and it's really a twenty-four/seven business in some ways when you've got investments and companies and you're working with com--we're very hands-on working with these companies we invest in. And so some of these organizations that you wanna sort of do require you to show up on a regular basis with, with kids, or if you're gonna do with kids, for example. And so I can't do a lot of that. My wife does. But that, my job kind of limits it, so you know, I kind of do things on a more macro level with organizations and foundations. Story_ID: 156642 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: Other than learn to type better (laughter), faster. Yeah, I probably would wish that I had become a better reader, you know, more voracious reader. My daughter's a voracious reader, and I, and I, I tend to read, you know, quickly and then start talking like I read the whole book (laughter). And I think when I do a whole book I really realize there's a lot of stuff in here that, you know, I didn't, you know, I wouldn't have gotten if I'd just sort of read thirty pages, the front and the back, and start espousing. I wish I had developed more of a habit of reading. I tend to be more of audio book guy than an actual, you know, reader guy. And I, I read a lot of magazines and publications because you, you sort of have to, but just novels. And I'm fascinated by a number of things, science, astronomy. You know, I read stuff about the universe, and all that stuff fascinates me, but I don't read it as consistently as I, you know, probably want to. But, you know, I'd say I'd, I'd like to develop more of a, a, a, a may, maybe speed reading. Typing and speed reading, that's the two things that I would do, and I still can, more of and develop a facility in more of-- Story_ID: 156643 Speaker 1: My, my recreational activities are, what you haven't asked about yet, are, you know, I'm a sort of a golf addict, used to do a lot of tennis and squash but of sort of settled on golf. And then golf, and that's because golf I find to be a very, forgive me for saying this, spiritual game in a lot of ways. It's a very meaningless game, but it allows you to deal with ego, and deal with nature, and deal with other way in a, in a setting that's unique and, and, and provides an opportunity to learn about trust, and courage, and joy and all those things in a four-hour round--and character-- that is, is unique. I mean it's hard to do that in, in an activity with other men or women in a pastoral setting. And so I find it a very, you know, transcending kind of experience, you know, as long as you don't take it too seriously because it's meaningless (laughter) what, what your score is or, or how many times it takes to get the ball in the hole. But it tells you a lot about you, as to have you react to the ups and downs of challenges, the cur--you know the joy the, the, you know, and all that. And it tells you--golf is a great game for business not because people do deals on the golf course in my opinion. It's because it tells you the character of the person you're dealing with in a way, in a very deep way in four hours, in three or four hours. I mean I can, I know who you are after playing a round of golf with you, and that's a very deep thing. So I like, I like golf for that reason. I like chess, although I've gotten very impatient, which, you know, in terms of moving (laughter), so I tend to make bad moves now 'cause I'm just so impatient. But those are kind of my active--that and you know, doing stuff with the grandkids and the kids, you know, outdoor stuff. Story_ID: 156644 Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Nothing I can really think of. I think we've talked about the reason why I, I do what I do. I think you understand that it's a part of a movement, a part of a continuum that I consider the economic phase of that movement to be the crucial historical imperative right now, to be engaged in it in a way that allows me to be--you know, enable underserved people, black white, brown, whether to be--to become a part of the economic movement is, is a privilege. And one can, you know, feel like you're doing something missional. At the same time, you can benefit financially very well. I mean that's a great opportunity. I can create personal wealth and help others, help create generational wealth or, or wealth in the community, wealthy entrepreneurial world in, in this system, which is about wealth creation. And so it's a, you know, it's a great thing to be involved in, and that's what I'm sort of consider myself to be about and, and, and why it's important, and because it's an outward thing and not just an inward thing that brings a lot of satisfaction as well. Speaker 1: Okay, well, the, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Very few people know you, actually, for all the things you're doing here are really impressive, but very few people know you but, so the last question is how, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How would I be remembered? I mean, as, as a basically good person who tried to be engaged in something that was important at the time, in, in that point in history to be engaged in and that did it with honesty, with concerns for the community, the larger community, focused on a, a segment of that community that I can potentially have an impact on that is the African-American-Latino community of entrepreneurs, Asians that we have an impact on because that benefits the larger communities, not just to create wealth or just to create opportunity for those people because the community, the American system. American needs that, and that's, that's the natural part of the future, and that I--people--(unclear)--say well, he recognized that. He was involved in it and not just for the personal gain or for creating some wealth for some black folks or, or Latino folks but because it was really about a bigger purpose. It's really about, you know, being relevant to the future and the future of this country, the future of people and, and creating hope and, and, and you know, making business a calling...