 Story_ID: 169230 Speaker 1: I'm Al Johnson. Albert Johnson is the full name. Born February the 2nd--23rd, 1920 [February 23, 1920]. Speaker 2: Okay. And can we have today's date? Speaker 1: Today is the, oh let's see, 14th [August 14, 2002]. I'm almost sure (laughter). Speaker 2: It's the 14th. Speaker 1: 14th. Speaker 2: And can we have your--the location we're at? Speaker 1: You're at my home at 990 North Lake Shore Drive [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. And your occupation? Speaker 1: I'm retired. Speaker 2: No but your--what your occupation was? Speaker 1: Well, my most recent is the president of a corporation. We had a few companies as you may know. I guess I'm best known, however, in two areas. In my earlier career it was the hospital field as hospital administrator assistant, and then the automobile business. Speaker 2: You would describe yourself probably as a businessman. Speaker 1: Indeed. Story_ID: 169231 Speaker 1: Now I, I ask five questions of everyone. They're a little People magazine-ish. But I just wanna know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: My favorite food? I don't have a favorite food. I may more or less able to say better what I don't eat. And that is I do not eat red meat. I'm not a vegetarian, but I do not eat red meat. Fowl and fish predominantly. I eat a lot of fruit. A few years ago I had a place that I spent some time vacationing and playing golf in North Carolina. And they introduced me to a thing called grits. I never seen grits cooked so many different ways in my life, but the fact of the matter is that grits has been one of my favorite breakfast food and I enjoy them. Never tire of them. Speaker 1: And you just got introduced to them when? Speaker 2: Oh about ten or twelve years ago. Speaker 1: (Unclear) then I'd like to know what your favorite color is? Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite color unfortunately. I'm not much on me and I. I really don't (laughter) have super preference for anything. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of year? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: I love being in California. I love California as a place to go. And I like Northern California much more than I do Southern California. Northern California is more scenic. The weather is not near comparable to Southern California. But it has so many other attributes. At my place in Rancho Mayo [ph.], the country club, the glaciers were real kind to us there. In that it came through and that the most beautiful rock fou- formations you ever imagine. And other places that I had homes. I ended up in California (laughter) about five years ago. And I wondered why I ever thought about Florida and even other places. In the USA, California is a place that I enjoy life. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No, not really. No, I don't have. Story_ID: 169232 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna start--I wanna start with your parents. And I would like you to give your mother's name and I'd like you to tell us what you know about her background and any of her growing up. Speaker 2: Well my dad was a graduate in 1915 from Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee]. He went to practice medicine in St. Louis [Missouri]. There were only two as they were called in those days colored doctors to take care of--St. Louis had a large population then. Somewhere in 150,000 people of color. And (unclear) [break in tape]. And my mother was a youngster right out of college and never did have a career as one being employed. She was married to a doctor. And her life was spent in the church. She was--even today and she's been gone since 1949. They have a day at the church where she spent her life. She developed a youth group. And they met with regularity. And that was her group. She was that person very dedicated to being supportive to the needs of people and the happiest woman I think I've ever met. She died as I said in 1949. Speaker 1: Now did she talk at all--first of all your mother's name? Speaker 2: Anna. Speaker 1: Anna (simultaneous). Speaker 2: And his name was Oscar. Speaker 1: Okay. Anna, her maiden name? Speaker 2: Theresa. Speaker 1: Theresa, Anna Theresa. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did she ever talk at all about England and where she was from and any of her growing up? [break in tape]. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Did she--do you know how she ended up at Union Station or, you know, or in St. Louis-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) in traveling on her way to New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Now did she ever experience, you think--was there any messaging she did to you as a young person, you know, that was based on how she was raised? Or, you know, showed why she was compassionate to young people or why she was religious? Do you know anything in her background that would have lead her there? Speaker 2: Not really. The interest she had in youngsters was so well focused that I just never challenged or concerned myself about why. It was what she did. Story_ID: 169233 Speaker 1: Now Oscar [Johnson], your father. Can you tell us about his background? Speaker 2: He came from a very poor family. He had two sisters Mattie and Marie. His dad was somewhat a cripple with no money. He went to college at a Baptist university. I've forgotten the name. And then he worked toward getting a medical degree, degree. He had two sisters to support. His dad died early. I don't know when his mother died. But it was his dad and his two sisters. So she died much earlier in his lifetime. And it was quite a struggle. Speaker 1: Where was he from? Was he from St. Louis [Missouri] originally? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. He was from Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 1: And do you--did you--do you remember your grandfather? Speaker 2: No I don't. I remember--no I don't remember him. Speaker 1: Did your father--did he ever say--share any stores about his growing up in Memphis and what it was like? Speaker 2: There was a--one family that knew him as a kid. They grew up together somewhat. His name was George Damron. I think George Damron stayed around until my dad, until he died. He ended up being a person that would drive him around, dad around. Take care of minor things on his cars. More than (unclear) it appeared to me to have been a regu- both of their lives were struggling. But they accomplished whatever my dad always--made George a very loyal and very happy for his growth. Back in those days it wasn't a lot of opportunity for people of color, as you suspect. To him, he did the impossible. He got a medical degree from Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. His life was dedicated to helping young physicians to enhance their careers. He envisioned back then that one day minorities would be able to get board qualifications to learn the specialties of medicine. And he was one of the three doctors responsible for building the Homer G. Phillips Hospital [St. Louis, Missouri]. Homer G. Phillips Hospital was a huge place with somewhere in the neighborhood of 1100 beds. That would even be larger than Northwestern University [Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] today in total beds in-house. He was so dedicated to improving the lives of people in the medical field that it ended up having many other the schools. I think the first one they developed was the school of nursing where women could come and get a degree, RN degree in nursing. Then they had a school for radiology students for a huge lab they had to have. And all the specialties of the, of the medical field. They had a school for each one of them. They had one of the largest outpatient clinics. The complex ended up being about three and a half to four blocks square. In fact I learned the other day that they were going to turn it into--the building itself--into a retirement home, making some use out of it. There was a move by the universities and these other private institutions to convince people in government that had hospitals for the indigent to close their doors that they could do it as cheap as they were caring for patients. Back in those days '53 [1953], '55 [1955] up to about '57 [1957] even at Cook County [Illinois] if I--according to what I read. In large wards they could maintain their cost. Everything in cost was running less than fifteen dollars per day for a patient. And the crazy thing that happened was when they convinced most places to close their doors, the cost of medical care just keeps skyrocketing. Cook County is amazing to me how they stayed taking care of the indigent and the poor, but most places were lead to close their doors unfortunately. Speaker 1: Sir, your father, did he ever discus why he went to medical school? What was the motivation behind that? Speaker 2: I think he was concerned about patient care. But I think the real--another motivation to that side I think was that you could earn an outstanding living. We weren't in the corporate world. I don't know of any, any vocation or job that would pay what doctors made in those days. So I think it was those two things. He had an ambition to earn a good living, to be independent while to help educate our--support his family, his sisters rather, and he did that. Story_ID: 169234 Speaker 1: Now how did--so your parents met at Union Station or on the way through. But I wanna ask--I wanna know what your earliest memory is of growing up in St. Louis [Missouri]? If you sort of search your memory banks back what do you remember as your earliest memory? Speaker 2: My earliest memory was the first day at school. That's where my whole life began in my thinking, in my memory. Getting around other people. This was--I think every boy and girl their life begins day one in school. I really believe that. That's the way it was with me. Speaker 1: Now what--do you remember the name of the elementary school? Speaker 2: Yes, very vividly. West Belle School in St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 1: And were there--can you tal--I mean what was that memory of school? Was it just that there was a lot of activity? Do you remember the teachers? Do you remember the students? I mean what was it about that, that was vivid to you about that? Speaker 2: I can remember my teachers at my early age. I can even remember my kindergarten teacher, memory of them. There were two in the classroom. Because living in St. Louis after school you met these people in some other way, either church or at some event. They never left your lives as long as they were alive. Somewhere along the line you would remember them 'cause you were in touch. And they worked at remembering your name, "Hi Albert." You know, even when I got in my teens. The thing that happened with black kids, boys and girls, they live in neighborhoods that they never leave by and large and based on income was the level at which you live. But the poorest of the folk in the community were too far away. So you always had contact. Story_ID: 169235 Speaker 1: The community that you lived in, were you the only child as I remember? Speaker 2: Yes, mm-hmm. Speaker 1: You told me you were the only child, okay. So you were pretty--were you doted on as a child? Speaker 2: Not necessarily. Speaker 1: If you think about your parents, do you think--what do you think you have from each one of them? What traits do you have from each one of them? Speaker 2: Well from my mother [Anna Theresa Johnson]--I think it motivates me to have worked in all of my career especially my business career and community organizations. I think my foundation of giving to community organizations. I think, I think the feeling of responsibility for doing something than other than for yourself. I think she taught me humility. And then later in life I had a mentor a guy named Virgil McKnight. He was the administrator in the hospital. And I met him in 1941. He was a person that taught you humility as well. And that you weren't the most important thing in the world. That it's the deeds that you grant other people. That--don't get too proud of yourself that you must be involved in other things rather than self-type of ideas and things that you do. He was a good teacher just being exposed to him. A lot of the skills that I learned was--and some of the techniques have been very helpful to me in business came from McKnight. Then I have another person a Dr. Fagen. He was the--he was at Washington University [in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]. And oh I guess about ten years after I had gotten at the hospital, he came in to do a study of hospitals "period." And, well Washington University sent him there. Somehow he picked me up as a person to work with him in his project. Since I'd been around the hospital a pretty good time. And I think all the technique of managing and handling of people, structured methods of running a company came from Dr. Fagen. I think those two people and one other. When I became the first person of color to buy GM dealership, was a gentleman that was in charge of the Motors Holdings Division that's a finance arm of General Motors. His name was Maury Lyons, L-Y-O-N-S. And he was in charge of the greater Chicago [Illinois] area. And when I came in the automobile business, one lesson he told me, he said, he said, "General Motors won't like my approach." He said, "But I'm known for being very straightforward and frank." He said, "Al, you're coming into a business that's not like running a hospital." (Laughter) and the first thing that he said, "What makes you think you're gonna be successful as a dealer?" and I must have told him something about my background at a hospital. He said, "That won't be helpful." (Laughter) he was very straightforward. He said--he gave me the history of the automobile agency kind of business. How it grew up like topsy. And he said, his job was to see that I did not fail. And he said, "The only way you're gonna be successful is first be a good student. If you can't be that, you're gonna fail." And he worked with me. He'd leave his office many times after four or five o'clock and come out to the dealership on the South Side and counsel me. Point out all the mistakes I was making in the different departments. And he taught me and exposed me to the people that were most successful in this business. Story_ID: 201828 Speaker 1: I wanna take you back just to your childhood. And I ask a question sometimes. And I just wanna understand what formulated you as a person. If you could take yourself back and tell me what either sights, smells or sounds remind you of growing up in St. Louis [Missouri]? What, were there any--was it--I'm just trying to get a sense of the environment you grew up in. Speaker 2: I grew up in the upper middle-income kind of environment. I don't know anything outstanding as a child that I can talk about. Speaker 1: Well what did the hou--was there a smell in the house or in the neighborhood? Were there certain sounds of, you know of pots and pans--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: If so I didn't-- Speaker 1: --You didn't pay attention (laughter). Speaker 2: It didn't make any-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: It didn't make any impression on me. I was always moving so fast. Speaker 1: So let me ask you this. How would-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sights and smells. Speaker 1: Okay that's--you know, business people always react to this question the same way you're reacting. Story_ID: 201829 Speaker 1: But can you tell me then what were you like as a child? Were you a quiet child? Were you a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Overly active. Speaker 1: Overly active. Speaker 2: Yes, indeed. They had to keep up with me (laughter). I never got in trouble. I was never in any trouble, wasn't around gangs or anything. In fact gangs weren't too popular in my time. The little school things, but we didn't carry guns and knives. Ours were fashioned after little cliques (laughter). The right people to be with and all that kind of stuff. Or people that had the same kind of life. But money wasn't too big of a problem, you know. You had a lot of--everything not you (unclear) but you have a lot in common because of I guess in- family income and the like. In our time, teachers were middle income--middle income and their families lived very well. The undertaker, those were local business people. So I don't think it was anything too impressive about my childhood. I really don't. Speaker 1: Okay, I just got a few more questions about what--what were your--did you dream about being anything? You know how young people are? You know, sometimes they think they, you know, maybe wanna be--but did you have any dreams about what you wanted to be or in your--or were you moving so fast you-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thought that I wanted to be a doctor as a child. In fact I (laughter) I made some of my--as an eight year old I made some of my neighbors' kids very ill (laughter) being the doctor. I gave them some of my dad's tablets (laughter). I got a good one for that one. A good whipping. But later in life as I saw how my dad [Oscar Johnson] worked, I decided medicine is not for me. He was never home. He got up at six o'clock in the morning and made hospital rounds because there weren't enough physicians in the community, he walked out of his office after twelve o'clock at night. I used to go around with him when making house calls. That had to happen between his office hours. He had to be back at two o'clock to four for his office hours. So he made house calls in the early afternoon. And then after four or five o'clock he had to try to get back for six o'clock and not necessarily make it 'til seven. And he worked real hard. He was just--there was nothing but medicine in his life. He had no other interest. And I wanted to be a businessman. I didn't know where I would start. And in your teenage years when I came up, of course, it was, "How are you gonna be in business number one? Doing what?" And after a few disappointments, my dad was determined, "Okay, if you're not gonna study medicine, you're gonna be in this hospital somewhere." That was it. Story_ID: 201830 Speaker 1: And I ended up in the hospital first starting out as a receiving room clerk. And then later years making a number of seminars and ended up coming to Chicago [Illinois] to work under the father of hospital administration at Chicago Dr. MacEkren [ph.]. Then that leads into the story when dad [Oscar Johnson] died and gave me an opportunity to wonder, to make my own decisions. And the question then was, "Where do I go from here?" I got a white-collar job that was considered very important in a good field, good income based on those days. And I then as you may read somewhere along the line I was fascinated with cars. So was my dad. And I ended up going around selling cars to people in the hospital field out of a briefcase. And based on reputation, having been in cer- in organizations related to hospital field, likely, first spot I got was the chairman of the hospital personnel directors, and St. Louis as you know is famous as a medical center. And then later I became chairman of the local hospital administrator's group. That gave you--people trusted you. (Unclear) And I started selling cars out of a briefcase to the doctors, to the nurses. I sold more cars in a year than (laughter) any three of our salesman put together. In some of the articles you may have read--I don't have it here. I know, the first month in this business I earned well over $1,100. That was a lot of money on a part-time basis, devoting no more than fifteen, eighteen hours a week. That was a lot of money. And it was earning me (laughter) more money than I was being paid as a hospital administrator full-time. It made me determined. And I felt this. I wanna be in business, and maybe we can crack this thing about our not being able to purchase from another dealer his company. And that maybe we could crack it. Story_ID: 201831 Speaker 1: Now I wanna just understand a couple things. You went to--the elementary school you went to was what? I want-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) West Belle. Speaker 1: Wesmal. Speaker 2: West Belle. Speaker 1: West Belle. Speaker 2: W-E-S. It's a street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: B-E-L-L-E. Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then I went to Marshall [High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Marshall High School. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And so I take it your father [Oscar Johnson] he must have been pretty much of a disciplinarian in many ways. Speaker 2: Oh he was. Speaker 1: He was tough wasn't he? Speaker 2: He was the law (laughter). Speaker 1: So you were gonna be within the hospital environment or nothing else. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you--so did you try to rebel against that much at all? Speaker 2: Well, you don't, in that--in those days and times, you had a father like my dad, how do you rebel? You were gonna lose all the things that you--that he gave you like driving the car, money and--so he had his carrots without saying it. You knew that you had to do what he would say, "If you're gonna be a man already and make your own decisions, then you're gonna have to go. You have to leave here and earn a living 'cause you're making decisions." He made that plain. If you can make your own decisions you are now a man and you should be able to support yourself. So he had many carrots (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Now you-- Speaker 2: --Keep you in line. Speaker 1: Right. So when you first started with the hospital, was that at Homer G. Phillips [St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just where he wanted. Speaker 1: Just where he was. So it was--you weren't too far away from his (laughter)-- Speaker 2: His sights. Speaker 1: His sights. Okay. And were you living at home still? Speaker 2: I--as soon as I started working at the hospital I got my own place. I could afford it. My first job there was as a receiving room clerk. And my salary was $125 a month. And in those days we're talking about '41 [1941] prior to World War II. Yeah June 1, 1941, most men were making--about $10 a week was a pretty good pay, and a top pay was $17 to $25 a week. Believe it or not, one other person that earned quite a bit of money were waiters in these country clubs. Somehow no one kept up with how much they were making. 'Cause they were making tips and paying no taxes. Taxes weren't a concern of our--by and large of most Americans until World War II. And the government then needed money. And that's when the tax laws began to really affect your pocketbook paying your share. Speaker 1: So did you--with this, with the hospital administration, even though this was not your--sort of your idea, did you find--were there things that you learned or that you found surprising about hospitals? I mean I know that you had grown up, you know, around that. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) in that environment. I grew up in it. Speaker 1: Right, right. But was there anything that you found surprising from that? You know, administrative--administrative, administration side? Speaker 2: Not really because when I went there, I didn't have anything to offer. It was a learning experience. I was just amazed at all that went on in a hospital and the responsibility. I found being a doctor was one aspect, but services and ancillary services that he needs at his disposal and for caring for a patient all of a sudden the role of the importance of a businessman. To see that supplies were there that personnel was there and that coverage had--it was a fascinating experience. Eye opener. I didn't have anything to measure what I was learning by at that time. That too was new. Story_ID: 201832 Speaker 1: And did you--are there things that you learned during those years [at Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri] that sort of stood you well in your business? I know you said that you said to Maury Lyons that, you know, "I've run a hospital." But were there truly things that, you know, helped you down the line? Speaker 2: Yes, as--I think Maury was about the business of shocking me. That was shock therapy. I think that was his motive because the things that I learned from Dr. Fagen was even a big plus when I got in business. That I didn't see that much evidence with other dealers. I was better organized than most dealers coming from hospital administration. There were several things that I found people in the automobile business. I couldn't understand how they could be so successful and not have the things and the tools and the methods that I was taught by Dr. Fagen. And that was that I didn't go in one dealership that had policies for personnel. Not one. And I was dealing with the top 15 percent earners in the industry. Policy manuals? What? They didn't know anything about it. And I think, I think I made a contribution in that area. And the next thing I was taught by Dr. Fagen is doing an engineering study on personnel. Time in motion to see what a prescribed job, how well and how fast can you do it? How many people do you need to get it done? Maybe just cleaning a ward, scrubbing the floors. I went into dealerships that had maintenance people, custodial people, call it what you will. And they had more people than they really needed. I was surprised. They did not know how many square feet a person mopping a corridor would take or a showroom. They had no idea. And I think one of the reasons that I did well on measuring the personnel, I went in with those techniques that I was taught by Dr. Fagen. Doing the time in motion study. Later on in the business, I talked to other, other dealers about it. Not only a personnel man- manual but as I said, rules and regulations, personnel policies. Most of these places they didn't really have anything written down as to the policies. It was left to management and one department over another. He had some rules that you could do, and in another department you couldn't. And there was no standardization in those basic things in running a business. Different today. Story_ID: 201833 Speaker 1: When [car] dealers began--minority dealers coming into the field began to fail and all the corporations were looking for solutions because there were activists groups saying that it was part of a plan to limit competition or really to exploit those minorities that wanted to go into business with their life savings. All kinds of witch-hunts. And they had to defend themselves. And I never shall forget the meeting that I was called to in Detroit [Michigan] where they were really concerned. Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] was pointing fingers at the failures and a number of other organizations. And at that time we were, we were just making (laughter) all kinds of money in those days. I was competing with the top fifteen dealers in the nation in cost analysis and profits and the relationship to personnel and units sold. All kinds of--whatever approach you wanted to have. And I never will forget the president and the general sales manager of the corporation [GM], which he and I became very friendly, and he had told me, "Now Al, we gonna--it isn't personal, but I'm gonna come out real hard to make a point." "Fine. I'm not thin skinned. Do what you will." So the first question came from--and every division was there. Chevrolet, Buick, every division. And the question was, "Al what are you doing that you're so successful and others are not doing?" So I said, "Well wait a minute. I don't know what they're not doing. I can only tell you what we're trying to do." And after talking about what we do and how we had been running a business, even though it was in a ghetto, I pointed out to them that it was unrealistic to ask minorities to come into a business as expensive, as competitive as the automobile business and never having been exposed. I pointed out in the ninety years of the automobile field, and reading their history, growing up right, I said, "Topsy." That they started selling cars out of filling stations and as the industry grew, they grew with it. And that finally most of the corporations went to the universities to help them to come up with a real method to make--help dealers be successful. I said, "We weren't even allowed to even sell a car. How are you gonna wait and you got ninety years ahead of us where the grandfather of the agency, the father had one and now the son has one. He's had all that to draw from." And I said, "It's unrealistic to expect because we put the key in the door in the ghetto that all of a sudden we're successful. Can't happen." So then I got myself in trouble. So I said to them, "You need an academy. You need a training program. So that we can catch up and learn this field. We first need you to put some money." "How much money are you talking about Al?" I grabbed a figure out of the air 'cause I didn't know. I said, "Oh maybe fifteen million dollars." So the general sales manager said, "Al, we haven't done that for white dealers." I said, "Well, really and truly you didn't have to." So he was really for it. So he said, "Well Al, if you know so much, put it on paper. And when you're ready to make a presentation we'll get back together." Story_ID: 201834 Speaker 1: After I left that room I thought, now your big mouth has got you in some serious trouble. You don't know anything about setting up an academy. Teaching is not your field (laughter). And I worried about it for about a week. And it came to me that we had a guy named Jerome Williams at that time with the school board [Chicago Board of Education]. Black fellow. And Jerome was a--I think Jerome had come from a teacher right into administration life. So I got in touch with Jerome and I said, and I told him the story. I said, "I don't know anything about how to put this on paper or what it takes to train and develop people." I said, "I'm dead." And I said, "And a lot is dependent upon it." I said, "You know, I think I can get them to put fifteen million dollars as a starter to get an academy started." And I (laughter) talked him into helping. So he came to Chicago [Illinois] on Fridays, evenings. Sometimes a little earlier. And within about six weeks he had met and worked in every department in our business. Every revenue producing department he spent some time with the manager of that department and learning something about it. And he put down after about six or so weeks a training program. And he gave it to me. So I called Mac Ward [ph.] up and I said, "Well Mac I'm ready." And I then told him, I said, "You know, when I was sitting in that meeting after I left I was frightened to death 'cause I wouldn't know. I'm no educator, know something about teaching and training. That's not my field." He said, "Well what do you have?" I said, (laughter) "I've got a book like this." So he called a meeting with all the major divisions. And I presented it to them. They were convinced they ought to try it. They were desperate. Guys that they financed and people had came into the business with a hundred grand, $150,000, taken out loans on their homes to raise money to be a dealer to be a millionaire one day with all that in front of them were going broke. So then GM [General Motors] got in a company called Jam Handy [Organization] something like that. And they came and worked in my place for about four and a half months in every department. And they aided General Motors in setting up a division called dealer development. Ford Motor Company heard of the success that they were having and they came over and talked with GM to see what they were doing, and they tried to do the same thing. American Motors at that time just didn't have the resources. In fact, shortly thereafter and I'm talking about a project that started in the last of 1968, and maybe get it off the ground by--some month in 1969, and I think it did a lot to aid--at least minorities improve. The next thing that I got Jesse to think in terms of having a meeting here. And I organized a thing called the black dealers--Automobile Dealers Association [National Black Automobile Dealer Association]. Story_ID: 201835 Speaker 1: Can we go back though a little bit? Speaker 2: Of course. Speaker 1: I wanna get there, but I wanna go back. And let me just put things in historic context. You, it was about 19--June 1, 1941 that you started with the hospital [Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri]. How long were you with the hospital as administrator? Speaker 2: I left the hospital to go into the first dealership here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Right. So how many years was that? Speaker 2: That was from '41 [1941]-- Speaker 1: To 19-- Speaker 2: I left for a short period in '40 [1940]--I think in '45 [1945], '40 [1940] something like that. I think I left for about two or three years. Anyway, I was there from--I missed two and a half years. I was there from '40--June 1, 1941, and June 1 is a magic date with me, until October 1, 1967 when I got the Oldsmobile dealer--agency. Speaker 1: And why is June 1st a magic date for you? Speaker 2: Well so many things have happened on the first. When General Motors had to get rid of factory retail stores, they bought--they threatened a land of trust suit. They the government, and made them sell all of their dealerships, and I along with four other Chicago persons--they weren't necessarily Chicago. Handley Dawson [Jr.] came from Detroit [Michigan]. But there were five dealerships, and we all got them on June 1, 1971. Story_ID: 201836 Speaker 1: Is there anything else that happened on June 1st? You know, I know June 1st of '71 [1971] 'cause you said that's your favorite date. But we were talking about--was there anything else that makes it a favorite? Speaker 2: Not that I can remember at the moment, but just imagine that we're talking about '71 [1971]. Boy what other dealership would you want than Cadillac? That was the zenith of the automobile business. No Cadillac dealer failed (laughter). Not one. You know, it was just--so it was a license to steal. Speaker 1: And you said that your--so how did you come--how were black people purchasing cars? You know, because you said--how were the sales of automobiles in the black community? That's all I'm saying. You had made some allusion to-- Speaker 2: Black, blacks bought cars, come on. If they had money enough to buy them. After World War II, the cars sold to blacks were just on the constant increase, even today. For the last fifteen years, many families (laughter) have two cars. You know, black families. Boy do they buy cars. Speaker 1: Now you said also that your father [Oscar Johnson] was also fascinated with cars. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. We had all kinds of cars. We--any new thing came out he bought it. That was his only vice. The only thing he had time to enjoy was his cars. He, I never shall forget they came out with the 16-cylinder Marmon, and it was a low-slung thing. And he had to have one. They came out with a car with a front-wheel drive. Unheard of! He had to have it. He bought a card. I [can] remember growing up, the first car I can remember was he had a Hupmobile, which was a very popular car at that time. When Ford came out in 1932 with a V8 engine, nobody had that but Cadillac in specialty cars. And a low price automobile, unheard of! And was it fast. So he practiced medicine in a little V8 1932 Ford. And then in 1960 they came out with a Victoria model, slanted back with three chrome strips around the hood. He had to have that. And he bought cars. He bought--that was his vice. Story_ID: 201837 Speaker 1: Now when you--do you remember when you first started selling cars part-time? Speaker 2: Oh without a doubt. I don't remember the month. But in 195--you'll get some of that story is in there. You need to get into that. In 1953, I bought a Buick, their first V8. It was a super Buick, and I think that was the last of the (unclear). They did come out with a (unclear). I don't remember now, but I bought a Buick. And one of the patients of my dad's [Oscar Johnson] named S. L. Pete [ph.]. I never shall forget him. He was big in the Brotherhood of Sleeping Porters Union [sic, Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters], Randolph's [Asa Philip Randolph] group. He was big in it. And he was selling Buicks. Now in those days he couldn't sell it on the showroom floor, but he would sell a car and take it to a salesman and they'd share in the commission. So (laughter) Pete was--sold me my Buick. So I said to him, "What kind of money you making on this Pete?" He said, "Well regular salesman make X and I share it. But I don't go out on the road anymore, only when I have to to maintain my seniority. That's when I go out. Well I made X number of dollars last year." "What!" And he had his own clientele. Everybody knew Pete sold cars. And so he said, "You know, you ought to do this. You like cars." But my tastes were--when dad died I spent all that money having a good time. And I like boats, big boats. And I could use the money. I'd gotten married some years before. And the nine thousand dollars a year that I was ma--I think it was nine, not more than ten I was making in hospital administration. My spending habits (laughter) was far above that kind of money, but my wife worked as a social worker with the school board and made nice money, but I wanted to be able to support her. You know, a lot of pride in that sort of thing. And I still wanted to buy good size boats. I was getting my answers in that direction. And other vices of mine (laughter). And I started thinking, "Maybe I can make some of that money." He said, "Well, you got,"--he had more vision than I had. He said, "You've got everything going for yourself. With all the professional people you know, you can sell cars like nobody's business." So I took him at his word. He took me out to an Oldsmobile agency. He didn't want me in Buick naturally. And I talked to the sales manager. I said, "Look, I know you're not gonna change the rule for me to sell cars, and I can't work here full-time anyway." That saved my pride a little bit (laughter). And I said, "I wanna sell cars." He said, "Well how about like Pete does?" I said, "Fine. I'll bring my own business in, but I don't need any salesman to write paper for me. I've got the intelligence to do my own." I said, "I think Pete's crazy the way he,"--and Pete was standing there. I said, "I won't do that. Somebody's gonna let me sell and keep the commission. I'll write a contract like all the other salesmen, bring it in for your approval, deliver the car and that's the end of it." So he was really aggressive kind of guy. He, I think he was really ahead of his time 'cause he said--I never will forget, Bobby said, "Al, I couldn't stoop to doing that either." He said, "Your pride won't let you do it." He said, "It's bad enough you're left out." He said, "I'm gonna get it done through the president of the company." And (laughter) he got the job done. Now I got a Buick and I'm selling Oldsmobiles. So now I had to get rid of the Buick, and I pleaded to get a demo of the--or I promised I would buy an Oldsmobile. Well I began to enhance their--they were a new agency. They were only about three years old. And I was selling cars and making such a good profit that all the rules changed. I no longer had to buy a car. They gave me a car, a demo. And from there on--that was a Scotsman owned the place named Nolte, Nolte [ph.] Oldsmobile. Anyway, I sold cars there from 1953 until--oh when did I leave there? About 1950--I think 1950--no, 1960 is when I left. Story_ID: 201838 Speaker 1: I went to a place closer in the city [St. Louis, Missouri]. Tucker Oldsmobile in May. They were trying to really improve their sales. So then I stayed there until I got the agency, 'til GM [General Motors] looked me up to go--tell me I had--that's another, that's another long story. Speaker 2: Can we tell that story 'cause that's an important story. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Here's what happened. While I was selling cars, I wrote to every manufacturer telling them that I had one hundred and twenty-five or so thousand dollars to buy an automobile agency and if anything came up for sale I'd like to buy it. That was in '53 [1953]. Fifty-three [1953] is the same year I started selling cars on a part-time basis. I started writing letters. Same year. I was so excited about, look at the money I was making in selling. So several months after that in '53 [1953], I thought, well my goodness, why can't I own a dealership? And I wrote to every manufacturer. Earlier they wouldn't even give me a reply or acknowledge my letter. 1960 during the [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] era when King was marrying the conscience of America in relationship to people of color, things began to change a bit. All of a sudden you'd get a reply. I had a relationship with GM as you know. I was the--I've forgotten the name they called me then. That's where I met Mac Ward [ph.], and he would tell everybody that he had this guy, colored guy that was really selling cars and that he had ambition to own an agency and some day it was gonna happen. One day I--after a meeting that he had with the salesmen in St. Louis [Missouri], I said to him, "Mac will it ever happen?" He said, "Al, be patient. It's gonna happen. And when it does happen, you'll be the first. I'll see to that." So (laughter) the years following and the turndowns and the like, then King kept pointing out the fact that--he really got on the case in '66 [1966] with a lot of pressure. He had the prestige then that he could call a meeting with all the corporate heads and they would respond. But the president of the United States [Lyndon Baines Johnson] had a meeting. And he said, "This is wrong to limit people to being consumers only." I had gotten a new boat. And I came up to Chicago [Illinois] from St. Louis on a flotilla. I'd just bought a 40-foot Chris Craft carrier, and I came with a bunch of guys in the harbor. I was a commodore at one time. They wouldn't even allow you if you were colored, you couldn't even bring a canoe in there (laughter), but I broke that down as well in Clifton Terrace, and won the folks over. So on their trips I went along, ended up as I said being the commodore. So we had six boats here tied up in Burnham Harbor [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 201839 Speaker 1: And those were the great years when you had outstanding nightclubs and (laughter) I mean it was just so much here in Chicago [Illinois]. London House was at its finest. I had two other couples on board and each one of the boats had two or three couples on their boat. And we'd go out in Chicago and have a ball every night eating at the best restaurants and nightclubs, and I never shall forget one morning in--it was mid-September 1976. I'm in my cabin, I'm asleep. Everybody on board's asleep. There was a knocking on the door. "Mr. Johnson." I thought, "Who in the world is bothering me?" So I got up and walked out on the back deck and a man said he was his own manager. His name was Ed Haddick [ph.]. And that GM [General Motors] had told him he had to get the job done. "You're gonna have to go back to St. Louis [Missouri] now and sign a release from St. Louis. This is the way it's done, Mr. Johnson. We have a dealership and a dealer is gonna sell. And we want you to be our dealer." So I said, "You mean to tell me I've been waiting all these years and I'm gonna leave this trip, my vacation?" So I said, "I'll tell you what. I don't need to be the first. I can be the forty-first. I'm not leaving here." He said, "You can't pass this up. You've been after this for years." "I can be patient." I'm having a ball, and I wasn't thinking about leaving. So Ed came back the next day knocking on the door again. He said, "Let me tell you something. May I come on board?" I said, "Yes." And we got on the back deck. He said, "Let me tell you something. You're going back to St. Louis. My career is dependent upon it (laughter). And I'll tell you what. We're gonna take you back in our plane." There were (unclear) planes at the airport. And he said, "You're going back to St. Louis to sign the papers. Then you can come on back and finish your vacation 'til we put this deal together." I said, "Well that makes sense." So I did. We flew back to St. Louis and signed the papers with Oldsmobile. And Oldsmobile was--had a little luncheon there congratulating me. And they were planning a press conference and had--it was like (laughter) I had won the presidency of the United States. When you read some of these articles you'll be amazed. New York Times, every paper in the country. You would have thought I was president. Speaker 2: This was a big deal. It was the first. It was a big deal. Speaker 1: I just couldn't--I was just overwhelmed with it. And then when I got in business here, I'm excited about trying to learn this darn business. I'm on television every station. You go in the archives you'll find it. Every station I'm on some program. And finally I had to say, "Look man I got--I'm in a business. I gotta, I gotta stop this." Story_ID: 201840 Speaker 1: Now how did--see because it would've been one thing had you gotten a dealership in St. Louis [Missouri], which was your home. But this was a whole different, you know, market here [Chicago, Illinois]. I mean even though you would come here, you were not a Chicagoan. Speaker 2: That was a problem, knowing Chicagoans like you do. They wanted to know why I wasn't a Chicago person. I'll tell you though, GM [General Motors] has worked with--do you remember [Lewis] Caldwell? Representative Caldwell? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Do you remember Fred Walls the guy that's smoked? The newspaper guy? Speaker 1: I don't know Fred Walls [ph.], but I know Caldwell. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They had--in fact that organization is still alive today the Cosmopolitan Chamber of Commerce [Chicago, Illinois]. Are you aware of that? That's a group about damn near ninety years old. They are hooked up as you know with the major corporations in Chicago. There's a relationship there. And Caldwell and Fred Walls, I think are the ones responsible for Chicago being the location. I really believe that. They had been pressing the corporation to have a minority dealership in Chicago. They were pressing. They were very active in that project. I never knew them. However, the day I came here to sign up GM had it planned that--I think I signed up out in Oak Brook [Illinois] at the GM office. Oldsmobile, each division of that office was out in Oak Brook at that time. And thereafter, GM rushed me out to meet and to have a late lunch with Fred Walls and Caldwell. And boy did they make it easy for me. They warned me. They said, "Now there'll be Chicagoans that won't like your coming in and getting this agency. Their feelings were it should've been one of them. They went on to say, most of them didn't even have the money to get in or any background at all, but they ran interference with me. I immediately joined the Cosmopolitan Chamber of Commerce. And one of Fred Walls' thought was "Al, you've got to join Operation Breadbasket. They have a meeting on Saturday." That was before it was PUSH [People United to Save Humanity]. "You're gonna have to get exposed because these are not the middle-income and upper middle-income blacks. These are the grassroot people. But you need numbers to be supportive so you won't get so much opposition." They were fearful that I wouldn't get any sales out of the people that could afford it. That was that fear of politics in those days. And [HM] Jesse [L.] Jackson was just getting started here in Chicago. Boy! The stories I could tell you. When I met Jesse at the Operation Breadbasket meeting, the first Saturday morning when I was here and started a relationship. They were very helpful, and Jesse was encouraging me, "You may not be able to buy a new one, but you can buy a used one out there. You know, he's got used cars." So he promoted me as well. There were a large number of upper income blacks that never did buy from me. And I don't think--you know, based on the psychology of that slave syndrome, call it what you will. That's what I call it. Some said I was getting seconds from General Motors. It was a little bit more than seconds. I wasn't getting--you know how it--it's amazing. And the thing that happened on Halsted [Street] where I was, most of the businesses were white-owned and very successful, but the neighborhood was changing then, and blacks were moving in particularly Englewood [neighborhood, Chicago, Illinois] and Woodlawn [neighborhood, Chicago, Illinois] and you know. It was changing so rapidly. And it stayed together long enough for me to get a pretty good hold until--for the first two years it kept--it stayed intact. And I guess half of our business was still the white clientele. Speaker 1: Now your first dealership was located where was it? Speaker 2: 74th and Halsted. Speaker 1: On 74th and Halsted. Speaker 2: Oldsmobile. Speaker 1: Oh that's the one that's Oldsmobile. Story_ID: 201841 Speaker 1: And can you also put this in context about Oldsmobile and the black community? Did they have a large black--I mean what were the favorite cars? I mean Ford was the--what were the favorite-- Speaker 2: The favorite car in America and blacks don't differ from all the other consumers. The popularity of Oldsmobile in this country was unbelievable. There was a time that Cutlass outsold Chevrolet. The little Cutlass? They blew it. But it was very (laughter)--the popularity of the car--Oldsmobile didn't have the truck line and the like, but when it came to the car, the Cutlass outsold the car line of Chevrolet for a couple or three years. Very popular. Speaker 1: And did Oldsmobile finally sort of seek you out because of pressure--more pressure? Or did they see market opportunity? Or what was it? Speaker 2: You know, I wish I had the answer to that. I have suspicions. I really don't know. I think Oldsmobile was the most aggressive of all the divisions. I know that much. Even down to retailing. I mean they pioneered a lot of ideas. They were the engineering of the GM [General Motors] industry--automobile manufacturers. In fact, they came out with the rocket 88 engine [Oldsmobile Eighty-Eight] that ended up being the block for--in a larger since for Cadillac. I mean they were just--they were just on the ball. Very progressive. I suspect--I don't know this for a fact, but I have strong suspicions and justification for it because when I started pushing the other divisions to open the doors to minorities, it was a long time before even Buick accepted them. A couple of years, and I kept pressing. Cadillac was out of reach. Nothing was gonna happen. They weren't ready, and they were so powerful in the division that even the chairman of the board didn't wanna buck them, but it came to pass. When GM had--owned agencies, they couldn't tell them who not to sell them to. So one of the five agencies went to--I was GM's favorite guy. I did a lot of things for them nationally and internationally. Image and the like, and I used to do a lot of little things, cut tapes for them here and there showing that they were not biased. And they offered opportune--I'm just all about--you know what must have gone on. Story_ID: 201842 Speaker 1: --Mentioned the support that a few gave me. They opened doors enough--wide enough. Not that we--I did not have opposition. They--but it was wide enough for us to be successful, and we ended up being in a short time--we took an agency that I learned was losing tons of money when it was Ray Oldsmobile. I didn't know I bought a loser, but we turned that thing around, and within oh a year, a few months, we out of some forty agencies in the Midwest or so in which twenty were in the greater Chicago [Illinois], we were probably fourth or fifth most profitable dealership, and we did a lot of things right, and that made it all happen. The toughy really was--oh pardon me. And some of the things I ran into we never did overcome. There were those that just could not bring themselves to buy and patronize a black business, and proof of that is right now in the so-called black community, you don't see any black guys in business. None. Guess who's in business there? Arabs and everybody else. Now white Americans are not in the community any longer as business people. We frightened the hell out of them about it. Why are they in our neighborhood? You know, we went through that period too. Story_ID: 201843 Speaker 1: The first day in business though was so traumatic. Here it was rumored in this dealership when Ray and his staff walked out into the shop to say that they had sold the company to this guy, black guy from--colored guy from St. Louis [Missouri]. It shocked them. And Maury [Lyons] felt it would happen. But GM [General Motors] had no idea about it--they just not aware of racism. Most people aren't 'til it really hits them, and as I stood there, Ray said, "These are the new owners." He had a lot of guilt too 'cause he owed money to these people, and I think we agreed that he would make his announcement. I think Maury said to him, "When you make your announcement, you have sold the dealership, then leave." Not the entire building but in the meeting. Now we're standing in the middle of a service department after 5:30 in the evening. All the mechanics were there whispering and talking among themselves. You can imagine what they were saying, and Maury sat there and told me, "You may have some problems. You're a salesman. Let's see how good you are." He challenged me. He said, "If they walk out, Al, you're done. There's no way for you to put this together piece by piece. You gotta have experienced mechanics to work on these cars." And he pointed out how important it was that I really--that I really sell these people on staying. And I never (laughter) shall forget the moment. I was frightened. And I said to them--I gave them my background, and I told them I knew something about management. That I wanna assure them we were gonna be successful, but I needed them. So one of the guys was very open as some can be and ruthless. He really had his hatred. And he said, "Well fellow, I'm gonna look for another job. I am not about to work for a nigger. My family is dependent on what I earn here. And I don't think you're gonna make it." And he looked around at the other mechanics and I was--I began to--I knew I was losing. Story_ID: 201844 Speaker 1: So then I put up a plea about the risk of pioneering and what they could help me do. That what would be different in my operation would be that we're unionized, but I would set up a profit sharing program over and above their pension which union pensions were robbery in those days. The union was robbing the people blind, and I got their interest. And they began to question, what do you mean profit sharing?" And I pointed out what profit sharing meant and how we would take these profits and place it in their accounts. And how we would divide it. How we would equate it. I had met a man prior to that. His name was McCabe, "M-C-C-A-B-E". He's still in business. His dad ran it then. They were investment counselors if you will. Heaven help them, but I'm still with them. Anyway, he talked about--we had talked about it a little. And I got him to join us later but--he came into the meeting about forty minutes later and talked about how profit sharing works and that the taxing situation. As long as that--we didn't take the money out and the participant that worked didn't take the money out, they would not have to pay taxes on the profits and the like and how they could possibly grow. I think that was one way. There was a strong woman that was the office manager. And I--you know, women are something. I think that's the motherhood in women. She knew I was sweating this thing out, and I met her a little earlier by going through the business office and I think she's the only one of two people that knew what was happening. The managers--top managers were going with him [Ray Oldsmobile] anyway other than one or two of them in the sales department. And anyway, that--she said that she wasn't gonna leave. She wasn't about to leave. She'd been there when May Oldsmobile owned it and when Ray bought it she was there, and that she wanted to stay there and retire. And she gave her impression of what she thought of this new guy named Al Johnson. And you could tell we were winning. You could tell in their faces and then they'd buzz each other, talk to each other. "Well, we're not leaving, just wait." You could see how people were talking. You could tell the air was changing, but that was a frightening experience. I don't think I've ever been as frightened as I was at that moment. And the reason was that everything I owned, even the loan on my boat (laughter) was a founder's deal from a bank in St. Louis [Missouri]. And I knew that what effect this would have on the future of others getting into the industry. I have never, never been that frightened, never in my life. Speaker 2: I can imagine that. Speaker 1: I never, you know, everything I owned was gone. Speaker 2: And had you come prepared to talk about the profit sharing? Or was that just something that came out? Speaker 1: No. I had thought about it. I had thought about it. What's gonna make me different? You know, the first thing would come in your mind and not just being me. Okay, what the hell have you got to offer? And, you know, and I--you gotta think--I mean you would think of it also. You'd wanna know, what makes me so different from the others? So I had to have something. Story_ID: 201845 Speaker 1: So how was that first year internally? Wasn't it a--it was still a struggle right? You had to win over bit by bit? No? Speaker 2: I brought in a guy from St. Louis [Missouri] named--from an Oldsmobile agency that worked with me, Ivan McClain. Ivan was a good service manager, and I brought another friend of mine that was a boater friend of mine. He was white. That--we were very close. His wife and all of their sisters and brothers and they were at one time racers. They were after, Leo [ph.] and I got together along with some others. And it came--and a relationship came out of the harbor in St. Louis, Clifton Terrace. He had a boat also. He worked as a sales manager for a Oldsmobile agency in Alton, Illinois which was near the harbor where we met, and I brought him from St. Louis to help me weather the storm. I brought--the first day I had two whites with me, a service manager ready to move in and take over and then I had Leo. He was quite an actor (laughter). He came along, and he was playing a role of giving--looking like we had some stability. Those were things that, you know, that helped us. And so there were some whites there with experience, you know, in their thinking, and Ivan took over the service department the very next day 'cause the guy that was service manager said he didn't wanna work for me. The assistant service manager, Ivan did his homework and kept him. It just started working. It just started--it was like magic. Leo and his big concept--he's dead now but I loved it. He and I were so close. We traveled many times together. (Laughter) I can think of many fond memories of our relationship and his wife. They had never been exposed to people of color, and after a while, you better not say nothing about Al Johnson (laughter). Leo would (laughter) wanna shoot you, right, and they just helped to open the doors of that agency. Speaker 1: Now what role also did Maury [Lyons] play? And then what--was Virgil McKnight was that--was he-- Speaker 2: No Virgil was an administrator at the hospital [Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) hospital, okay, but Maury, what role did he play vis-a-vis. You know, he was-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) he was motor holdings division. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his job was to service and keep in--and you know, they want their money. Okay, those were loans to the dealers. And his job through the years is to try to keep them as successful as possible so they can pay General Motors back and to protect the assets. They had the accounting division in that office. They would go out and check inventory to be sure (laughter) you're not gonna--knowing you're gonna go broke, you're gonna bleed the place. They had all the, all the protection and it was a big outfit. Story_ID: 201846 Speaker 1: Now do you ever think that security--were you ever--because you know a lot of times when blacks buy at places, the clients disappear. So are you saying that they--people didn't disappear and they didn't go to another dealer? Speaker 2: Only believe it or not, based on my memory, and who I considered the clients, with any history of being there, I don't think I lost any whites of any note that had been doing business because the way we were able to tell, there's a file of your service records. When you buy a car there's a file there. When you come in for service there's a file there. I don't think we ever lost any of the whites, but we lost some blacks. Story_ID: 201847 Speaker 1: So but you, you--it seems like, okay, you hit it, and you just went up this way. The only scary moment was that first day. Is that really true? Were there other things that where you had--there were challenges in that business. Speaker 2: I had such--my mentors like--and I hate to say--call Maury [Lyons] my mentor, but he was the guy that handled, you know, the financing, his division, but by golly, I don't think anybody. I don't think he's ever put as much into this agency. I don't think he had the time to do it any other time. He worked so hard over the call of duty. He was determined that I win. Speaker 1: But why do you think he was determined? What did he see in you? And then I want you to comment on his whole thing about be a good student and what he taught you in that whole way or what you were taught. Speaker 2: I think his motivation surely was that here was the first minority. And you can bet the corporation had said to the division, he cannot--he must not fail. I'm sure. That would have to be. It has to be that way. He cannot--he cannot fail. I'm sure from the top to the head of motor holders division. I can remember it very well. I'm sure they told Maury's boss, he must not fail. I had too much--I had, I had a lot of attention from Maury. And when I was--then out of my, the period of fear that I could make it or not, he told me that I was the best--one of the best students he'd ever had. Speaker 1: What did he teach you though? Speaker 2: The basic things that makes a automobile dealership successful. When a corporation as large--it doesn't have to be as large as General Motors mind you. But wherever a corporation has a history of what dealers are successful, what they do, and what others in--that fail, what they do or don't do, is the reason for their failure. There's a way to measure how well you're doing, and it's simple. For example, at one point I looked at the body shop. We were running something like fifty thousand dollars a month in the body shop. We had a huge body shop. And looking at what the top 15 percent successful body shops were doing, in paints and material, their cost measuring somewhat the same volume. I was spending three times as much, eating up all that profit in the body shop. I said, (unclear) there were so many reasons the other guy fail. Then Maury said, "Al, here are the figures. Shops that are doing nationally are doing somewhat your business in the top 15 percent. These are their costs. How can yours--what's happening?" So I said, "I don't know." He said, "It's simple. They're taking the paint home. Working in the evenings. You're repairing a lot of cars that you don't know about Al. You've got to get some control." Story_ID: 201848 Speaker 1: And just as it was in that area--I'll tell you another thing that happened to us in that body shop. I know why Ray [Oldsmobile] lost money because his dad had an unending amount of money. No end to it, very rich, and he kept his son in business (laughter). They were hiring--what'd they call 'em in those days? Where policemen in accidents will call and let you--and get the car sent to certain body shops. I'll recommend you. They called them oh gosh. Bird dogs. They can come from many sources. And you gotta give them a percentage. Well the shop was giving more to these--and the profit was all eaten up by rewarding these guys for the business. This was crazy even for a dummy like me in the business. A job running up to a thousand dollars hypothetically, the bird dog fee was a hundred bucks. That's right off the top. So Maury [Lyons] said to me, "Al, if you're in the best shop, who do you think you make off of? What's your profit margin going to be?" "I don't know." He said, "In your entire business, if on gross sales you can make 8 percent profit, you're gonna be with the top five percent, not 15 percent in making money over sales." Based on the volume of sales. He said, "In a body shop there's nowhere near even 6 percent. How you can give somebody 10 percent off the top is a loser. Ray never knew that." He said, "If you can't get that body shop in shape Al, I suggest you get rid of it. It's a cancer. You're never gonna make money." And boy did I clean that up right quick. We got the parts department to have you sign for a half a pint or a pint of paint. We figured out what it takes to spray a fender--a quarter pound--and we started issuing it out in small containers. And where we didn't, you'd have to take the paint, the quart, the pint, cap it again and take it back to the parts department. And they controlled paints and materials. Same way with all the other material, bonding and sandpaper. Just, we knew what it took. That's where my background in--that [Dr.] Fagen taught me, time in motion status and examining utilization of supplies. That's just one example. There were many other areas that they thought they were making money. Handling millions but never making a profit. Story_ID: 201849 Speaker 1: So you had the Oldsmobile dealership [in Chicago, Illinois] for how long before you got your Cadillac? Cadillac came--no. But was-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You have the date. Speaker 1: But first the dealership. The dealership you got in '60 [1960]-- Speaker 2: Seven [1967]. Speaker 1: Seven [1967]. Speaker 2: October 1st, 1967. Speaker 1: But then in 1968 you were talking about the black dealers. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were going broke. We had to find a solution. Speaker 1: And so how many came--you were the first. But how many came in after? Speaker 2: You know, well I-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) that's what I don't understand all-- Speaker 2: I'll tell you what happened. Everybody then had to move. Here General Motors is in, Ford is in. Every company had to move. And within those corporate structures some were not moving like in General Motors. At that time, you couldn't get a Chevrolet. See after October 1 [1967], in the interest of the president [Lyndon Baines Johnson] and Martin's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] interest, and all that publicity going all over the world, they started moving. Chrysler had to find a way. American Motors had to find a way, but within the corporate structure, as an example, look how many years it took to get a Cadillac agency, and the only reason it happened then in my thinking, had it not been for the government threatening General Motors that they had to get out of the retail business as manufacturers. I wouldn't have got the Cadillac agency at that time, but they had to sell. Speaker 1: So that decision in six--it was six--wait, '68 [1968] is when--was that when the black dealers came together? No. Speaker 2: Well they came together-- Speaker 1: I thought '68 [1968]--'68 [1968] is when the government said, you have to get out of the--it was the factory. You have to allow-- Speaker 2: I don't think that happened. The pressure didn't go on General Motors to sell factory stores 'til about I guess some time in 1970. Those were pressures through the antitrust laws. That they can't be competing with their dealers, being the manufacturer and selling cars in their competition to the dealers. It wasn't right. Speaker 1: Now the other question I have for you. Who was--who were dealers at that point? Who were these, you know, people who got dealerships? What was the-- Speaker 2: Oh, I can give it. It's right in here. I can give you all the names. Speaker 1: No, no. But I'm even saying not even-- Speaker 2: Not who? Speaker 1: Not, but who--like even if you take black and white. Who were these business people? The people who would sort of qualify? Or were they--did they come from all kinds of different-- Speaker 2: They came from every vocation. I can remember mechanics now. Got a mechanical background. Getting groups together to help finance them going into business, and I hope--I said, "You're asking me for an answer? I don't wanna make enemies." And I said, "I don't wanna be asked no questions about who." But there was a group. And the guy was gonna run a dealership was a mechanic. And I told him, "If you put your money in this, you're doomed"--I used Maury's [Maury Lyons] expression. "You're doomed for failure." A mechanic. There was no way for him to become a dealer. Story_ID: 201850 Speaker 1: Now, do you remember who the others--these early black dealers were that came in around after--you're the first right? Speaker 2: Boy, you're going back a number of years, but yes, I can give you some. Speaker 1: Just some. Speaker 2: I've got the records in there. Speaker 1: But just some. Some names. Speaker 2: Well, Adam McFadden in Los Angeles, California. Ernie Banks and Bob Nelson [Robert H. Nelson, Jr.], I forgot his name, gosh. Nelson and Banks Ford [Chicago, Illinois]. They got in early. [Nathan] Conyers in Detroit [Michigan] came in shortly thereafter. I'm talking about the very early guys. Let's see. That was with all in less than sixty days. There were about ten. Everybody was rushing to put a guy in business, and they all went broke. Speaker 1: All of them except you. Speaker 2: Conyers held up. I think Conyers is still in business there. Boy was he a good student. He was bright. He was one of those that was smart enough to listen. He'd pick you, pick your brains, and I think he came by way of the Ford dealership program--development program [dealer development program]. So it was some basis, but I'll bet you that I don't know any the first--of the first ten of us that made it. Some took longer to go broke. A year, some a year and a half, but most much less, and then some were really broke and the corporation didn't wanna give up on them because they thought--so much negative publicity and these companies subsidized a number of us. I mean knowing we were broke. We were eating up their money, not our investment. Our investment was gone. Many times. In other words, they weren't gonna get their money out of the loan. We started operating on their money. Our 25 percent or less was gone. Speaker 1: Did you--so really the auto industry really sort of--it is an example of an industry going out of its way, whatever the dynamics were, to help blacks in business. Whatever the dynamics. Speaker 2: Well let-- Speaker 1: Sort of? Speaker 2: The automobile business is a highly competitive business. And there was no way that they were going to--one company would have minorities in it and they didn't have any. That just wasn't--to them it was--had greater consequences than we knew. Story_ID: 201851 Speaker 1: Now tell me then the Cadillac. So you're doing Oldsmobile and that's fine. What makes someone wanna get--and then, you know, this whole antitrust suit happened. So it opens things up, which really what you're saying is that before that antitrust suit you would never ever be able to get a Cadillac dealership. Speaker 2: Well I'm not saying that. In time that would've changed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just like other divisions began to come around in General Motors. Finally we got a Chevrolet dealership. Then a year later we got Pontiac agencies had minority dealers. The longest holdout was Cadillac, and I said, unless--knowing the folks that ran the Cadillac division and the power that they had and influence over the cooperation. They weren't interested in minorities. That was such a closed thing. See most of those guys as managers in the corporate structure they ended up getting the cream of the crop. They ended up getting a dealership. (Unclear) one of 'em resigned as vice president and got one. And that--I shouldn't name him, but--the store that I got was already programmed to go to somebody when they knew they were going out, but then Mac Ward [ph.] and those guys said, there's no way. You're gonna have to have one of the five stores go to a minority. You don't have any representation. Speaker 1: Now what behind the scenes maneuver- maneuvering did you have to do to get your Cadillac dealership? Speaker 2: It was tough, and of course there was a lot of opposition. Again one of the factory men wanted it for himself, and when the second one came due, one of the blacks who was gonna work with the factory guy as partner, quietly he worked for me. I had to go fight to see that he got the agency. The one in New York in the Bronx. I raised all kind of sand to get him the agency. So I had a little influence after a while. You know, I had done a lot of things for the corporation, and so when I started raising sand and exposing the fact that they were gonna lock one of my guys that worked for me that had been promised the agency that I got with one of the general managers that now all of a sudden he wasn't gonna get it in New York. They had to close down most of New York. I think there were four in New York owned by the factory, and I raised all kind of sand, and the president of the corporation said, "Al Johnson is right." And made every--and Cadillac was such an egotistical group. Nobody changed nothing there. They were who we are. Well I bucked the establishment (laughter). And when I first became a Cadillac dealer, they did not make it easy for me. Speaker 1: So it was much different than the Oldsmobile. Speaker 2: Oldsmobile was open handed, and they were glad to have me. Cadillac division wasn't too happy 'cause they--I spoiled their plan, and then I fought against them in New York to do what they wanted. Story_ID: 201852 Speaker 1: So did you--but here you had landed the prize because, you know, both among blacks and whites, but definitely blacks Cadillac was--well it was Lincoln or Cadillac--but Cadillac, you know, it was always--but Cadillac was like the champagne. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were the number one luxury car in the world. Royalty would buy Cadillac--had to have a Cadillac even though they owned Rolls Royce. They had that mystique. Standard of the world and everybody wanted a Cadillac. I sold many to Arabs and royalty in the Middle East. Shipped them 'cause they couldn't get 'em. Speaker 1: Now were you located in Tinley Park [Illinois] at that point? Speaker 2: Oh no, no. I stayed at that store from June 1, 1970--'70 [1970]--I started '71 [1971]. I built a place in Orland [Park, Illinois] and Tinley Park in 1970--opened the doors in the fall showing of the 1977 model in 1976. Speaker 1: Now how did you choose Tinley Park? Orland Park and Tinley Park? Speaker 2: With the help of the marketing department of the [Chicago] Tribune. I developed a good relationship with the advertising 'cause I did a lot of advertising, and one of the guys that--they usually charge you for doing studies, and he wanted to help me, and I said to him, "Tell me where I should go." And they have a division that makes studies like that constantly, and he drew a circle around that area. Near Harlem [Avenue] and 159th Street. So I bought west of 159th between LaGrange Road and Harlem and started automobile row. You go out there now everybody's out there, everybody. It's like automobile street, and folks give me the credit for being one of the pioneers. The credit (laughter) doesn't go to Al Johnson. It really goes to the Tribune. Speaker 1: But, you know, that's what I was gonna ask earlier about the role of advertising and who was representing you? Were you dealing directly? Did you have an ad agency and what, you know. Speaker 2: I went through an ad agency to some degree. At the time Cadillac, as well as every division of Oldsmobile as well, had a Cadillac division, ad division. Association they called it. Every division had that. And you paid your share based on units. So you were taxed on that. Story_ID: 201853 Speaker 1: And did--when did you first make--when you made your first million what year was it when you made your first million? Speaker 2: Well according to Maury [Lyons] 'cause hell I didn't know it. Hell (laughter). According to Maury I made it in--I'll tell you what really happened. At Oldsmobile, when the situation--when the opportunity came up about getting the Cadillac, one of the factory stores, I said to Maury, "Do you think I've got enough money to do this?" And he said, "You don't know what the corporation's net worth is?" I said, "Maury, I haven't been concerned about that. I've been concerned with learning the business and developing a profit. I haven't thought about that." I said, "I wanna know do I have enough money to buy that big store over there on 71st Street." He said, "Al, you are a multimillionaire." He said, "Don't worry about the money. You've got the money to buy it. Don't even think about it." 'Cause I never, I never, I never thought about net worth at that time. I was just too busy trying to run a good operation, maximizing the profits. I really never thought about it, my net worth. So the guy from St. Louis [Missouri] said, (unclear) was running a good store. I was real proud. Speaker 1: So what year did you feel that you hit your stride you yourself? And was there I mean a--like, you know? Or you felt like you hit your stride from the beginning? I'm just--I'm asking that because I--you know, you said, I was too busy. Were you civically active during that time? Or were you really concentrating-- Speaker 2: No, let me say this. After I thought I was learning the business and using some of the things I learned from hospital administration to shore it up, I used the same rule that I did at the hospital. You can't run three thousand employees and try to do it all yourself and manage it. I had learned early in that field the most you can operate or deal with directly and do a good job, six to nine people based on the kind of product you're producing, but that's the most. The skills lie in the fact that you are training people to do what you feel is necessary to be successful. You must recognize you're not running a corner confectionary store where you can take money out of one pocket and pay it out of the other. You gotta train and develop people to take your job. Story_ID: 201854 Speaker 1: And that's the way I operated. I spent with [Operation] Breadbasket in those days. I gave them at least thirty hours a week. This was a source of generating business for me. It was a thing called the telephone. I trained the management staff how to do business my way, the mechanics, and then I had in this crazy time, I had to get out and let people meet me. Sitting in that store wasn't gonna get it, and I knew that in time that being dependent upon the white successful businessmen with the neighborhood changing, I had to think in terms of we're gonna have a different market and that I had to win more people in the community to buy cars. Some I knew I could never gain. But there was new blood out there. And all of a sudden there was a guy that came to Chicago [Illinois] to do business named Al Johnson and everybody heard about him. Even my billboards, I think the technique in the early years aided us in the community knowing where we are and the location of those billboards. I used an expression, "Join Operation Switch to Al Johnson Oldsmobile," and it worked. And people would say, "What do you mean by that?" And you'd tell them, "From wherever you're buying switch to Al Johnson Oldsmobile." Nothing super clever about it, but it did get your name out in front of the public. Civic organizations, I took some leadership roles in them. I worked hard in the community, never changed. I worked real hard in the community. Speaker 2: So what were the organizations that you were involved in? Some of them besides-- Speaker 1: Operation Breadbasket and when it became PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] I was also there as one of the founders of PUSH. I worked with--on the board of St. Bernard's Hospital [Chicago, Illinois]. They were in the neighborhood if you remember. I worked with Ryder Cup of Illinois where--as president and chief barker. I gave away vans to a lot of the institutions that were doing something for children--the children's charities. I gave some time to La Rabida [Children's Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] on their board. I hate to think of all the boards that I worked on because I worked on many. And then as officers--as an officer in many of these charitable organizations. I gave some of my time. Story_ID: 201855 Speaker 1: Now your political involvement, what did it--when did it start? Did it start before Harold Washington? Speaker 2: Oh God yes! Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's how Harold got there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Politically, you had a very strong person in this town [Chicago, Illinois] that was--he and I became great friends. And that was [Edwin] Bill Berry of the [Chicago] Urban League. Bill was the strong upper-middle class minority leadership that had outstanding relationship with the top corporations in Chicago [Illinois] as you know. I was just looking at some pictures a minute ago. The chairman of the board of commonwealth, you know they were closely related. Bill had the contact. So one day he and I--he invited me over to a meeting that was at the campus of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and this guy was there talking. We were concerned about, how do we get more political representation. At the time, we had maybe two aldermen on the West Side with all that population over there. Some persons weren't too far from being racketeers with the leadership. They had owned them. The, one of the black aldermen they murdered over there during--earlier, about a year or so earlier, and we talked about what we could do to make some changes. We weren't thinking about--ever thinking about getting the fifth floor, being mayor. Not at that time. I think I've got some brochures of PACI [Political Action Committee of Illinois] that I'll let you see, and we just started working. We attracted the middle and upper-middle income professional people into PACI, and it just kept growing. Everybody you can think of politically maybe nine times out of ten came from PACI days joined us. [HM] Senator [Carol Moseley] Braun had many meetings here and other places on campus. Cliff Kelly, Davis before he was thought to ever being a congressman, he wanted to be alderman. All that crowd. What is the name Smith? No not Smith. Art Turner. We just enhanced the numbers both in the [Chicago] City Council as well as in Springfield [Illinois]. In the house [Illinois General Assembly] alone we had not made any real, at that time, early months, but we did later on get into the senate in Springfield, but we got numbers. PACI did. We had a rule that no political person having a political job by appointment. No elected official, I'm sorry. That's, that was the language, could be an officer in PACI. They could belong, but they could not be an officer. Story_ID: 201856 Speaker 1: Harold [Washington] worked with PACI [Political Action Committee of Illinois] in the early days before he was dreaming about being mayor. And when they first thought about running after [Richard J.] Daley died, we weren't ready, and our--PACI's thinking and my thinking--we did not think Harold could win then. As you know, it was a total failure, but then in 1982, PACI was well--had a real strong organization and we all came out to work with Harold. And I remember the day that we met he was congressman. And he thought he was setting a parameter in which it would never happen. I never will forget. He said one thing: "We must bring at least a hundred thousand more registered black voters, but he wasn't thinking about leaving. He liked his job in Washington, [D.C.]. Come here and run for mayor? And that we had to raise two hundred thousand dollars. Can you imagine such--small sums? But you know the story behind that. At that time [HM Alvin] Boutte [Sr.] opened a bank up in the boardroom there and we had meetings there with regularity. Instead of raising two hundred thousand dollars, we raised well over a million for the campaign. Of course, it was unbelievable, and they doubled the amount of money they--for the--I mean voters, registered voters. Story_ID: 201857 Speaker 1: You were saying you were having these meetings and everything, and when did you see--when was there viewed an opportunity and why? Because you had had the whole thing--maybe I'm jumping ahead because you're operating with PACI [Political Action Committee of Illinois] on the '73 [1973], you know, '74 [1974]-- Speaker 2: Right, way back there. Speaker 1: Right. And so was it viewed an opportunity with the death of Mayor [Richard J.] Daley? I mean was that sort of view? 'Cause, you know, at that point you have [HistoryMaker] Wilson Frost, you know, who was a member of the finance committee. I'm just--I'm trying to understand and get some perspective (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Well, I think the sequence is like this. When Daley died, Harold [Washington] had some concerns about running for mayor. And most of us thought the decision to run--had not prepared ourselves for him to run. And that it would be--I felt it would be a waste of resources. So I didn't push hard to make PACI go out for him at that time. And there was a chance for him to win, and there wasn't. All I imagined is our little money for him to run would go down the drain. I guess Harold with his political mind felt it would be a good test run and it was worth risking, but I didn't think it was worth risking the kind of money to even run a little test run. I wanted to win when we were ready and enough was put into it, time. So, Daley was--and then there was--what's his name judge--he was a judge finally, ended up in Daley's spot. (Unclear) is. I forgot his name. He just died recently. The Mayor [of Chicago] behind Daley [Michael Anthony Bilandic]. Speaker 1: The mayor behind Daley. Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember. Speaker 1: Oh Yates? It was not Yates. The old--he was very old? No, no, no. Was he very old when he died? Speaker 2: I guess he was-- Speaker 1: No, no. I'm thinking of the wrong person. This one was pretty-- Speaker 2: Well it's a shame I can't remember his name. Speaker 1: --Late nineties. Was he in his late nineties? Speaker 2: No, no. He was--he ran--he was mayor for four years. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, you're talking about Bilandic. Speaker 2: Bilandic. Speaker 1: I'm sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: That's the man. Speaker 1: I'm so sorry. Speaker 2: He was the man after-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: After the mayor died. And then we supported Jane [Margaret Byrne] community thought that she on some occasions that she'd--they call it betrayal. She got in bad with the machine. That was why we gave her our support to begin with. So then the move was on for us to look for a black mayoral candidate, and the first one we thought about with a great reputation was Warren Bacon. Warren had been a fighter against the machine all his political life, and Warren, so the story goes, his wife [Mary Lou Warren] didn't want him to run, and then Warren told us he was not going--going to to be a candidate. So then the scramble began to--for us to look for somebody to run. Many of the activist--activists groups got busy getting their voices in, and they were very helpful in the campaign a number of those groups. And they came up with Harold. Harold then made his demand what it would require before he'd run. And we surpassed as you know his request. Well we lucked out, got enough votes that Harold was mayor. Harold was dedicated to cleaning up the city. And Harold was a smart politician. He was smart enough to know that he needed the best people around him. This was a new venture even for him, and he tried his best to get the best. It was--I think most of the top selection list, the best we had to offer. The best without a doubt, and the disappointing thing was when a rebel group got busy to push Frost[Timothy Evans] and demand, in the emergency election, a win against [HistoryMaker Eugene] Sawyer. And Daley-- Speaker 1: You mean, [Timothy] Evans. Speaker 2: Evans, they tried to get Frost to run. Speaker 1: Oh they did get Frost--okay. Speaker 2: They tried to get Frost to run. He turned it down, but Evans they got his interest, and a number of them went along. Story_ID: 201858 Speaker 1: Did you--do you remember how you felt the evening when Harold Washington was elected [mayor of Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Just elated. We knew it was close. We weren't sure we won it, and that was a great celebration when Harold won. He was able to attract--the campaign attracted many whites as you know, many. Had it not been for all the communities making a contribution he couldn't've won that election. The lakefront whites did their share. Went overboard for Harold. He was smart in getting cooperation from David Orr and the Hispanic community. There are just a number of names in the Hispanic community that came forward to work in his campaign. The next big issue during Harold's time was that Harold couldn't get anything done. In the cou- [Chicago] City Council, nothing. They had more votes, and that's when PACI and a number of organizations got behind Harold, Harold's ideas and let's change. The city council had more represent- representative coverage, and they did real well. They got the Hispanic community as well as Hyde Park [neighborhood, Chicago, Illinois] and the rest of the lakefront, all the way north to the city limits to Evanston [Illinois]. It was just a--it was a beautiful campaign. Amazing how as bigoted as Chicago [Illinois] is, that you had all these groups working together. Speaker 1: And it was really in many ways independent politics at its best. Speaker 2: Oh at its very best. At its very best. Speaker 1: Now when you look back on the, you know, Harold's tenure, what would you say he did right? And what things do you think were fatal errors? Speaker 2: (Laughter) oh boy, fatal errors. Had Harold not died, he'd been the mayor again. I don't think Harold--Harold had such good people around him. And when we were able to outcount--get the majority in the city council and Harold was the kind of guy to listen to all the groups, and as he often said, he wasn't a black mayor for the black community. He was mayor for all the people in every community. And that's what he practiced. He did not practice any form of racism or favoritism, none. If he made any errors they were mighty small, and I worked for Harold as a dollar a year person in economic development, and I worked him twelve hours a day. As you know, I had offices on the sixth floor. The enthusiasm of the employees there. Very few people worked less than ten hours a day in their administrative setup. They were excited. They were learning and they would think they were bringing about change. They took a lot of pride in his meetings when he said, the one thing they need to be certain of, however long that he was on the fifth floor, that government would be in the open. Story_ID: 201859 Speaker 1: Now when you--this was also probably an exciting time in your life in many ways. It's different--it opened up new vistas in some respects. Right? Okay. Because it's different. You had been successful as a businessman, but this was politics at that level, you know, or being involved sort of. You know, some people say, they'd like to make king. They'd rather be the kingmaker than the king. So in many ways you were the kingmaker. And so I'm wondering what you would say that--what things did you learn out of that? What was exciting to you about it? What, when you look at that period of your life-- Speaker 2: Well first of all, I was never trying to be kingmaker, never. I was--people would say that was my motive, but it wasn't. I--even though I worked at city hall, I tried my very best to be off center stage, but very supportive about what I was doing without fanfare. That's what I tried to do there. We had some exciting people come on board. Professor Robert Mere [ph.]. Rob had so much loyalty to making change and to Harold [Washington] and we worked together as a real good team. Rob and I stayed that close until he died. We were say about the excitement. It was exciting. I was doing something that was mainly--I was there in fact due to the fact that I had a business background, I think my job was to make downtown business community feel safer, and I think I was that businessperson that was part of Chicago United which is the business community, as you know, with all the major corporations. I was the person they could talk to and felt at ease at first. After that, it didn't take long for them to feel comfortable, and they found out that the--things were not like the old days that you had to get it from somebody. Or right from [Richard J.] Daley or--you didn't have to do that with Harold. Those departments would be receptive, and if it was good for Chicago [Illinois], then it could happen. One of the best things--one of the strong things that Harold supported was the expansion of the airport [O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois]. And when Harold became mayor, Jane [Byrne] had started some of that, and they, the airlines felt that oh my God, we got a new mayor, and he might hamper the progress and our plans that we have on board. And they said it. And then, I never will forget, one of the airlines' rep came to see me, and he kept saying, "Well you're a business man you know, and it isn't just political with you." That kind of approach, and I assured them that Harold then would appoint somebody just on that progress to see that it worked. And that's exactly what he did. And I was sure about many of the projects that Harold worked on. Story_ID: 201860 Speaker 1: And what, what do you think of--what do you think when you look at the City [of Chicago, Illinois] now and, you know, of the Harold [Washington] legacy is what I'm saying? Those years. Because why is it so--I want your comment on that. Oh are you comfortable? Do you feel comfortable commenting here? Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't see anything wrong with me giving my opinion. Not at all. I think that--it's like Billy Sunday says in that song. Even Billy Sunday couldn't tear Chicago [Illinois] down. Even the era of politicians and their method of exploitation can't tear this city down. It's strange. I can't understand it. In our day, everything had to go out on bid, everything, every contract. I've forgotten the small amount, the minimum, but it was a small figure that did not have to be bidded upon. I've forgotten those figures. Speaker 1: Was it $5,000? Or $50,000? It was something-- Speaker 2: Something small. It could have been as much as $25,000 or $50,000, which was nothing when you're spending a billion dollars. Anyway, I think there's been some change in that. I think the price we're paying for some things would have been better to have been openly bidded and not maneuvered. I think under Harold and [HistoryMaker Mayor Eugene] Sawyer tried to carry on all of the plans he had promised, all of the things that Harold[Washington] had on the drawing board, Sawyer was committed to follow it to the letter. I think Chicago right now is--has a crisis on its hands. I think the city is broke. I think shortly this will prove my point. I think the rating agencies will--has will further change our rating to a much lower one. Meaning a higher risk in doing business, and a higher price we'll have to pay for services, for bond money to borrow. I think that's something we must fear. And again, if Billy Sunday couldn't tear it down, neither can politics tear it down. I don't think we are in such a shape that we can't recover. Won't be easy, but we will. Story_ID: 201861 Speaker 1: Now you have been involved--I just would like you to touch upon some of your other business activities over the years. The breadth of them. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Just a little bit. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's been so many. I think another barrier I took pride in breaking down, and the only reason I raise it is that this was a government entity. Some years ago I thought about racing, and I discovered that racing was controlled by a commission and that this was a privilege of the public, administered and protected. That a commission granted the dates that a organization could have racing whether it's thoroughbreds or harness racing. So we had a legislator named [Richard] Newhouse [Jr.], and I talked to Newhouse. I said, "You know, why can't some business group for the minority community have racing dates. What do you guys do about that?" And if you ever met Newhouse you would first make a request, you don't know whether he's thinking about doing anything about it. He goes off and you may hear from him two weeks later. He's thought it out. So next call I got from, he said, "You're right. You're entitled. Let's go to work on it." We spent close to three years. And finally after fighting those three years, we got racing dates. And we had three groups and they got three tracks. They had to give some of those dates to these groups. And that was a fascinating business. Profits were--I had Sportsman's Park [Chicago, Illinois], and in those days in the '70s [1970s] the average handle was a million, six hundred thousand dollars a day. Track loaded on the weekend, could have crowds eighteen to twenty-five thousand. It was an enjoyable experience. And guess who I had to carry with me to learn something about the business? There again there was a guy named Maury Lyons and Bill Kelly attorney that had worked with me through the years, and I mentioned that Maury Lyons was my mentor. He carried the, the knowledge and skills forward, and the reason we were successful there was because Maury's watchdog, Maury Lyons and we made money. Today the tracks are empty because you got off-track betting, and it wouldn't be something I'd be interested in now because unless we get the same privileges as off-track but you can't. That's unthinkable. Story_ID: 201862 Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about your involvement in cable television? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And that-- Speaker 2: I'd be happy to. The reason we got into--involved in cable was the fact that one guy, one person from the business community had the vision (laughter) and that is chairman of the board of Independent Bank [sic, Independence Bank], Al Boutte [HM Alvin Boutte, Sr.]. Al had an idea that this was a coming thing and that we should try to get into it and get one of the stations. That was his thought. One of the channels. I was invited up at a summer home he has up in Wisconsin at the time, French I'm pretty sure. Oh what's the name of the one famous resort? Speaker 1: Maison [ph.]? Playboy? Speaker 2: Yeah, Playboy area. Lake Geneva [Wisconsin], that's a better name for it. He had a--he had a home near there, and I went up there as his guest. So while we were there, he brought up this idea cooking breakfast. He said, "You ought to get busy and get in cable." And he sold me on it. He said, "I can't work on it right now, but I'll help you get some folks in there. I'll get [HiatoryMaker] George [Johnson] in here. We'll bring in the business community as a whole, doesn't wanna go." So then like I always do I got carried away and started working on it. Jane Byrne was the mayor, and there was a national convention[National Cable Operators Association(NCTA}] that was held in Las Vegas [Nevada], and I thought, "Well if we're gonna do this we've got to know something about the business." So I went to the convention, talked to all the key guys that's in the business in other parts of the country, and then began to dream and got the group together, and I reported to them what my findings were. None of them were working at it the way I was at the time. So I made contact with an outfit at the convention named--the company was Continental Cable. They had offices out here the suburban area, and I started working with their official folks in planning. We decided on the money, how we could get it financed and what role we would play. That's where it really started. Incidentally there were other meetings of cable groups that I attended, one in Atlanta [Georgia]. I talked to folks that were thinking about it in Cleveland [Ohio]. I traveled all around to find out. In the early years cable wasn't thought so much in the metropolitan districts, but in those areas that had peaks and valleys, in those valley areas where you couldn't get the signal, I learned that's where cable started. Seeing that the people in these areas that they could not get--pick the signal up, but had to get a cable to bring it down into their homes and the like, and that's where a lot of my knowledge came from. Visiting those sites and talking to people, trying to find out the cost of operating a station per se. I began to learn that the way they measured it is number of homes passed determines the cost of cable. They equated it from that basis. You know a lot about that as well. That's how I got hooked and involved. Story_ID: 201863 Speaker 1: But remember how you were just saying how, what your role has been in many ways that you were able to show people that they could be other than. Can you restate that? Speaker 2: I think the era that we started pioneering that we didn't--to be successful, we're not limited to being doctors or morticians, undertaking parlors, that there's a world out there that we have not been exposed to. I think the mere fact that all we had in the past--not to discredit cosmetic firms. They have played their role. Now, we're thinking in terms of directly doing business and involve and our participation in places like Wall Street, dealing with billions of dollars, not just frolics per se. We're opening the doors of that, and I think, I think that projects--projects like yours fits in very well in distant learning. I think some of your product would fit very well in universities to get a message out to inspire many more than a classroom of thirty students but millions. You need more exposure. And that's, well I, I think a real quality project that you're working on that what it can do to inspire many, many men and women to be a part of the mainstream in business in America. Story_ID: 201864 Speaker 1: Now, you know, some people say that the generation that you represent, that there was real money made and there were real institutions, and that that is lost, that is lost now and that while people may, you know, be in the Wall Streets and things, there was real money, whether it was in the cosmetics or whether it was, you know, the businesses, that there was real, real money there. And people talk about that time, or, you know, what they perceive of that time with sort of longing that we didn't have it. And it's particularly being talked about nowadays, with, you know, institutions that were built, being sold, you know, and what is left in the black community except the black church and possibly drugs. And so I want you to sort of comment on that. Speaker 2: I don't disagree with that those kinds of businesses, yes. We're losing in that area, but still, I think business opportunity is out there, not just for products, but for dollars, generating dollars to be given to other, to these businesses that we're trying to promote and sell and get them on a viable--help them to become viable, and I think, I don't think it's any--I think there is good reason to have companies like [HM John] Roger's helping us to safeguard these dollars that seeing to it that some of the pensions, the money that we call savings are there when we retire and need it. I think it's an important function. I don't wanna take away from the fact that the kind of businesses that you thought of in the past are not important 'cause they are. You're gonna need them now. Anything that provides services to the community is necessary. There's all levels of businesses through--to supply these needs. It's the corner grocery store, it's the pharmacist, it's a cosmetic corporation, it's the automobile dealer. It's all these things, but then there's another level that I think we're reaching for that we have not had in the past that's necessary to complete this. Now, about the, losing businesses to the black community. I hope I'm wrong, but I do have a strong feeling. The one--one of many reasons we're losing businesses in the black community is that the black community does not support them to the degree that they should have. They don't and did not, and now, on a lesser scale, the people that are in the black community now, everything but black people and white Americans doing business in those communities. We got a new level of person coming in here performing some services designed after the way they operated in different countries, but on a lot lesser scale. Look at them. Look at the black community businesses, look at the food markets, terrible, terrible shape, so much so that the dollars of the middle-income and above in the black community don't even--people don't spend their dollars there at all. They're looking for a better product so they buy outside the community. I think we have to collectively do a lot of things. I'm not sure in my own mind that in the future, that progress is going to be made talking about the black community and black business. I really don't think that's the answer. I think we've been a part of this great country long enough now to assimilate into the American scene as just another American. I resent and dislike the idea that when I visit colleges that blacks want their own graduation. They segregate themselves, black this, black that. I don't think that's the solution. I really don't. I don't think you will really gain anything in a capitalistic society based on racial concepts. I don't see any difference in, between a black racist and a white racist. What's the difference? All these ethnic identifications, I don't think is the smartest thing for the future, but there again, I'll be gone soon. Hell, I'm eighty-two. So what I think doesn't matter at all maybe, but I'll assure you in my own thinking, America has to become one nation without all these identifications of different groups. I think Hispanics need to mesh into American society, language and all. Story_ID: 201865 Speaker 1: What do you think black people's contribution has been to this society? Speaker 2: Tremendous. All you have to do is read history. They've been everywhere, doing many things. The story needs to be told more. I think when it comes to measuring our contribution to America, it needs to be told. The more that people learn they'll find we have really and truly have been good Americans and have made our contribution. Speaker 1: Now, when you look at the auto industry, are you happy with the progress you were the pioneer? Are you happy with the progress that you see? Is, the industry's changed in some respects, sort of, right? Speaker 2: Yes, maybe in many respects. Speaker 1: In many. So I'm wondering are you happy that you think, you know, it would be lot--thousands and thousands of Al Johnson's in time? Did you think--I mean-- Speaker 2: I know what you're asking. The concept of selling cars as we did in the last ninety years is changing. Doesn't mean that American auto that's part of a united group can't fit in. It's bigger and more consolidated. There'll be fewer dealerships inevitably, can't avoid it. The cost of doing business or getting into business. Where thirty years ago, [$]150,000 get you in the door, foot in the door, won't do anything for you. It's gonna take millions. Capital, own your own part, best financing, the amount it's just gonna take a million bucks to even be a part of a, show that--part of a top agency, just to get in. Speaker 1: So if Al Johnson were starting today, what business would he go in? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I've been somewhat concerned about doing, everything but business (laughter) in the last three years. I'm working on, right now, as you know, a casino deal, bringing a number of minority business people as well as white women as well, getting a piece of this industry. And with my income from it, I won't pay--I won't keep a nickel of it. Every dime that I make after taxes will go to some of the projects I'm working on and others. Eighty-two, what--how much more money do I need? How much more will my grandchildren need? You know, come on. Making money is no longer an interest of mine. That's hard for people that don't have any, to think about, but if they look at my career, and that in--since 1983, that I have not operated a day-to-day business myself, and I came out and worked in projects that benefited me financially, not one dime, I didn't get a dime from them. Story_ID: 201866 Speaker 1: I have two, possibly three questions left, and one is, what do you think good business--who would you--how would you define a good business person? Speaker 2: Boy, that's a rough one. How would I define a good? If I was getting down to the real true nuts and bolts and not some great philosophy, and trying to be a poet and philosophizing about it, right now, to be honest about it, I don't know. I think it's a broad question. Who's fitted for what? One's makeup has to do with what business he should be in. I do know that a businessman, to be successful, he needs to know basically the product. There are some basic things he must learn about operating a business, and to be successful, he should not be in business just for himself, but the people that help him to earn his wealth, they--it helps them to progress as well, to share the profits, is what it takes to be a good businessman. Skills alone doesn't make you good in my book. It's how you treat the people that work for you. I think that has to do with whether you're a good businessman. Good for just you making money or good--you gonna be good for the community in your pursuit for being good businessman, earning money. Is it gonna be good for the staff? Are they gonna live a little better? Are they gonna have a little more security? That to me, those facets determines a good businessman. I think it takes more than skills to be a good businessman. That's such a broad term. The average person who talks about a business--well, he must know his product. He's got to make money and he's got to watch expenses. Oh, come on. Yeah, you gotta do all those things, but a good businessman has a broader connotation in my book. Speaker 1: Now, your father [Oscar Johnson]. Do you think--what would he say if he could see you now? Or had seen-- Speaker 2: Impossible. Couldn't happen. Where he is right now, he's dumbfounded. Al lives too well, he has too much fun. He won't dedicate himself to be that successful. He's shocked. He's shocked. And without my mentors, he would be totally right. Without the names of, again, Virgil McKnight, Maury Lyons. I can just think of these people with such fondness, and Dr. Fagen, Washington University [in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]. They are the ones that took a product and made it successful. It was not my skills and ingenuity, my great brain. No way. Everything I own, they made it, and having good employees has helped so much, their loyalty. You couldn't steal an employee from me, wouldn't let you. How much more it takes you to stay here? I want you. Look at your profit sharing. How much you got in it now? Those are the folks that I sold. I didn't go out selling cars in business. I let them do that. Story_ID: 201867 Speaker 1: And your legacy? What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Whatever I've earned. I look at life as one thing. Boy, you're here for such a short time. And I don't believe I have a selfish bone in my body. I really don't. I've never dealt with mine. You say yours. Okay, I mean mine. I don't deal with Al Johnson as the most important thing in my life. I know it sounds untrue, but it is true. I haven't. Look at my work hours and my work habits, and what I've done since leaving day-to-day operations in 1983. Boy, have I been involved. You name it, I've been there. Story_ID: 201868 Speaker 1: And do you wanna be remembered for anything? Speaker 2: If the public or people that care about me, if they have enough left to give, leave me and think about me, thank you. That's enough. Make room for somebody else coming and make his mark or her mark. Story_ID: 201869 Speaker 1: Okay, that's it. You know, before we do photos, I'd like you just to spell some names. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I'd like you to spell Virgil McKnight. Speaker 2: Okay, Virgil McKnight, V-I-R-G-I-L, capital M-C-, capital K-N-I-G-H-T. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He is a black American. He was. Speaker 1: Clifton, is it Farris or Terrace, Clifton Terrace? Speaker 2: Harbor, that's not a person (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Okay, that was a harbor, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: That was a harbor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Boat harbor. Speaker 1: Dr. Fagen, how do you spell Dr. Fagen's name? Speaker 2: Dr. Robert--R-O-B-E-R-T, F-A-G-E-N. Speaker 1: And Maury Lyons? Speaker 2: M-A-U-R-Y, L-Y-O-N-S. Speaker 1: And is it, McWarden? I don't know, let's see. How about Ivan McClain? Speaker 2: I-V-A-N, capital M-C-C-L-A-I-N. Speaker 1: Ed Heinneck [ph.]? Speaker 2: Ed's, what is Ed's, damn twenty-five years. Speaker 1: Is it Hanneck or Hann-- Speaker 2: Boy-- Speaker 1: H-I-N-I-- Speaker 2: I was right in the middle of it, thinking of it. Ed Heinneck, that's who it is. I think he spelled his name H-E-I-N-N-E-C-K. Speaker 1: And then [HM] Al Boutte [Sr.], can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: Alvin is A-L-V-I-N, B-O-U-T-double E [sic]. Speaker 1: Okay, and is it George Dau- George Dauman, George Daimon, George-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh, my dad's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Grew up with my dad, George, G-E-O-R-G-E, Damron, D-A-M-R-O-N. Story_ID: 201870 Speaker 1: That's [HM] George Johnson of Johnson Products and next to him is Tom Ayers, chairman of the board of Commonwealth [Edison]-- Speaker 2: Edison. Speaker 1: And the next to him is a local businessman, and that's me, Al Johnson there on the very end, on the right side. You got it correctly. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: George to the left, George Johnson and the businessman--I can't remember his name [phone ringing]. That's me, Al Johnson. Bill Berry of the Chicago Urban League. I can't see this person here. Oh, that's Tom Ayers. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: Yeah, Commonwealth. On the far left side. You wouldn't know it, would you? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: George Johnson, Johnson Products and-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: I'm not sure what this is. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: To my left is Bill Berry from the Urban League, and there I am, the next person. That's Maury Lyons of General Motors Corporation, motor holdings division. Speaker 2: Will you spell his name again here, too, sir. Speaker 1: M-A-U-R-Y, L-Y-O-N-S. This is one of the assistants to Maury from motor holdings division. In fact, I stole him from him. I can't think of his name. To my left, the young lady there to the left was the queen at that time of the Illinois Pageant, and next to her is the Mayor of Chicago, Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, and next to that person is [HM] Jesse Jackson of Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity], and I'm on the far right side, Al Johnson. Speaker 2: That's, it must have been at the auto show, right? Speaker 1: This is, these pictures were taken with models at the Operation PUSH Exposition that was at McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois]. I don't know the names of these three. If I could see the car, maybe I could tell. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: What company is this? Oh, this is that PUSH Expo also. Oh, boy, I'm not gonna remember all these names. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: Yeah, just who you know. Speaker 2: On the left is Richard Harris. He was the dealer development manager of General Motors, and next to him is the vice president of General Motors. And the next three persons, I can't even see that. Speaker 1: This is Ms. Black Illinois. Speaker 2: Next to--to the left of Ms. Black Illinois is--thank you, is Maury Lyons. Ms. Black Illinois. I don't know who that is next to her. There--second to the last person is a black Buick dealer, just awarded a dealership back in that year, Chuck White Buick, had a place off of the--on State Street, just off of the Dan Ryan [Expressway]. And that's me on the end (laughter). That's Al Johnson, as I looked with the long hair during those years. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: No, I'd have to get it in that file and find out. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: This is an occasion where we had a luncheon at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] when we paid off General Motors on the Cadillac deal, and they--yeah, that's when that was. A luncheon we had. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: That's an award that I got from one of the civic organizations, and next to, next to me there to my right is Vernon Williams of the Southwestern Bell Telephone. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Next to me there is [HM] Clark Burrus and next to him is Vernon Williams of the telephone company. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Boy, I don't remember his name at the moment. Only 'cause you ask that, [Bill] Baxter. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Yeah, a local real estate president. That is Senator [Cecil] Partee, P-A-R-T-double-E. He was the president of the [Illinois State] Senate at that time, passed recently. And next is Maury Lyons. The person on the far right is [HM] Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer. Speaker 1: Well, that's Cirilo right there. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Cirilo. Speaker 1: I know down this way. Speaker 2: And George Jones of Joe Louis Milk going that way. Speaker 1: Ah, so this is an historic picture. Speaker 2: Yeah, this guy had a storage company on the left. I'm trying to remember. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Yeah, with the light jacket, on the left, I meant. Speaker 1: But who was this? We don't know. Speaker 2: That's what I'm trying to say. Wait a minute. He's well known. He had a storage company out on 79th Street [Chicago, Illinois]. Oh, gosh. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a--he was known or well known. He had a terrible-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Cirilo and Compton of the Urban League. Speaker 1: Okay, Cirilo McSween is C-R-I--C-I-R-I-L-L-O [sic]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: McSween, capital M-C-capital S-W-E-E-N. Speaker 2: Indeed. And next to him would be the Reverend Jesse Jackson. Speaker 1: No, [HM] James Compton next to him. Speaker 2: James Compton, yeah, I'm sorry. And then Reverend Jesse Jackson, George Jones, president of Joe Louis Milk Company, and I've forgotten the guy next to him. And there is Chuck White and Bill Elira [ph.]. Story_ID: 169279 Speaker 1: Okay, Chuck White, a local [Chicago, Illinois] Buick dealer. The next person in Gavin Weir, W-E-I-R, president of Chicago City Bank and Don Johnson, my son. The next person is Maury Lyons, from General Motors, motor holdings division, Al Johnson, the [HM] Reverend Jesse Jackson, Tom Lahman which is, was the assistant to Maury Lyons until he was hired by Al Johnson Cadillac. Speaker 2: Can you spell Lahman? Speaker 1: Yeah, L-A-H-M-A-N. And the next is well-known, got killed in a plane crash coming here, second man in command of Motown, [Ewart] Abner [Jr.], A-B-N-E-R. Speaker 2: Oh, Abner. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: His name has come up. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, everybody knew-- Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: Colorful guy, died too young. Then Al Bell of Sax--Stax Volt, V-O-L-T Records. Speaker 2: Okay, great. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: On the left is Senator Chew, Senator [Charles] Chew [Jr.] in the [Illinois State] State legislature, and I'm standing next to him, C-H-E-W. Speaker 1: Okay, Charlie Chew. Speaker 2: Charlie Chew. Standing there is a car that--every year I used to give Virgil McKnight a car, and that was the day he left St. Louis [Missouri] and came to Chicago [Illinois] to pick up his car. That's his Cadillac Eldorado convertible. That's Virgil, V-I-R-G-I-L, McKnight, capital M-C-K-capital K-N-I-G-H-T. I'm in the next person, and the other was a gentleman I hired to come with me shortly after I got in the automobile business at Oldsmobile, worked up to become Ivan McClain's assistant, and then he replaced Ivan, and that is Herbert Williams, H-E-R-B-E-R-T. Speaker 1: Now, do you--what year do you think this is approximately? Speaker 2: This had to be--let me see. What showroom is that? It's Cadillac. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Oh, this is, yeah, this is the Cadillac on 71st Street [Chicago, Illinois]. So it's gotta be (unclear) auto was the first. I think that's a 1971, 1972. Speaker 1: Now, is this your staff per chance? Speaker 2: Let me see it close, at the Cadillac agency. At the time, there were only two mechanics in the group. The rest were busy (laughter) and did not join the photograph in my offices. And that photograph was taken in my office on 71st Street. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Where's my family? Speaker 1: I'm gonna get that. Speaker 2: Wait now, who is this? Speaker 1: That looked like--well, I don't know who it was. Speaker 2: Why that is--that's Leak. Speaker 1: Oh, that's Leak-- Speaker 2: Leak Undertakers, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, Leak Funeral Home. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's who that is. One is junior [Spencer Leak, Jr.] and the old man [Spencer Leak, Sr.]-- Speaker 1: Oh, good. Speaker 2: And I'm on the outside. Those are the two Leaks. Speaker 1: L-E-A-K-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Leak Funeral Home. Do you remember the first names? Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, come on, Al. Spencer Leak. Speaker 1: Okay, Spencer Leak, that's right. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: This was taken in 1971. The gentleman to my left was the--one of the managers of a Cadillac division, and I'll never forget this rotten rascal (laughter) in his--his name was Hopkins. He was from Detroit [Michigan]. He was the general manager for Hopkins--I mean for Cadillac division. He was a top man that ran Cadillac. This is a photograph of a symposium sponsored by the black--what is it? Black Enterprise, yeah, it's Black Enterprise-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Magazine. And these are dealers in the, some are dealers from other companies. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: The editor of that magazine. Speaker 2: Is [HM] Earl Graves. Speaker 1: Yeah, Earl Graves. He's in there. Speaker 2: Okay, this one is a nice picture. Now, that is Cecil Partee and Charles Chew-- Speaker 1: And [HM] Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer. (Laughter) boy, did I change my hairdo sixteen times, didn't I. Senator Chew to my left, next to him would be Senator [Cecil] Partee, President of the [Illinois State] Senate at the, in Springfield [Illinois], Maury Lyons, standing, I'm standing, and then a picture of Mayor Eugene Sawyer. Boy, they'd kill me if I couldn't remember their names. Speaker 2: But there's the mayor [Harold Washington]. Speaker 1: It'll come to me. I know Harold Washington is on the end, but I'm trying to think--this guy was very colorful in this town with First National Bank [Norman Ross]. I can't remember who he was. Speaker 2: The big guy--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: No, next to Harold Washington. You see him mentioned in the newspaper every once in a while. Now, he's not living anymore. I can't remember the guy to the left. But I'm in the center. This is at a formal affair, a dinner at the Hilton Hotel here in Chicago [Illinois]. I don't--can't remember this guy's name. He's always--whenever you bring up something about First National Bank, his name comes up. He did a lot for the-- Speaker 2: He did a lot for the community. He was-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, he did a lot-- Speaker 2: He was identified with First Chicago. Speaker 1: And he worked a lot in the-- Speaker 2: Community. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know who you're talking--was he involved with Chicago United? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I can't remember the name. Speaker 1: I can't remember his name either. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: That's Bill Berry and I, and I don't know the--his was a writer, I think for the Chicago Courier. Speaker 2: Right, they-- Speaker 1: I think the Chicago Courier was Fred's Wall's--Fred Wall's paper. That was when I bought Cadillac. That was part of the celebration-- Speaker 2: Okay, and it-- Speaker 1: That happened at one of the affairs in 1971. Speaker 2: And that shows you with Bill Berry and you're in the middle, Al Johnson, and it says, "Loplois, Lakie Ashford." Speaker 1: That's his name, and I wouldn't-- Speaker 2: Okay, and it's spelled L-O-P-L-O-I-S, and then in parentheses, Lakie, L-A-K-I-E, and Ashford, A-S-H-F-O-R-D. And the date is Saturday, July 3rd, 1971. Speaker 1: I knew it. I didn't know the exact date. I don't know him. This boy is with Prudential Insurance. Gosh darn. He'd kill me. Speaker 2: It's hard. I would be doing the same thing. Speaker 1: Fred Williams. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: The very right. He's a service director. Wonder who the heck that is? I had so many people. I don't know who that is. Speaker 2: (Laughter) but you know what? We could also send, you know, we'll print these out and someone can write on it. He came back from pancreatic cancer. I saw him dancing up on stage recently, and he had been sick. He had pancreatic cancer, I've been told. Speaker 1: I wish I'd known. I would have called him. Speaker 2: Six months to live. Speaker 1: He's magic. Speaker 2: He's ma- I mean that was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I should know the third person. He was a dealer. He ended up getting, he ended up getting the Pontiac agency that, that Ernie Banks, [Robert H.] Nelson [Jr.] had. I can't remember his name. Okay, on this picture, it would be the [HM] Reverend Clay Evans and behind him is Horace Noble. Horace ended up--he used to work for me. He also was a sergeant of police here in Chicago. And he came to work for me for about two and a half years, and then got a Dodge agency, and Horace is now living in-- sold it and now living in Las Vegas [Nevada]. The other person was a dealer in Pontiac, and then I'm in the picture. That is Bill Berry again, and this boy began to work for me, used to be at that. These two guys were partners at one time. Oh, what is his name, in the last picture. We trained him. Ford trained him. He didn't make, and he came to us, worked for me for about three years. Gosh, (laughter), pass--Dinwiddie. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Alvin, Al Dinwiddie. Speaker 2: D-E-W-I-T-T-Y [sic]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Dinwiddie. Speaker 2: Okay, oh, sometimes it's spelled D-D-Y. Okay, are these your employees? Speaker 1: Yeah, these are mechanics in the service department. Speaker 2: Okay, (unclear) is that a significant photo? You had a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes. This was the editor of the--I can't remember his name, Chicago Defender and Cirilo McSween next to me. That's when the Defender was quite a newspaper. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Those were the great days. Oh, boy. This is at a party in the service department, and this was--the gentleman there was a man named, Bob Fagan [ph.]. Bob Fagan was a certified public accountant. He was a chief--and president of New Age Savings and Loan Company in St. Louis. And I finally encouraged him to come work for me at the, starting back at the Oldsmobile days. This picture was taken at a party in our service department. The other gentleman is an employee next to him. Speaker 2: See, you did very well on that one. Speaker 1: I'd better not forget Fagan. Fagan was one of the bridges that carried me over. Speaker 2: Well, that's an ad, Al Johnson Cadillac and our leasing company. That was early in the early years. That is a 1971 Eldorado--no, 1972 Eldorado. Those were some of the--what we call our creative advertising. And we called the South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] area the Cadillac Village. This is my family. On the very left is Donald Johnson and his grandmother. Gosh, she just died not too long ago, and she is Mrs. Donald Edwards. She was a, her career was teaching English at the universities, one being Lincoln University in Jefferson City, Missouri and also she was at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University] in Greensboro, North Carolina, to name just two of them that I remember. And next to them is my wife, Marion [Johnson], Donald's mother. And the next person was a friend that I had known from St. Louis many years ago that lived in Chicago. And when I bought Al Johnson Cadillac, he had been employed by General Motors for about five years. You notice how neatly I left the name out 'cause I forgot it. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 169280 Speaker 1: This is the one picture I really want to-- Speaker 2: [HM] Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Who is the woman? Oh, that's the mayor--that young lady is Mayor Sawyer's daughter [Sheryl McGill], and then next to him is the mayor, and I'm in the middle, and the last person to the far right is John Johnson of Ebony and JET magazines, Chicago [Illinois]. Well, that's me on the--damn, I got so many different looks, haven't I, Jekyll and Hyde. In the middle is doctor, a local dentist here in Chicago, Dr. Russell [ph.], and next to him is my son, Donald. I think it was some affair we had given. Oh, boy, I gotta remember his name. It'd be a shame if I can't remember. Speaker 1: Let's see. Speaker 2: He's a Catholic priest. He was in the newspaper the other day about the sex scandal stuff. Speaker 1: Oh, he's been on the news a lot. That's-- Speaker 2: A lot. He, he represents the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --The-- Speaker 1: Right, he's, but, but that's a much younger picture of him. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, much younger picture of all of us. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That's Coretta [Scott] King, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King's [Jr.'s] wife. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: Well, let's see. My hair is short there. I can't remember the occasion, but if you notice I got big, horn-rimmed glasses and all I ever used them for is reading. I'm surprised I got 'em on and took a picture with 'em, but that's Coretta King and a priest. This was, oh, this was a meeting during the period that Harold [Washington] was running for office as mayor, and this was some of the committee. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: No, no, this is one of the many meetings when Harold was running--I'm trying to think who that is. Speaker 1: You mean here? I don't know who this is. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know either. Speaker 1: Okay, that's-- Speaker 2: Wait a minute. Is that--what's his name of Woodlawn? Speaker 1: No, that's not--that doesn't look like [HM] Leon Finney. But it might be. I don't know. Speaker 2: Sure did look like Leon Finney to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he would have been at that meeting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Call him Leon Finney. I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: In the middle on the end there. Speaker 1: That's Tom Murphy. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is Tom Murphy. And next is [Angelo] Geocaris. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: His sister-- Speaker 1: G-O--G-E-O-C-A-R-I-S (simultaneous). Speaker 2: I-S, yeah. Speaker 1: What was his name? What's his first name? Tom? Is it Tom? No. Speaker 2: His sister is a senator in Springfield [Illinois]. Damn, then there's Harold Washington, and that's me leaning over on the right. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 2: That has everyone in it. Speaker 1: Oh, God. Speaker 2: That's you at the podium. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, [HM] Carol Mosley Braun, Mary [Ella Smith]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was his girlfriend. And Carol Braun, that's her, Senator Carol Braun. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And on the very end, this boy is-- Speaker 2: It's Mayor Harold Washington--I don't know the--and then there's Nina Shepherd and then there is [William] Beavers. Speaker 1: Yeah, Beavers. That's who that is, yeah. Speaker 2: And then behind is-- Speaker 1: Mayor Sawyer. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Then next to him, to the right of him-- Speaker 2: Is, what's his name? From the West Side? [William "Bill" Henry]. Speaker 1: Yeah, he died. Speaker 2: Bill, Bill [Henry]. Speaker 1: He died young. Speaker 2: Right, he died horribly too. Speaker 1: Yes, he did. And the top guy with the white hair, had it all his life, is the guy from Woodlawn Organization [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: I don't know who that is. Speaker 1: Damn, I got another hairstyle. Speaker 2: (Laughter) you do. Speaker 1: That was the period where they were wearing, you picked your hair and make it look real wooly. Speaker 2: And that would be like-- Speaker 1: Use a pick (simultaneous). Speaker 2: 19--what? Eighty-three [1983]? Speaker 1: Something like that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know who this is? Speaker 2: That's your running buddy (laughter). Speaker 1: Yep. The first person is Dr. Leon Dingle, D-I-N-G-L-E, and Mayor Washington and that's with me with my natural, picked. My folks didn't like it at all with their bourgeois stuff. Mayor Washington and myself. Mayor Washington and Al Johnson. I'm trying to remember the occasion, but I think it was during the campaign period because we had a lot of meetings with the group. I don't know why other people weren't seated (unclear). This is his photographer too, who took that picture. Damn, I didn't know you had this. See, I hadn't been through this stuff. I don't know where she got all this stuff. Oh, boy. Oh, man, this goes back when I got Oldsmobile. This had to be something like '68 [1968]. What's this advertising man, shaking my hand? I know the man on the right end is--here's the guy that loaned me all that money on my house, my boat. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the president and chairman of the board of Gateway National Bank in St. Louis [Missouri]. Gosh, very bright guy, one of the most knowledgeable pioneer, black guys in the country. That's before--he was in the business much before Al [HM Alvin Boutte, Sr.] or any, any banks you had here in Chicago. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Yeah, he pioneer--he was a blazer--pioneer. Speaker 2: The name of the bank was, you said? Speaker 1: The bank was Gateway National, but he had banks before Gateway, before we bought--Gateway was something else. I was on the board there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this guy here, I can't remember his name. He was a local businessman-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: --And this is, the far left is Cirilo McSween and myself, Virgil McKnight. Who is this guy? You know him. Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: The advertising guy shaking my hand. What's his name? Speaker 2: I don't know him. Speaker 1: He was early in getting-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no. Then it would be--because we, it's--I--Cullers, Vince Cullers. Speaker 1: That's who that is. Speaker 2: Okay, V-I-N-C-E-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Vince Cullers. Speaker 2: We're trying to find him now. We can't find him. Speaker 1: I can't find him either. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: That is at my office in-- Speaker 2: That's a nice picture. Wait, let me tape this one and put this on--this goes here, okay. Speaker 1: This is, this picture was taken at a manager's meeting at Al Johnson Oldsmobile back in '68 [1968]. Boy, I'm really trying to make a point, huh? Look at that curl on that mouth? Boy, I'm saying, "I don't know what the hell I'm doing, but here's my suggestion," (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: That's when I first got to town. I've had more hair-dos than anybody you've ever seen. I just went back to the natural about ten years ago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, boy, this is the date I got my--this is a party at, in, that I had at--what's that community where the--off of 39th Street [Chicago, Illinois], what is that, those big buildings there. What do you call that? 39th Street here? Speaker 2: Thirty-Ninth Street, 39th? Two big buildings? Speaker 1: Many buildings, a cluster of buildings, apartment buildings there. Speaker 2: Oh, South Commons [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah, South Commons. This was a party I gave after I got Oldsmobile. This had to be made in late October of 1967. And these were people from St. Louis, yes, these are people from St. Louis, and they were customers of mine. One was an employee that worked for me at the hospital, not that she wasn't a customer. And that's Mrs. Grady [ph.] next to her, and Waldo, her husband is next to me, and this is Mickey Davis [ph.] on the end and his girlfriend. Mickey Davis was a policeman at one time in St. Louis and ended up with Motown as the securities director for Motown, all the top stars and singers. He had a staff of police to accompany him and protect him. There's Al Johnson Oldsmobile. Oh, that is the first one of my salesmen. Next to him comes from a famous family in St. Louis is Dr. Mitchell. He gave many of the people that I sold cars, Oldsmobile to in St. Louis, they would drive or fly all the way to Chicago to buy their cars. I kept--many of my customers used to come to Chicago to buy cars. And that was taken--what kind of hairdo I got on me? Is that a natural? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, that had to be something, about 1974, I guess. Oh, I got many faces, haven't I? I look like a lot of different people. I'm a Jekyll and Hyde. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Al Johnson Oldsmobile. This picture was taken in 1967. And if you'll notice the price of a '98 [98 Oldsmobile] was only $2,593 at that time. What does that date show there? That was in Saturday Review paper. Oh, this was in the '70s [1970s]. This was--it's the annual affair by American Airlines, Golf Classic that is held in the Canyon Hotel complex, and this is in the desert in Palm Springs [California] is where it is. And this is their annual tournament, business people, not from Chicago. I was the only Chicagoan there. Story_ID: 169281 Speaker 1: I'm in the middle, and Al Johnson, Jr. is to the right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: Oh, that is, yeah, that's in the--that picture was taken--oh that picture was taken in my office on the second floor at Al Johnson Cadillac in--that had to have been in--I'm trying to remember if that's in Tinley Park. I think that's Tinley Park, Tinley Park, Illinois. I'm almost sure. Gary, Indiana. Speaker 2: [HM Richard] Hatcher? Speaker 1: That is Mayor Hatcher. Speaker 2: Oh, we're trying to find him too. I think we found him though. Speaker 1: You tell him that you--that I asked you, listen that I told you especially to get in touch with him and that--I got some kind of award from the City of Gary. Speaker 2: Oh, recently or? Speaker 1: Oh, no, that was when he was mayor. Speaker 2: Mayor, okay. Speaker 1: And see, you can tell by the clothes on there. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's-- Speaker 1: That's Mayor Hatcher. Speaker 2: Good 'cause I didn't--people are hard to find. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: These are--this is a picture of the Edwards family, my mother-in-law and father-in-law, my wife's [Marion Johnson] mother and dad. These have been some very active people in their lifetime. Each lived close to--one lived around ninety-six and the other--ninety-seven, and the other lived to be about ninety-four. Don Edwards was a professor at a number of schools. The last one that he retired from was A and T, a physicist. He worked with [Arthur] Compton on the atom bomb in the 1940s and the most mild-mannered gentleman I think I ever met. He had later in years when this picture was taken a skin disease and had many different complexions there. Below is Ruth Edwards. She was a King and the King were--came from a very famous family in Johnson City, Missouri. The father, her dad--actually, they were a mixed family. Her dad in the, in the early 1900s, was appointed in charge of the prison in Springfield [Illinois] by the governor, and that was very rare for any, somebody called colored to be appointed to a post that high. He stayed there in charge through several administrations, and when he died, I don't think anybody of color ever replaced him. He had some famous sons and daughters. Ruth had, to my memory, three other sisters. And they were all professional--teach- they all were teachers and taught in various parts of the country. Some of the family ended up in Hawaii and marrying, in one sect, Chinese and I've got some pictures up there of some of their children. Then the other member of the family, the son ended up being in charge of the rail system in Hawaii. That's about as much as I can say. Speaker 1: Just one more, and it's this one right here. Speaker 2: (Laughter) this was something--this is something about the three of us. At one time, Chicago [Illinois] was considered Johnson City. I mean that the black business mecca of the world, of the country rather, and this is where the most successful businessmen were at the time, in the top Black Enterprise 100. We were the major role, and one is George Johnson of Johnson Products. George, incidentally, sold Johnson Products a little excess of seventy-five million dollars, and George had many other enterprises, real estate being one. John Johnson is the old faithful, Ebony magazine. Speaker 1: And he hasn't sold to anyone (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, this is true. Speaker 1: By golly, this is taken from the University of Illinois [Chicago, Illinois], circle campus. There, I was chairman of the--let me get that up close. It's a organization that was dedicated to aiding small business people in their problems to avoid them going bankrupt. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I can't remember all of these. Many of these were teachers at the university. And I think attended one of the meetings at the university--this is taken at the business college. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Speaker 1: I don't think so. Yeah, that's what this is: Center for Urban Business is what that group was called, Center for Urban Business. We had major corporations, downtown major businesses to help small businesses with many of their problems...