 Story_ID: 636249 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sure. It's Christine Lea James hyphen Brown [HistoryMaker Christine James-Brown], L-E-A--oh, C-H-R-I-S-T-I-N-E, L-E-A, J-A-M-E-S, hyphen, B-R-O-W-N. Speaker 1: Now, I always ask people about their names when they're somewhat unusual and this one--this combination is kind of unusual. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: It probably (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is. Speaker 1: Just--I, I, I can understand how you got it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You married someone named Brown [James-Brown's ex-husband, Donald Brown] probably, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And I actually didn't think about it when I decided to hyphenate my name. It was in the time when that's what people were doing, and it, it didn't occur to me how memorable the name would be and how much fun people would have, so that's where it came from. You know, it's my--it's my married name. I'm now divorced, but it was such a good name, I kept it, so. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nine, nine, fifty-two [September 9, 1952] in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. And, ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Not for profit exec [executive]. I'm now the CEO of the Child Welfare League of America [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, what is today's date? Speaker 2: (Laughter) It is 4/30/2012 [April 30, 2012]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Where are we? We're in Alexandria, Virginia-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --in my condominium. Story_ID: 636250 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as sort of a warm up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: You know, I don't really have a favorite food. I'm not a big foodie. I have a tendency to like one thing and eat it all the time. So, at any given time, like right now it's matzo crackers that I like and I eat. Speaker 1: Okay. Do, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right. Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring closely followed by fall. I love the colors in the fall and I love the beauty of the spring. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Someplace warm with no computer and no access to the telephone. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "They said it couldn't be done / But he with a chuckle replied / That 'maybe it couldn't,' but he wouldn't be one / To say so until he had tried" ['It Couldn't Be Done']. And I can go on (laughter) from there if you had the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that's from--what is that? Speaker 2: They said it's a poem-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that I learned as a, as a young person and it has been something I think about quite frequently throughout life because it goes on and talks about just the power of believing that something can be done. Speaker 1: And do you know who it's by? Do you have any-- Speaker 2: (Pause) No, I'm not sure who it's by [Edgar Albert Guest]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's always in the back of my head, so I shouldn't--I should look it up, shouldn't I? But it's, it's got a lot of significance I think-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for all of us. Story_ID: 636251 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and your father's [Howard James] side, Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but separately so we don't get them mixed up in the beginning, then we'll put them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Eva, E-V-A, Matilda, M-A-T-I-L-D-A, McCollough, M-C-C-O-L-L-O-U-G-H [Eva McCollough James]. Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], July 10th, 1930. Speaker 1: All right. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Well, I know the least about my mother's side of the family. I can go back to my grandmother [Alma McCollough] and--but not to my grandfather. My mother was raised by a grandmother that was very private and very quiet--or by a mother that was very private and quiet. I always heard that my mother was born out of wedlock, but never--it was never talked about. She used to tell me stories of having to go to Wanamaker's [John Wanamaker, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and ride up and down in the elevator with the man who she since believes was her dad, but she was never told it was her dad, so I know very little about my mother's family. My mother had a significantly older brother and she had a--another brother and sister [Gloria McCollough Yip], and the older brother and sister both passed away before I really had a chance to get to know them. And my mother's sister, who she was very close with that was closest to her age, was someone who we grew up with, who I spent a lot of time with. She had seven children. She had an arranged marriage, someone from China and-- Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute now. Give us some details on that one. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: That's a--that's-- Speaker 2: So, my grandmother, as I said was very strict and my mother's sister really wanted to have her own life and get out of the house. And at the time, her, her--the person who became her husband was a [U.S.] Merchant Marine from China who wanted to stay in the U.S., and actually in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], they had these folks who would did--do arranged marriages. And there would be payment on both sides. People didn't really know each other. My aunt did not know her--the man that she married. He was older, probably by about fifteen or sixteen years, and they married. He didn't speak much English at all, but they had seven children. They were married for life. Speaker 1: To a Chinese man, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Uncle Ming, Ming Yip. Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting 'cause that--that's an aspect of history I did not know-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) anything about. I mean, this is the kind of thing that you would only hear in a interview with somebody-- Speaker 2: And in neighborhoods-- Speaker 1: --who actually told you. Speaker 2: --in North Philadelphia, that was part of the--something that was done, you know. And you had people there who worked these deals and that was the deal that made--was a moneymaker. Speaker 1: This is the first deal like that I've heard and we had another HistoryMaker, Judge Russell Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon], in Memphis [Tennessee] whose grandfather was Chinese, and another one [HistoryMaker Aki Leonard Gonzales Aleong] who--I'm blocking out his name now, who is from Trinidad whose father was--his father was Chinese, and a couple Malaysians and one from Ethiopia that came over on Merchant Marine, (unclear) and then went back to their countries. But this is an interesting aspect of it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well my uncle was a pretty special person. He lived in two different worlds. He worked in Chinatown in Philadelphia in the restaurant business, and he worked all night and he was home during the day. So, most of the time when we saw Uncle Ming, he was sleeping, but he loved the family, you know, had the seven children, and we stayed there a lot because my mother was sick frequently and we would stay and just move in, you know, to the house. And from seven children, it would go to nine children, plus my grandmother plus my aunt plus my uncle in a little teeny tiny house in, in North Philadelphia. But, he, he was always in Chinatown. He got his hair cut in Chinatown, his friends were in Chinatown, but when he wasn't there, he was with the family, you know. He loved spaghetti and just a really special person, you know, so-- Speaker 1: Did he ever learn any English at all? Speaker 2: He learned enough to communicate with us, you know, and, of course, over the years he picked it up, but not as much as you would've expected because he spent so much of his time in Chinatown, you know, and continuing to hold on to his culture and hold on to his language and everything. We never really thought about it much as kids. You know, our family was so diverse that it was just Uncle Ming, you know. And his seven kids, Bo-Lin [Bo-Lin Yip] and Toribio [Toribio Yip] and different names that, you know--some of them Chinese names, some of them not. Story_ID: 636252 Speaker 1: So, well what else about your mother [Eva McCollough James]--so, so your mother--he didn't--she didn't know her father-- Speaker 2: She didn't know her dad. Speaker 1: --but in terms of her mother's ancestry, did, did her mother [Alma McCollough] have any other place of origin for her family other than Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Well, no--only guessing, we think that she was from North or South Carolina. One of my cousins has been trying to kind of work his way back to figure out. We know that my grandmother lost her parents very, very early in life and that her brother was a major provider. I know that my grandmother went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], she and her sister, that her brother paid for them to come from the South to, to Howard to go to school. We know my grandmother didn't finish. We heard rumors about why she didn't finish, but nothing that was ever substantiated. It was really an interesting time when people just didn't talk about--didn't talk about things. Speaker 1: So, you think your grandmother was born around the turn of the century or? Speaker 2: She was born around the turn of the century, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, what kind of work did she do? Did-- Speaker 2: She, for all the time that I knew her was a, a servant and she was very interesting in that she was always head of--head of the household servant in very, very--homes of very, very rich people. And she was a proud person who I think actually liked her work. She was the one who told people what kind of meals they were gonna have and what the cook needed to do and things like that, and she did that her entire life. I understand that when my mother was young, she was gone a lot. She would be a live in domestic sometimes. And my mom's older brother would watch out for her and the others. She was also interesting in that she--my grandmother wanted the right things for us, and so she made sure that the seven of my aunt's children [of Gloria McCollough Yip] and my brother [Michael James] and I had piano lessons. And she had--she bought a piano for both of us, both families, and she paid for Mrs. Brooks [ph.] to come and teach us--you know, give us piano lessons. She decided at about--in her late sixties, maybe early seventies that she wanted to learn to play the violin. Unfortunately, her hearing was going at the same time 'cause (laughter) she never knew how bad she was, but she learned. She went and learned to play the violin and had a violin. She was a really interesting person, very interesting person. Story_ID: 636253 Speaker 1: What did your mother [Eva McCollough James] say about growing up? Speaker 2: You know, I think my mother had a challenging time growing up. I think she missed her mother [Alma McCollough] a lot. My mother was sick a lot when she was growing up. On the one hand, she was this person who was full of life, loved doing things, loved people, but she had a illness. She had lupus and it presented itself fairly early in her life and--but no one knew what it was, so there was a lot of misdiagnosis and a lot of struggle just, you know, with being sick so often and missing a lot of school and things like that, but also a really incredibly determined person. You know, she tried to do everything she could do despite her illnesses and all. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, she grew up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 2: She grew up in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah--North Philadelphia, okay. Okay. Now, give us some idea what the demographics of Philadelphia were like when she was growing up. Speaker 2: Predominantly African American and Jewish, you know, a few--the Jewish population was moving out, moving north and west, and so you had these beautiful brownstones, but they were broken into multiple apartments and things like that as African Americans came in, so it was predominantly African American. She went to a school that had Jewish and African American. It was just--it's now totally African American, but she grew up in a primarily-- Speaker 1: Is that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) African American environment. Speaker 1: --Gratz High School [Simon Gratz High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you're talking about? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Are, are you-- Speaker 2: Gratz. Speaker 1: --Gratz? Speaker 2: Um-hm. She went to-- Speaker 1: Simon Gratz. Speaker 2: --Gratz, Simon Gratz. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She also grew up in a very, very strong church environment, Episcopalian, but predominantly African American Episcopalian churches, St. Augustine's [St. Augustine's Protestant Episcopal Church; St. Augustine's Church of the Covenant] in Philadelphia, North Philly. Speaker 1: Now, St. Augustine, that--that's not the original Episcopal church in Philadelphia is it? Is, is that--that's not the one that-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --was founded by (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's a--in Philadelphia, there is, of course, the African Methodist Episcopal church, the A.M.E. church that was founded in Philadelphia. At the same time, there was an African Episcopal church that is part of the Episcopal Diocese [Episcopal Diocese of Pennsylvania], and that's St. Thomas [African Episcopal Church of St. Thomas, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. That's-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the one I'm thinking of. Speaker 2: And it's the only one, though. There, there isn't another one. But in addition to that, because of segregation in Philadelphia, very, very segregated place, most of the churches were segregated, too. So, if you were an Episcopalian, you--for the most part, you went to churches where the majority of the people looked like you. Now, sometimes the priest would be a Caucasian and everyone else would be (laughter), you know African American or maybe a little--a few sprinklings of non African Americans in a church. So, we grew up in, in a very, very strong environment of the church where the church was our social life and our family life 'cause all of our family went to the same church. Speaker 1: Okay. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, we were-- Speaker 1: So this is-- Speaker 2: --together all the time. Speaker 1: So, this is pretty much a black Episcopal church, St. Augustine's? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Almost tell by the name sometimes-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --St. Augustine [Augustine of Hippo] being a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --African-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yep, yep. Speaker 1: --you know, bishop. Speaker 2: St. Augustine's, yep. Speaker 1: I guess--yeah. Okay. So, so--now, now what did your mother--did she go to college, too? Did she have a chance to go to college? Speaker 2: No, she didn't go to college. By the time--let's see, she and my dad [Howard James] married, my mom was about nineteen, and it was at about that time that my mother was very, very, very sick 'cause lupus is related to changes in hormone levels and things like that, so when she started having children and all, it really started to flare up even more. So, she was--she didn't go to school. She was very, very smart and wanted to be a nurse, very creative. She made all of our clothes. She was always the one tinkering around the house, you know, and doing things like that and volun- doing volunteer work, so. Story_ID: 636254 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and can you give us your father's name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Howard, H-O-W-A-R-D, Raymond, R-A-Y-M-O-N-D, James, J-A-M-E-S. He was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Raymond James, okay (laughter). Howard Raymond James [Howard James]. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Okay, so he was born in Philly-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was born in Philly-- Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: --nineteen twenty-five [1925] to a big family. He was next to the last of seven--one, two, three, four, five, six, seven. He has one--he's--he passed away in 2009. He has one brother remaining. They pretty much passed away in order, interestingly enough, so his youngest brother is alive. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, his mother and father, his mother was Nellie James [Nellie Kraider James], his father was Charles James [Charles James, Sr.]. I didn't know my grandfather. He had passed away either right before I was born or when I was an infant. Speaker 1: Now, are your father's family roots basically just in Philadelphia or are there some down south, too? Speaker 2: The furthest south is like Delaware. My dad's--on his mother's side is German. So, Kraider is their German name, K-R-A-I-D-E-R. I understand his dad had some family like in Rho- Rhode Island, but they're pretty much more northern bound, my dad's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandmother's mother was the Kra- the German, of German descent and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how, how do you spell Kraider? Speaker 2: K-R-A-I-D-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay, Kraider. Now, is there a story behind how the, you know, how this happened and-- Speaker 2: So, my--from what I understand, my--the, the--Mary Kraider [ph.] worked--my, what, grandfather--great-grandfather worked as a servant. I believe he, he was the driver for the family and he married the daughter, and the family disowned her as a result. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So we had-- Speaker 1: So he was the chauffeur for a-- Speaker 2: He was the chauffeur for-- Speaker 1: --certain family-- Speaker 2: --a well to do-- Speaker 1: --but he fell in love-- Speaker 2: --German family. Speaker 1: --with their--with their daughter. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And they got--they got-- Speaker 2: And they got married. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was disowned. And we know that her sister secretly kept in some contact, but the family did not, the rest of the family, so we didn't really know the family at all. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting situation. Now, did, did the--so, that was a well known story in the family and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, did, did you meet her? Your-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Now, this is your--this would be your-- Speaker 2: So, it was my grandmother's mother-- Speaker 1: Okay, so your great-grandmother (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) who married the--my grandmother's mother married the chauffeur (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, my, my grandmother and my--all but one of my father's brothers and his one sister, they were extremely fair, some of them with blonde hair, blue eyes and grew up in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and--in a period where things were really segregated, but always were very connected with the African American community. I think we were more tolerant in those days of each other, you know, the African Americans looked all hues. And, and they never forgot who they were. Now, I--we heard rumors of a piece of the family, you know, my mother's--my grandmother's brother's children just passing, you know, and I don't know them so I don't know much about it, but we heard that there were pieces of the family that would--that passed for white, but our family, it was the opposite. They were very much North Philly people who were part of the community, in the community, enjoyed the community. Story_ID: 636255 Speaker 1: Now, what did your father [Howard James] say about growing up in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Well, he had all these brothers, you know, so they had a great time growing up. I--it was also war time, so he watched all his brothers go into war and he had increasing responsibility for his mother [Nellie Kraider James], you know, making sure she was okay when--with her sons going off to war. Speaker 1: Okay, this is World War II [WWII] we're talking about. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the family was really, really close. I mean, we did absolutely everything together. They lived in the same neighborhood. My, my mom [Eva McCollough James] and dad and some of my aunts and uncles lived in the same project and everybody was together all the time. And then when--as people moved out, it became--and then there was always a house that was the gathering place for the entire family. So, we'd go to church in the morning, come back and spend the day together on Sundays. That was kind of the typical Sunday, you know. So, it was a real close knit family for my dad growing up. He--I think he was pretty studious, you know. Speaker 1: I think-- Speaker 2: He didn't seem to be like a party animal, you know. It seemed like he had a quieter life. Speaker 1: Now, did he have a chance to go to college (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He went to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for two years, I believe it was, and then he went in to work for the government in procurement. For many years, he was in procurement for the arsenal in Philadelphia [Frankford Arsenal] until it closed, when they started closing all of the major bases and all. And then he went and was a, a minority business developer for the [U.S.] Small Business Administration. And then he retired again and he did procurement in New Jersey where they had moved. Story_ID: 636256 Speaker 1: Now, is there a, a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Eva McCollough James] used to take care of--they all went to the same church [St. Augustine's Protestant Episcopal Church; St. Augustine's Church of the Covenant], but my--there was a five year difference. So, five years when you're young is a lot. But as you get older, it, you know, kind of disappears. But my mother used to take care of her sister's two sons and she was the one who had them all the time. My dad [Howard James] would pay attention to my mother, but not too much 'cause he thought she was married with kids. And somehow at some point in time wor- walking down the aisle in church, he figured out that it wasn't, you know, her kids, and then they somehow got together. So--but they were all in the same neighborhood [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. They were in the same church and the same neighborhood. So, I guess at the time when the five years disappeared, you know, it--something happened (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I just wondered if they had a story about it. Speaker 2: No, no, not a story. I think--not a story in terms of meeting, I think a story in terms of staying together, you know, for so long because my mom was sick so often, you know, and I think it was a hard life for my dad as well as for my mom. So--but, he stuck--he hung in there. Story_ID: 636257 Speaker 1: How long did your mother [Eva McCollough James] live? Speaker 2: She passed when she was forty-two and at the time that she passed, I was in college [Douglass College; Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. I had dropped out to take care of her in her last year. I remember thinking she was old (laughter) at forty-two. And I only realize now how young she really was, you know, when she passed away. But, it was young, you know. So--but, she was kind of this really incredibly remarkable person 'cause she would be in pain all the time and would still do things, you know, still encourage us. And she knew that we knew that she wasn't gonna live long, but she never wanted it to impact us. So, she would insist that we do things, you know, go away to school or go away and do different things. But, it was hard for her that we did, you know, when we went away she would--I can remember leaving to go back 'cause I would come home every weekend [to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I can remember leaving and looking back and she'd be standing in the door crying 'cause she didn't know how long, you know, she'd be around. But, she still just had a really positive--she said--my brother--(cough) excuse me, my brother is about fifteen months older and--but, he was quieter than I was and a little bit more fragile in terms of the lo- of how he would respond to the loss of the--of a mother. I think she thought I was a little bit more resilient as far as that was concerned. And she had said, even though they told her she had--you know, that she was gonna die within four years or something like that, she said, "No, I'm gonna live until my son graduates from college." And I can remember her last couple of days, I can remember saying, "Mom, why are you just--why did you just ask for Mike [Michael James]?" You know, and she said, "Well, I'm not really--I don't really worry about you." She says, "I don't love you any differently, but I'm not as worried about you." And she actually could control, I think, you know, with God's help of course, how long she lived. And she died after my brother had graduated from school, and she felt that her--you know, her work was done. And, and she was in so much pain. I'm sure it was a relief for her to go. You know, her kidneys had failed by then and she had lost a lot of what she wanted from her--for herself, you know. She had lost her hair and a lot of stuff that happens when your kidneys fail. So. Story_ID: 636258 Speaker 1: When you consider your, your mother and father's habits, their personalities, their dispositions, their talents, their looks even, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I'm a blend of the two of them. I think that my mother [Eva McCollough James] was much more outgoing and full of life than I tend to be. I tend to be a little bit more serious like my dad [Howard James], but I think in terms of creativity and liking to sew and like to--liking to be with family and all, that's both of them, really. I think looks--look wise, I think I am really a blend of the two of them, probably leaning more towards my mother, but as I get older, I see more of my dad in me (laughter). So, I think I'm definitely a blend of the two of them. And I think--I wish I had more of my mom's sense of fun. You know, she rode motorcycles and she did as much as she could pack in, you know. And-- Speaker 1: She rode--really? She rode motorcycles (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She rode motorcycles as a younger woman. She would go to catch a bus and come back with friends, people of--bunch of people at the bes- bus stop. And we'd come in and she'd be sitting in the kitchen with people and I said, "Who are these people?" And it would be a bunch of people she met at the bus stop. She brought them home and would talk. She was actually diagnosed finally because of friendship. She was at University of Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and they still couldn't figure out what it was, and she would talk to the interns all the time, and one of the interns, Dr. Bopray [ph.], he was writing a paper about lupus. And because she was interacting with him so much and he was paying attention to different things, he's the one that said, "I think that you might have lupus." And he noticed--they get like--lupus is a butterfly, so they get a slight discoloration around the bridge of their nose that--it's the butterfly. And it's not real pronounced all the time, but he was the one by--just because she was--whoever was walking down the hall, she was talking to and concerned about, not just talking to, "How are you doing?" "What kind of day did you have," that type of thing. And he was the one who diagnosed her and then treated her for a long time until he moved to Boston [Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 636259 Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters and tell us where you fit in the--? Speaker 2: Well, I'm the youngest and I have an older brother, fifteen months older, Michael, Michael James, and he lives in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. He lives next door to where I used to live. We are I think as close as two siblings could be. We talk four, five times a week. He's the one I now--I used to go to my dad [Howard James] a lot with issues. I go to my brother now. And he's a--he's just a good soul, you know. He's very protective of me. When we were in like high school [Burlington City High School, Burlington, New Jersey] or junior high school [William L. Sayre Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], if a group of girls would stop speaking to me and--he has still not spoken to them (laughter). You know, once you do something to his sister, that's it, you know. So--and he's in Philadelphia now. He has done a lot of different things. He's kind of edging towards retirement now. But he's someone who is a linguist in the [U.S. military] service. He was a translator. He knows Farsi and German and Russian and, and it's all self taught. Most of it is self taught, you know. And curious about everything, you know, and you can't--and he doesn't--he's--it's not like he's showing off. You can't ask--you can't make a comment about something without him knowing, you know, the next level down of information about it that he'll--and that he's willing to share. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, it's just you and your brother? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 636260 Speaker 1: Can you describe your first, your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory? You know, it's hard to separate your memory from what you were told is your memory from looking at pictures and all. I--my memories are more impressions. My brother [Michael James] and I used to spend a lot of time together and I used to--I was a little bit in control of that time, so I used to tell him stories, that I told him were dreams but they were stories that I was just making up. And I can remember the two of us just sitting around doing that. And he was--he likes animals, in particular reptiles, and I have memories of his snakes getting out and me being terrified by it and finding them under my bed or something like that. So, it's kind of like impressions of childhood, family, you know. My, my father's family and my mother's in a different way--my father's family made a commitment that we would never have to change schools. So, no matter where we would have to stay--'cause when my mom [Eva McCollough James] would get sick, we'd have to go stay with a relative--no matter where we had to stay, they would make sure we got back to our schools and they took care of us. And my, my father's mother [Nellie Kraider James] and at any given time at least two of his brothers all lived in a big house in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and that's one of the places that we would go. And they used to braid my hair. So I have childhood memories of one uncle braiding and he would braid underhand and another uncle braiding and he would braid overhand, and I'd go to school like with braids like that, you know. Speaker 1: One braid going up and one going down? Speaker 2: One braid going up, one braid going down. My cousins, the children of my father's brothers, as they got older had to share in the responsibility of taking care of my brother and I. So, they would have to come to our house at that point in time on kind of shifts to make sure we got off in the morning and we got in okay in the evening until my dad [Howard James] got home. So, all my cousins participated in this. You know, I work for an organization [Child Welfare League of America, Washington, D.C.] that deals with children who are neglected or abused and where family isn't there to be pressed into duty like that and the consequences of that are pretty significant. But, if you grow up in a family where everyone has the responsibility to make sure everyone else is okay, you know--and that's the kind of family I grew up in, you know, that--my cousins weren't always happy about having to go to our house after school, you know, rather than go out with their friends, but they all did it. You know, my seven cousins from--on my mother's side where--who shared. We--basically, there were three little tiny bedrooms and we all had to share along with my aunt [Gloria McCollough Yip] and my uncle [Ming Yip] and my grandmother [Alma McCollough], so--and one little bath. They never--I can never remember a time that we had to go there because my mother going to the hospital where they didn't just embrace us with open arms and say, "We're gonna have a ball." And we did some little things like set the bathroom wall on fire once trying to (laughter)--so, we would do typical things but, you know, we did--it was wonderful. Speaker 1: How did you set the-- Speaker 2: We were (laughter), we were trying to see--you know, in North Philadelphia they have the alleys, we were trying to see if we could burn across the clothesline to the other side of the alley and it somehow backfired on us. Speaker 1: Oh, so like a fuse, you were gonna light one end and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were gonna light--we actually thought--I don't know what--we were kids. There were--there were nine of us. We were getting into all kinds of things. We once found five dollars on the street, and five dollars in those days was a lot of money, and we decided to buy donuts, five dollars' worth of donuts, and we turned those donuts after a while into weapons. You know, they were like cream filled donuts, we were throwing them at each other 'cause we had eaten as many as we could (laughter). And those were the kind of--I mean, they weren't like--they weren't the kind of things that would've sent us to jail, maybe if we had hit a cop car, car with a donut, but it was just kind of things that kids do together, you know. The most trouble was setting the wall on fire, but other than that, we kind of squeaked by. Story_ID: 636261 Speaker 1: All right, now, this is just a continuation, I guess. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Wow. We, we lived in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and so Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] has the largest inner city park system. We grew up without a lot of money but with a lot of opportunities to play in the parks and to go to a creek, things that people in cities really don't usually have the opportunities to do. So, playing in the park, you know, catching frogs, you know. And doing the kinds of things that you would think about in the country, we did, we were able to do in Philadelphia because of that really huge park system that they have. Riding bikes, stick ball, hopscotch, things out on the street that kids don't do enough nowadays, you know, playing jump rope. I can remember I was a little bit--I was always the kid left sitting on the ground when people were picking teams, so I was a little bit slower in most things including jump rope. I can remember my dad [Howard James] taking me down in the basement and tying the, the rope ends to the post at the bottom of the steps and trying to teach me how to jump in to play (laughter) double dutch, 'cause he was so sad to see me standing out there not able to do it, and so he'd stand down there and say, "Okay, Chris [HistoryMaker Christine James-Brown], just--it--you won't get hurt, just jump in, jump in." But, that was like part of our childhood, you know, the clapping games that you don't see kids play anymore. (Laughter) Some of the dangerous things we used to do without knowing, you know, the mosquito trucks? Did you--I don't know-- Speaker 1: Were the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) if you have them in Chicago [Illinois], but they would come and spray and-- Speaker 1: And they would just come down the neighborhood-- Speaker 2: --come down-- Speaker 1: --down the street and-- Speaker 2: --and we would run behind the trucks, you know (laughter) breathing everything in, thinking it was great. And then there were the--this really dates me. There were the roofers that used to come through and they'd have that tar and we used to love to steal the tar and chew it 'cause (laughter)--so, tho- I mean, those are good memories, you know. I loved the smell of the tar, you know, and, and we loved the idea of these mosquito trucks coming down the street. The ice cream truck would come around. I'm sure they were filthy little things, you know, 'cause where were people washing their hands and all. But, we never got sick, you know. We always had the ice cream. I mean city--we had block parties all the time and, you know, we didn't know any better and everybody survived it. You'd have potato salad sitting out there in the sun (laughter) all day long and, you know, fried chicken and just nice--just a nice community feel. Now, there were struggles, too. You know, there were people who didn't have a lot of money, but people would help each other if they didn't have money. And then, there came a time when gangs and racial issues started to kick in, so you started to have a lot of gangs in West Philadelphia and in all of Philadelphia, and you couldn't go out of your neighborhood too easily because you couldn't go into another neighborhood because another gang owned that neighborhood. So, you started to feel a little bit restricted. And then, there was a real turn in the police department [Philadelphia Police Department] where they started--with Rizzo and all where they started to really-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Frank Rizzo. Speaker 2: Frank Rizzo, who was a police chief but then became mayor, made it really tough for people in neighborhoods. So, they would come--the cops would come around while we were out doing all those wonderful things, playing, and they would make us go in the house, you know, because they would say too many people, you know, outside at one time, and so you had that. Story_ID: 636262 Speaker 1: I have to say, growing up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--'cause I, I was in Philadelphia through junior high school [at William L. Sayre Junior High School]. I never really, to be honest, understood what it meant to be an African American 'cause everybody around me almost was. It was a little strange when I would sit back and think about, well, why is the mailman and the insurance man--they don't look like me, but it was like a fleeting thought, right, 'cause we were all having fun. We used to go to--we'd all walk to go to the movie theater together and it was an African American theater, so we didn't know, you know. We were all just hanging out. When we moved to New Jersey, I was in the environment where about 25 percent of the people in the school were African American and it was a whole different story. You started to know what it meant to be African American. And the first introduction to that was, my brother [Michael James] and I were both pretty good students in school, and when my dad [Howard James] got the house--we had to move to a place called Edgewater Park [New Jersey] in--which is right across the border from Philadelphia, and we moved because we were trying to find a place where my mother [Eva McCollough James] could be on one level because she was--it was starting to be difficult for her to move around. And the one option for that in Philadelphia was in the Northeast [Northeast Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and if you were African American, you didn't live in the Northeast in those days, you just didn't. Those were (laughter) homes for Caucasians. Speaker 2: Can you give us an example of--I mean, just a overview of what the demographics were in Philadelphia in those days? Speaker 1: Sure (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know--I hear people say South Philly and North Philly, and you were raised in--initially-- Speaker 1: I was raised initially-- Speaker 2: --in West Philly. Speaker 1: --in North Philly and that's where my-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --dad's family was from. Now, you know, there are migration patterns, so-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --at one time, North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was heavily Jewish and then African Americans moved in. North Philly is predominantly African American now and has been for a long time, and is a very, very--it's, it's a community that's struggling, you know, because it was also very industrial community, lots of factories and people were living around their factories and all. And, and you go there, the factories are all gone. You know, the, the last ones have kind of just slowly disappeared. So, the, the, the reason that people went there for jobs and all started to disappear over the years. A very, very depressed community and one that you wanted to move from if you were African American, unfortunately. You wanted to find another community. So, we moved--my father's brother first and then my dad 'cause they always went out in little packs (laughter), you know, moved to West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And West Philadelphia was kind of at the time the up and coming place to go if you were African American, and it quickly changed, though. West Philadelphia had been Jewish also and what started to change--I think West Philadelphia started to change because so much of--so many of the people there worked for the government and got on the "L" [elevated train]. The "L" was the other--when you talk about--and you know the "L" from Chicago [Illinois]. The "L" was--it was elevated in--for the most part in West Philadelphia, it was elevated and--but it was the major artery into--you know, into downtown, into jobs and things like that, and so as people found it easier to come to West Philadelphia, the complexion changed, and people who were Jewish, a few would stay. Like every block had one or two elderly, you know, couple. But, West Philadelphia quickly became--except for the part around University of Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], it became increasingly working class and lower working class and then borderline, you know. Also the story of loss of factories, loss of businesses and things like that. It used to have a thriving, you know, like strips and things like that where people would go shopping, then the malls, took that away, you know. So, people started to go out to the malls rather than shop in their own neighborhoods. And then people started to move to--further west and--into Winfield [Pennsylvania] and places like that, and then gradually, that started to change and complexion and, you know, the, the, the property maintenance issues started to come in and, and things like that. So, you've got really--the majority of Philadelphia is very, very--is really struggling, you know. The neighborhoods in Philadelphia are struggling. South Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], a little bit more stable, but stable working class, really hardcore working class. Speaker 2: Was South Philly mostly white or what? Speaker 1: No, there are pockets of South Philly-- Speaker 2: Pockets, okay. Speaker 1: --that are very, very white and--very ethnic, I should say. So, you have the Italian section, really strong, you know, and then you also had a strong African American section in, in-- Speaker 2: So there wasn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) South Philadelphia. Speaker 2: --one part of town that black people lived in, you know-- Speaker 1: No, but where they lived-- Speaker 2: --for the most part in Philly. Speaker 1: --they were pretty segregated, and the schools were extraordinarily segregated, and churches were segregated, and movies were segregated and, you know, very, very segregated housing wise. Story_ID: 636263 Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school? What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: Harrity Elementary School in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is where I st- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Parity? Speaker 2: Harrity. Speaker 1: Harrity. Speaker 2: H-A-R-R--yeah-- Speaker 1: H-A-R-R-- Speaker 2: --I-T-Y. Speaker 1: --I-T-Y, okay. Speaker 2: Walking distance--you know, it was a time when, you know, children went to school in their neighborhoods and they walked together to school, and they formed friends around that. And that changed over the years with desegregation and people being bused down and special schools. By the time my daughter [Arica Brown Booker] was in school in Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], almost nobody on the block went to the same school. No two people went to the same school, you know. So, it changed the nature of the neighborhood 'cause they didn't play together, they didn't know each other. But, when I was growing up, it was always very much--we all went to school together, we came home together, we played together, you know, after school. And then I went on to Sayre Junior High School [William L. Sayre Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, wait a minute. Now, before we leave that school, let's--now, what was your--did you like school, first of all? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was a fanatic about school, very serious student. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: I just wanted to know everything, but I wasn't the most popular student. I mean, I had a teacher in the third grade who when she heard she was gonna get me in the fifth grade said, "No way do I want her" (laughter), 'cause I, I was talkative, but mostly to the teacher, you know. So, if she said, "It's blue." I'd say, "Well why do you--why do you think it's blue? You know, can we talk about that a little bit?" (Laughter) You know, so--Mrs. Lee [ph.], she was not happy about that. I loved reading. I loved poetry, absolutely loved poetry, and it was really encouraged in my house. And loved like the old fashioned poems, you know-- Speaker 1: Like what--was just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Edgar Allan Poe-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --you know, and things like that, you know. I liked the epic poetry that was--could tell a story, you know, "Under the spreading chestnut tree" ['The Village Blacksmith,' Henry Wadsworth Longfellow], and, you know (laughter), all those kinds of things. It's, it's interesting what's in your head, you know, that's stuck back in there. 'If' [Rudyard Kipling], "If I could change the world," [sic.] right? So, yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I just--and I was a reader (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) "If you can keep your head when all about you / Are losing theirs." Speaker 2: Yeah. "Are, are losing theirs and blaming it on you. / If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you / Yet make allowances for their doubting too." Yeah. I was just in a way pr- I--in a way, I was a little bit of a disappointment for my mom [Eva McCollough James], you know. And that's not a--it--my mom really wanted me to do the things that she couldn't do. You know, so she would want me to go out and have a good time and go to parties. And she would call my friends and say, "Invite Chris [HistoryMaker Christine James-Brown] to go to a party," or something like that, "get her out of that room reading." So--I mean, I wasn't a perfect kid. I did lots of things, but-- Speaker 1: Well, I've seen in the pictures now, you were--you were a chubby little girl. Speaker 2: I was chubby, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: And you're not now. A lot of people were a regular size person as a little girl and now they're real big, you know. Speaker 2: Well, I was only chubby for a little period. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was like this window of time and who knows what was going on at that time in my life. My mom and dad [Howard James] were--my--were very--I never had really a self esteem issue about chubby or not. It was not--how you looked was not something that my parents encouraged you to worry about and--except my mom really liked you to wear the latest styles. I remember when miniskirts came in and she thought that was the best thing in the world and, "Go get a miniskirt" (laughter), things like that, so-- Speaker 1: And you weren't excited about it? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. If anything I can say about myself looking back, I was a little bit boring. And I said to my daughter when she went away to school, I said, "I want you to really enjoy school. I don't want you to do what I did, you know, staying in the libraries and things like that, just really enjoy school 'cause there's so much to learn," you know, and--that I think I missed. So--but, no, my, my time in, in elementary school was kind of a predictor of the rest of my life. You know, I remember when I got the job at United Way, when I became the CEO of the United Way in Philadelphia [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey], I actually got a card from a se- my seventh grade French teacher who said, "I'm not at all surprised" (laughter). And she talked about me and how determined I was 'cause I wasn't like a super smart student, I just was gonna work until I got it done, you know. My brother [Michael James] was--is brilliant, you know, so he could do nothing and get A's, you know, and I'd work all night and get like B pluses and things like that. So, so I had a good--elementary school was fine. I--junior high school was a little bit more challenging for me 'cause you were supposed to be--are you a cool kid or not, you know, and so I think once people got used to who I was, they--I was fine. You know, that's just Chris. Story_ID: 636264 Speaker 1: So, you weren't as concerned about music and stuff like that or were, were you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you mean like popular music? Speaker 1: Yeah. Did you really like-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --popular music then? Okay. Speaker 2: I love and still do all of the popular music. I mean, that, that was Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble and, you know, all of the Philly sound and I loved it. I just--I wasn't--it was hard for me to get out and dance, you know, but I was always the one moving with the music (laughter) and listening to the music and knowing all the words and loving all the music. Oh, yeah, music was a big part. And my mom [Eva McCollough James] and dad [Howard James] were very much into music, but they were more into like Sam Cooke and, you know, the old music from their days. But, music was a big part of our, our home, too. Speaker 1: There are so many, in some of the other interviews I've, I've listened to from--people from Philadelphia that talk so much about musicians that lived in the neighborhood. Were, were there any famous (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --musicians-- Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have anything--we had some speakeasies in our neighborhood (laughter), but we didn't have, that I knew of--we spent a lot of time at the Uptown [Uptown Theater]. Did people talk to you about the Uptown? The Uptown was the place in Philadelphia, it was in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], where anyone who was anyone in the music business around African American, you know, soul music and all, went to the Uptown. Speaker 1: Was that in West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was in North Philly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right on Broad Street. And I mean it was the place to be. And I went to Uptown a lot and it was a--it was one of the safe trips until we started to get a little bit older and then--and it got increasingly dangerous. But--'cause we would go in big gangs, you know. Big groups of us would go to the Uptown just like--oh, the other thing that we used to do a lot as kids that Philly is popular for is roller skating, you know, and dancing when you were roller skating and things like that, you know. Speaker 1: Could you skate? Speaker 2: I was okay. I mean, I, I would go, you know, whether I went around once (laughter) or not. I would go 'cause I wanted to be, you know, in something like that, roller skating and a lot of times swimming at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)]. The Ys were very, very important parts of our lives. Rec centers [recreation center] were as we were growing up. Story_ID: 636265 Speaker 1: Okay, now in middle school-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I guess-- Speaker 2: In junior high? Speaker 1: Junior high school, yeah. Now, so you were starting to tell, tell us where you went to junior (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Sayre Junior High School [William L. Sayre Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Sayre? S-A-- Speaker 2: S-- Speaker 1: --Y-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, R-E. Speaker 1: R-E. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Sayre Junior High School, okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, there are a lot of things happening in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the time. You know, you had all the stuff with the police. You had-- Speaker 1: Now, what time is this? This is like--this is--let's see, you were born in-- Speaker 2: This was in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you, you were in junior high school in-- Speaker 2: So, I graduated from high school [Burlington City High School, Burlington, New Jersey] in 1970 and so it was the late '60s [1960s] I was in junior high school. And it was--it was around, you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and there, there was just starting to be some tension, you know, that I didn't fully understand until I got into high school, but it was just the beginning of some tensions and gangs. The thing that destroyed things more than anything else were the gangs, you know, where you had to take on a whole different approach to walking down the street, you know. You couldn't--you had to show that you weren't afraid. Story_ID: 636266 Speaker 1: Junior high school [William L. Sayre Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you were--was it like '64 [1964] or '65 [1965] I guess, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, and--all right. So, what's going on? Now, you got SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] going on now, the desegregation-- Speaker 2: You got (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) struggles on TV from Alabama. Speaker 2: You got--gangs were-- Speaker 1: Did you-- Speaker 2: --overwhelming. Speaker 1: And gangs in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You got police activity in Philadelphia. You had--we would go to a dance at the--at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] and the police would search you, even a woman, a young, you know, woman. They would search you, pat you down. You felt threatened walking up and down the street. You know, if you--and you couldn't go to other neighborhoods. It just became, you know, impossible to go to other neighborhoods. Speaker 1: And how would, how would another neighborhood know that you weren't from that neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, s- they knew. I mean, and, and there was fear of, if, you know--they policed neighborhoods. They patrolled the neighborhoods. You know, remember, I told--I--my cousins who used to come visit us had to be very, very careful, you know getting to our street, you know, because people were looking. I think there was a lot of anger and people were looking for a reason to be against somebody. And then they came up with if you were--you came--people came up with sayings, "What gang are you in?" And they would say, "Nobody gang," or something, so then there became a gang by that name. So, it just got really just crazy. Speaker 1: So, if you said nobody, you were in trouble. Speaker 2: You didn't even know what to say, you know. You didn't know what to say and what to do. And it got mean. You know, it went from throwing jelly donuts, you know, to people would put razor blades in snowballs. And, and you would hear that at the high school, they were slicing people, you know, if they didn't look a certain way or--I had--my best friend was a year ahead of me and she went to high school, and she used to have to get picked up from high school, she'd have to run down the steps and jump in the car, and they'd have to pull off, and people would still be coming after her. And you couldn't go to the bathroom during the day at school, you know, and it was just a period when it was a lot of anger, a lot of fear I think going on, and people just trying to figure who are you supposed to be angry at, you know. The, the police coming in to your community, how did you express that anger? You couldn't express it to the police, you know. The business of feeling that you had rights was different. You know, how dare someone come on my block, on my front step and tell me to go into the house, how dare they do that? But we never thought about that. We never questioned it. The same way I would say to--my mother [Eva McCollough James] used to tell me that they had to sit in the balcony at the--at the movie theaters in Philadelphia. They weren't allowed to sit on the front level, and I'd say, "How, how--why would you stand for that?" Well, when I think back on my childhood, why would I stand for letting the police chase us in the house, my house, (laughter) you know, my front stoop? So, really, really interesting times. Story_ID: 636267 Speaker 1: This is a time, now you were in junior high school [William L. Sayre Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I guess all the way through the end of high school [Burlington City High School, Burlington, New Jersey] was a time with, with all this awakening of African American culture and history, and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is one of the homes for that sort of thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: So, was there a--did you--were you keenly aware, start becoming aware of black history? Speaker 2: Well, we moved from Philadelphia when I finished high school over into Jersey [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: When--after you finished? Speaker 2: After I finished junior high school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we moved into Burlington County [New Jersey] and we moved into a interesting situation without knowing it, in that my dad [Howard James] who was very fair, you know, blue eyes and blonde hair, he went to look for the house and put, you know, the deposit down and then we showed up and found out that it wasn't a community that African Americans (laughter) are supposed to be in. Speaker 1: So, they actually thought-- Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) your dad was white? Speaker 2: They thought he was white and so they were gonna sell him the house, and then we showed up and they tried to talk him out of the house. They showed them everything was wrong with it. My dad didn't do it deliberately. He was surprised by it, you know. And so when we moved in, we broke the block and that started the awareness for me, you know. Because the people across the street, they burned the word nigger in their lawn, the people next door put their house up for sale, but then would come over and ask my mother [Eva McCollough James] if they could bring any potential buyers to talk to her to see that she really wasn't too bad. We had the little jockeys, the black jockeys around. I mean, all of this was to me, like--I-- Speaker 1: Are you talking about the little statuette of the black jockey-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with the lantern? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's always painted black with the red lips and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and they were all around. And I was like, wow, this is like a whole new world. And so when we--when we got into that environment, it was both leaving Philadelphia, coming of age anyway, and so I can't sort out what had the most impact on me. Story_ID: 636268 Speaker 1: I can remember when my dad went to enroll us in school, they didn't want us to go into the academic track 'cause the school we were going to was predominantly white, but-- Speaker 2: What was the name of the school? Speaker 1: Burlington City High School [Burlington, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Burlington City (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So there was about 25 percent African Americans. So, we lived in Edgewater Park [New Jersey], there was no high school, so we were bused to Burlington City High School, and there was about 25 percent blacks in the school, and a very, very settled population. People in Burlington [New Jersey] who were African Americans had been there forever and very few African Americans in the academic track, and my dad had to fight to get us in. They didn't--they never once looked at our grades or anything, you know. You were just--if you're African American, you're gonna go in the commercial track, you know. Speaker 2: So was that--was that typical of the counseling you got through the rest of high school? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. I mean, I can remember when I said I wanted to be an architect. It was like, no. You know, why would (laughter) you think you could be an architect, you know. So, it was an interesting time. I'd--I was fortunate enough to have teachers who, who broke through and were interested and very encouraging for anything, almost anything I wanted to do, but not at the coun- not at the formal level, not the counselors and things like that. Speaker 2: So, was your--was the teaching staff integrated at, at Burlington? Speaker 1: A little bit, not a lot, but it was a little bit integrated. But, you would have like the gym teacher or something like that, you know. Speaker 2: Gym teacher would be black--was black (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: A few, a sprinkling. Speaker 2: So, but the teachers kind of were helpful even-- Speaker 1: They were helpful. Speaker 2: --despite the-- Speaker 1: You know, I was kind of--I'm kind of oblivious to stuff, you know, and would insist on certain things and, and as are my parents [Eva McCollough James and Howard James], so they would kind of break through it just by taking liberties that maybe others wouldn't have taken 'cause they assumed that they should be there for me. So, if I wanted to take a lot of French courses, I took a lot of French courses, you know. And so I, I think that there's this interesting difference. So, when I was in a, a totally African American environment, I was not as aware as I should've been that it meant something to be African American. When I was in a predominantly white environment at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] and was--and whenever I would be--a place where I was one of the unique few, I had a different understanding of what it meant to be black. The best understanding was when I was in the environment where, where there were enough of us to be a perceived threat, you know. 'Cause when I thought about--I didn't understand it at the time, like, why are people wanting to move away from us? You know, I really didn't get it at the time, but when I look back on it, the people who were living in Edgewater Park, which was still a lower, lower middle class environment, they had no opportunity to go anywhere else. They were feeling really stuck and then here we came, you know. They had just--they had moved from North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], West Philadelphia out a little further and then finally over into New Jersey, and we had been following (laughter), and there they were, and where were they gonna go? This was what they had built their dreams on for the kids, you know, and that's just the way the world was. So, when I think about it in that way, I think, okay, I, I kind of understand it a little bit. I didn't like it, don't think it's right, but I understood it better with the benefit of, of hindsight, and, and listening to people and the kinds of dreams that all of us have for our kids, you know, so. Speaker 2: So, well, did, did your grades suffer in high school or did you do all right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. I did fine in high school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was a student (laughter). Speaker 2: So, what did you concentrate on in terms of-- Speaker 1: Well, I got involved--fortunately, I loved history, I loved French. I studied French quite a bit. I was able to go to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] for a special summer French program. I was editor of the school newspaper, in student council, so I got involved in the more--I wasn't in sports or, you know, the fun kind of stuff. But I got involved in like French club and, you know, the newspaper and things like that and enjoyed it. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Now, were there any special teachers that were like a mentor to you or took a special interest in helping you? Speaker 1: You know, I was, I was really fortunate. I believe in mentors and I would force everyone into being my mentor (laughter) at any given time, you know. If I needed something from someone and I thought they had it, and I was fortunate. I didn't--I think most people, they were, you know, so shocked by it, you know, that they just were fine with it. So, I was able to get what I needed from most of my teachers, you know, at the time that I needed it. Story_ID: 636269 Speaker 1: So you were taking the college prep course, I guess, and, and you had intended to go to college, I suppose. So, your, your brother [Michael James], was he already in college when you were in high school [Burlington City High School, Burlington, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: No, he was two years ahead of me, so we were in high school for a little bit of time together. And he didn't like the move. He didn't adjust well to the move from Philly. He made my dad [Howard James] furious 'cause he wanted to go back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for school and my dad was like, "I got you a place where you don't have to be worried about gangs and all and you want to go--you want me to pay for you to go back?" But he really, really had a hard time with the move and his grades actually suffered, and he was really miserable for a while. He eventually got himself together. He went into the [U.S. military] service, you know, and then went back and went to school and everything, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --he wasn't a happy camper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, well, I guess--I guess it would've been '68 [1968] that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died and did, did, did you have--how did--where were you and what happened in Philadelphia-- Speaker 2: I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) during that period? Speaker 2: Well, I was in New Jersey-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I was--we did--there was a school walkout when he was killed. Speaker 1: Now, the black students walked out of school? Speaker 2: Black students walked out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But--this is embarrassing. I was such a rules follower and everyone knew, that the black students came and got me and told the teacher to give me permission to walk out so that I would walk out (laughter), and I walked out. I wanted to, but I'm such--I was such a kind of follower of the rules. I was a maverick around how to use the rules to get things like, you know, with the newspaper and things like that, but in terms of a walkout, I would've been, oh my gosh (laughter), you know. So, I was thrilled when I did, when I did it, you know. Speaker 1: So, they, they wanted you to walk out with them and had to get permission for you to walk out? Speaker 2: The, the students I think liked me, but they also knew me, you know, and they knew that I was kind of a different sort of person, and they wanted me to be part of it, and they knew I would want to be part of it, so they had to figure out a way to make sure I could be part of it, you know. Remember, this is the one whose mother [Eva McCollough James] was calling and saying, "Don't you wanna come tell Chris [HistoryMaker Christine James-Brown] to go out and put that book down" (laughter), you know? So--yeah. But, I mean, my high school experience was good. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the, the--where, where you were in New Jersey, were there any riots or anything or any-- Speaker 2: No. No. It's too, I think too small. And actually, it was a little sad. You know, people really didn't understand beyond a walkout what they should be doing and could be doing. I mean, these were people who were told, "Go into a commercial course," you know, in school and don't--and they were smart people, so it was a little bit--I think a little bit of a sad story in some ways, very parochial. They were so amazed that my dad worked in Philadelphia and that we spent--we went to church in Philadelphia [St. Augustine's Protestant Episcopal Church; St. Augustine's Church of the Covenant]. It was like, "You're going to Philadelphia? You know, to church?" I'm like, "Yeah. It's like seventeen miles away," you know, so it was different, very different. Speaker 1: Okay. So, were you as a high school student, you know, kind of keenly aware of what was going on in the city or, or--I mean, in-- Speaker 2: In Philadelphia? Speaker 1: --in Philadelphia or, or nationally with all the things happening (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was--I was-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, I was pretty much aware. I was very aware of what was going on in the world, you know. And my parents were very were--aware of what was going on in the world. And so, yeah, I, I, I feel fortunate in that although my parents didn't travel a lot, they weren't able to travel a lot, they were pretty worldly in how they viewed things. They weren't real parochial. So they always encouraged us to be looking at what's happening in history and what's going on and why do you think it's going on, and so that part was good. It was really good for us I think. And they were pretty tolerant. I think my dad and mom were very tolerant of the things that happened around that move to Edgewater Park [New Jersey], you know. My mom was also someone who demanded her rights. I mean, she never would let anyone like not do anything other than give her the utmost respect, and she got that from her mother [Alma McCollough], (laughter) you know. But--and she was very vocal when she thought things were not as they should be. So, I remember she had--I'm trying to think. She had called the police in Edgewater Park for something and they came in to the house and were not giving her the, the proper respect. And I don't even remember the issue. I can just remember my mother in her very, very wonderful way laying them out and inviting them out of her house, you know. Never used curse words or anything like that, but they left (laughter), you know, pretty quickly. So, that was a good role model to have, you know. Story_ID: 636270 Speaker 1: All right, so now in 1970, you were on the verge of graduation [from Burlington City High School, Burlington, New Jersey]. What were your prospects? What were you thinking? You, you, you were going to school, right? But had you chosen a, a, a college at that point? Speaker 2: I never had like the college I wanted to go to, you know. I had some bizarre little periods in time when I wanted to go where the best basketball team was, you know, so I was looking at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you a sports fan, I guess? Speaker 2: Basketball. My dad [Howard James] was a fanatic about basketball, absolutely a fanatic. So, I think it was Bob Lanier and they were playing Boston--the people at Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] at that time were really, really good, so I had it in my head I was gonna go to a school where there--and luckily, that was just a fleeting little thing in my head. And then, actually, my best friend and I wanted to go to the same school, so we actually--which was also crazy. We also went through a process of deciding where we wanted to go based on where the both of us would be happy. And I thought I wanted to major in journalism, and I think I ended up--I never--I don't know why a historically black college [HBCU] never came into my head, but it never did. I don't know that I was in an environment where people--well, not historically black, but Cheyney was one of the schools that all of my cousins had gone to 'cause they were all teachers. Speaker 1: That's Cheyney State [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania] and-- Speaker 2: Cheyney State. Speaker 1: --that was in--that's in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Pennsylvania, okay. Speaker 2: Right outside of Philadelphia, West- Westchester [sic. Cheyney, Pennsylvania]. And maybe five or six of them had gone, and they thought that I should go to Cheyney to be a teacher, but I knew I didn't wanna be a teacher, you know, and--at least, I thought I didn't wanna be. And I ended up wanting to go to Fairleigh Dickinson [Fairleigh Dickinson University, Teaneck, New Jersey] and not having enough money to go, and I ended up going to Douglass [Douglass College; Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey], you know, state college, and--but a good school. It's a part of Rutgers University [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and ended up going there and taking-- Speaker 1: So it's a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) journalism. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. You say it's a part of Rutgers? Speaker 2: Rutgers University. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's the all-female college of Rutgers-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --University. Speaker 1: So, Rutgers is--was a Catholic school or? Speaker 2: Rutgers, no. It's the state-- Speaker 1: Okay, state. Speaker 2: --university for New Jersey and it has multiple campuses and colleges, and, and it's less expensive because it's a state school, so I ended up going there and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I knew the--I never knew the nature of Rutgers or when--I mean, whether it's public or private, but, but it's a state school? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's a state--and it has--it used to have Rutgers College [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], which was the all-male, and it had Douglass, which was all female in New Brunswick [New Jersey]. And then they had--over the years, they have Livingston College [Piscataway, New Jersey], which is coed and Cook College [George H. Cook Campus at Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], which is coed. They have Newark [Rutgers University - Newark, Newark, New Jersey], they have Camden [Rutgers University - Camden, Camden, New Jersey], and then Rutgers College for men went coed. So, the only thing now remaining is Douglass College, is still for women. Story_ID: 636271 Speaker 1: I had a pretty good experience at Rutgers, although I--you know, I had--I was back and forth so much with mom [Eva McCollough James] and I spent quite a bit of time not living on campus to, to, to watch her, but I still had good friends and a lot of--a good taste of college life. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, so-- Speaker 1: Switched majors (laughter). Speaker 2: So, what--you, you initially was--were--you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Journalism. Speaker 2: --gonna be a journalism major-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, I wanted to go into journalism. Speaker 2: --and you switched to? Speaker 1: Anthropology. Speaker 2: Anthropology? Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. I took a course--my dad [Howard James] was so disappointed (laughter)--I took a course in anthropology, cultural anthropology and just loved the framework for thinking about people and cultures and how they all come together, and switched my major. And, which meant most of my courses weren't even at Douglass [Douglass College; Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey] 'cause it, it didn't have an anthropology major at Douglass. And, so I had to go to another campus to take the courses, but it was--I'm--I'd never regret it, you know, going into anthropology. It's a good foundation-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --for where the world is going and where the world has gone. Speaker 2: Well, did you have impressive professors there at Rutgers? Speaker 1: All of them were. I mean, I think it was a very applied anthropology program, which meant it really helped you think about how you could apply it to life in your real--and to jobs. There's--when I went to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], I dropped out because it was the opposite. It was what I call arm chair anthropology, so you, you learned it to teach it and the idea of applying it and, you know, where you wanna go with it was just too foreign to them. And so--but, at Douglass, I had a good--at Rutgers, I had a good experience with anthropology. Speaker 2: Okay, now this would be also--now, now-- Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: So, so there's not a--but, but--so, you're saying there really wasn't any outstanding professors that you remember that really, you know, served as a mentor or-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --role model-- Speaker 1: No, unh-uh. Speaker 2: --to either--this is also the beginning--we were talking about the beginning of black studies and also women's studies were starting now, in a place like Rutgers. Were you-- Speaker 1: Got a lot into the black studies, women's studies was all part of the--you know, our program in anthropology. And at Brown, it was much more women's studies, you know, had some pretty well known professors at Brown in women's studies in the anthropology department. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, we never had a problem, you know, understanding the black experience, you know. We were pretty--it wasn't kind of wow for us, you know, 'cause I think we just knew that--about the contributions that African Americans had made to the world, you know, and to the city. And so-- Speaker 2: I think and if I'm not--correct me if I'm wrong, I think Dr. Ivan Van Sertima was there. He was pretty big figure-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --important figure in-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in African American-- Speaker 1: I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) studies. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think if you--I guess in a way, we grew up a little bit cocky (laughter), you know. We never once thought that--I mean, you said, "Were you thinking about going to coll- ?" I mean, there was never a question that we were going to school. I mean, even when we knew, my dad was really struggling paying these huge medical bills and all. There was never ever a whisper of not going to school, you know. We knew it would be a little bit more of a challenge and we all always worked, but it was not ever discussed as a--not a possibility, you know. So--which was good. You know, I think that more children should be raised in that way where you just know that--just like you never discuss that you're going to high school, you know. Speaker 2: Well, I raise it because I think neither one of your parents like finished-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, college, so I just wondered if that was something that they pushed (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think that they--I think that they--they're--certainly, certainly, I would not have said I'm the first person in my family that graduated from college. It wasn't that kind of family in that my mother and father, there were reasons that they didn't--weren't able to go. For my dad, it was primarily financial with--when--as my mom started to really deteriorate, and for my mom, it was her illness [lupus]. And so, I think that--and I think we kind of understood that. But, you know, my uncles and my cousins--and my cousins who were all at least ten years older, and they all were in school, you know, so school was kind of a natural part of, of things around us. Story_ID: 636272 Speaker 1: So you were at, at Rutg- Rutgers until '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You graduated in '74 [1974] with a degree in cultural anthropology. And were there, were there any classmates of yours that were-- Speaker 2: In cultural anthropology? Speaker 1: Yeah, or--not just in cultural anthropology. I, I know there's probably--probably a lot of the black students knew each other, I would guess. And who was in school with you that you would, you know, or--black or white that you would remember now that, that-- Speaker 2: I had--if you--if you mean, do I have friends from school that I'm still really close with? Speaker 1: No, I'm just asking who was there that you remember that's notable, whether they were friends or not? Speaker 2: Oh, that's known (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, friends or not or just-- Speaker 2: --to the world? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, famous people while I was at school. Speaker 1: Well, not just famous, just, you know, anybody that you--is significant, you think that is-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, probably my closest friends were the ones that I was in the same dorm with, so most of them are African Americans after my fist year. My first year, I was with Adele Marsha Bloom [ph.], was my roommate because--and she was Jewish from New York, I think. You didn't get to pick your roommate in your first year and they were very careful to say they wanted to--you to meet different people. And I don't think it was because she was Caucasian, Jewish, I think it's 'cause she was messy (laughter), incredibly messy that we weren't roommates. But, I also think you, you, you drift towards people who have the same musical interests, that identify with the African American--it was a time at Douglass [Douglass College; Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey], they had just started the African House [Africana House], African American house, so that they wanted everybody who's African American to live together in one house, but the house would only accommodate about twenty people, so (laughter) it wasn't easy. So, Adrienne McMillan [ph.] was, was a roommate that I was very, very close with. Kathy [ph.] and there were lots of people there that we were very, very close for those four years. And I can remember them being very, very significant to helping me deal with my mother's [Eva McCollough James] death when I was in my junior year. They all came and stayed a couple of weeks with me, you know, and things like that. So, they're the kinds of friends you make in college, you don't make again, you know. And we're--we had a reunion in Atlantic City [New Jersey] not too long ago and it was kind of fun. But (laughter), you know, you look at yourself for the first time through them and say, oh, my, I really have aged, haven't I (laughter)? 'Cause you look in the mirror and see something different. You know, you see what's in your image about yourself. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you came out in '74 [1974], and now, did you go to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] right away? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I went to Brown-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) right away. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: In, in pursuit of master's [degree] in-- Speaker 2: I was in the Ph.D. program in urban anthropology, and I was there through one academic year, did well academically, and the field study during the summer and then I got married. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my, my--the person I married [Donald Brown] was at--was my boyfriend from college, and he was a year behind me, so he was in his--he was a year behind me not in age, but in deciding he was gonna study rather than play bid whist, but (laughter)--he was in his senior year while I was at Brown. And then he got into Columbia [Columbia University] and we eventually--we got married and went to Columbia. Speaker 1: To New York City [New York, New York], okay. Speaker 2: In New York City, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 636273 Speaker 1: Tell us about your husband. Now, you, you met him in--at-- Speaker 2: Met him our--probably in my freshman year in college [Douglass College; Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and we were basically really, really just best friends for a long time and then it evolved and probably in my senior year, we were seriously dating and going out. And so--and we got married in '76 [1976] and-- Speaker 1: And his name is not James Brown, right? It's-- Speaker 2: His name is Donald Brown (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His name is Donald Brown, really, really good guy. He, he and I lived at--in married student housing at Columbia University [New York, New York]. He was in the business school [Columbia Business School]. And, and it was a good experience. I went kicking and screaming to New York City [New York, New York] from Phil- from the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area-- Speaker 1: So, did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and had a really good experience. Speaker 1: Okay. So, there wasn't a way that you could figure out how to stay at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] or finish your degree-- Speaker 2: I was not happy with Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Brown was--I'm--Brown was not the right place for me. It was--I was one of their first African Americans in the Ph.D. program in anthropology. They worried about that too much and I was uncomfortable with that worry. So, the fact that I wasn't social is because I wasn't--I'm not social and they kept thinking it was because I was uncomfortable. And, but more important than that, I really went into anthropology to work on issues in the U.S. and I understand better now they were saying to me. They wanted me to work on issues outside of the U.S. and I had an M- NIMH, National Institute of Mental Health fellowship for Brown, to go to Brown, had a full fellowship, and they wanted me to--you know, to work in different areas that--where I could hire some research assistants and things like that, and it was just not where I was at the time. You know, thinking back on it, I probably should've spent more time really understanding the school and the environment there and whether I would be happy there. And then there's always, you know, when you have this guy that's far away (laughter), you know. It was--it was different. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I always thought I would go back, always thought I would go back. Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you, you moved to New York City and you're staying in married housing at Columbia University, which is--okay. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: So what did you do? Did you get a job in New York? Speaker 2: I got a job. Actually, I had gotten a job at--in New Jersey, department of human services [New Jersey Department of Human Services] in research, 'cause my fellowship was a teaching and research fellowship, so I got a job in research doing a research project. And then I got a job in the New York City Department for the Aging, also working on a research project, looking at crime against the elderly, and so I worked there. Story_ID: 636274 Speaker 1: When did you start that one, New York department of the aging [New York City Department for the Aging] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started that probably in '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Let me see, April, May, June, July--late '76 [1976], early '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that was a short term research project, but I finished it out and then moved--that--by then, we had moved outside of Phila- back outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. He [James-Brown's ex-husband, Donald Brown] finished school [at Columbia Business School, New York, New York]. In between that, though, he was sent--when he got his job, he was sent to Seattle [Washington] for eight months. And so I used to travel back and forth from New York City [New York, New York] to Seattle a few times a month to see him. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --and then we moved outside of Philadelphia and I continued to work, actually, in New York City, so I commuted for almost a year, three hours each way-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to finish out the project. Speaker 1: This is the seniors project and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, looking at crime against the elderly. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did you learn about that? 'Cause that's a major source of tension-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in most urban communities. Speaker 2: You know, it was at a time--the thing that we were trying to work on is at the time, they didn't even keep police statistics by age. So they didn't--when you don't look at data to understand what's going on--they didn't understand that, that elderly people were victims of very specific crimes. So, we did a pilot starting--just looking at the data. Let's collect the information by age and look and see. And we found out for an example that they were very, very, very vulnerable to what was called push in crimes, where they would go to their front doors and fumble a little bit with their keys trying to get in 'cause they were older and somebody would come behind them, push them in, and rob them in the safety of and, and in the violation of their own homes, and then they would go. So, they were--so, we--but just by using data, we were able to figure out that there are certain crimes that the elderly are more prone to be victims of. And then we took that information--it just--where the applied part was also always important for me, we then took that information and started doing training with police departments. And it was at the same time when they were getting training around rape to try to sensitize them to the whole issue of rape, so we would generally go into these meetings where one person would be training on rape and I would be training around the elderly, and the bizarre kind of statements, "Well, she brought it on herself, she had on this short dress." All in the, the mindset back then was so interesting, you know, where, where they really didn't get it, you know. And it was right at that time when, you know, women's rights and, you know, respect for women, and, and the elderly were in the mix 'cause they didn't even think enough to wanna collect the statistics by--and they never asked the age of the victim, you know. Story_ID: 636275 Speaker 1: This is interesting. As I think more about this, just as a--as a person out here in the world, I never--I never lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but when I think about it, Philadelphia seems like a crime laboratory for those days. I, I remember the story--do you remember the orange hats thing? 'The Orange Hats of Fairlawn' ['The Orange Hats of Fairlawn: A Washington, D.C. Neighborhood Battles Drugs,' Harvey Simon], was a famous crime paper written that the National Institute of Justice passed out about this community to start wearing these orange hats to let the gangs know that, that the neighborhood was united. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Do you remember that? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They even depicted it in a movie about Philadelphia [sic.] called-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I remember now, yeah. Speaker 1: --'Meteor Man' ['The Meteor Man']. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: With-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Robert--I, I mean--what's his--Townsend [Robert Townsend]. Speaker 2: Right. Well, they--Townsend. A lot of--there was a lot of innovation around even driving gangs out, and Philly was pretty successful. It took a long time and a lot of experimentation in order for them to really start to turn that around. Philly is not as, you know--Philly survived that gang period, you know, and it wasn't by police activity. That was the interesting thing. The initial response was just have the police go in there beating people over the heads, and that--there's something underneath gangs, you know, that isn't about, you know, just beating them over the head. People were looking for something. They were looking for connections. They were looking for a, a sense of belonging. There's so many other things, you know, that you need to look at, you know. Speaker 1: And this is the Nixon era [President Richard Milhous Nixon], the crime--he ran on a crime platform, anti-crime platform-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --appealing to the elderly, the World War II [WWII] generation-- Speaker 2: Yep (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to arm themselves-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --against increased crime and gang activity. Speaker 2: There's been a lot--the elderly--I mean, it's interesting. They're really back in trouble again, but the last twenty years, they've really--they were able to form a real good strong coalition to demand rights and demand focus in public policy for the elderly. We're starting to see some step backs from that now, you know, particularly for the most vulnerable elderly. But, looking at the history of, you know, whether it's crime or just rights of the elderly over time is--in this country is interesting to look at. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a period where a lot of pioneer studies around patterns that people have, where the elderly go to cash their checks even and the route, you know, the crime (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was when abuse against the elderly was really--you know, a lot of the adult family members of the elderly were abusing, you know, because of drugs, you know, and so, yeah. Speaker 1: What did you find and--I mean, what was the most significant thing that you found, I guess, in looking at-- Speaker 2: You know, looking back at it, the most significant was the incredible importance of data and information. You just can't solve anything. You can't really know how to approach anything other than with a big smack, you know, unless you have good data that tells you who are the people, where's the crime? So, we [New York City Department for the Aging] would keep district by district, you know, block by block, what's happening, so you can--then, you can step back and look at patterns, you know. The, the, the power of data and, and, and using it for problem solving, you know, is pretty significant. So, that was the biggest aha, in addition to the kinds of crimes in elderly and how, how insensitive police departments were at the time, you know. But, I think the most significant thing was around the power of data. Speaker 1: So, you were becoming keenly aware of applied social science to solve problems in the community (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. And--and it's--what I was--I've been fortunate enough to do throughout my career 'cause I went from that job to a planning position with United Way in Philadelphia [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and my first two assignments, I, I needed--I had to look at the needs of women and girls, and I looked at the needs of the blind and visually impaired. I was asked to come in and do an assessment for what should we be doing as United Way with these two populations. Speaker 1: Now, now, now what year is this when this comes? Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979]. Story_ID: 636276 Speaker 1: Okay, now, we might be going a little bit too fast 'cause I wanted to ask you about MOVE. Speaker 2: About MOVE, yeah. Speaker 1: MOVE occurs in what, '78? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's the--well, tell us what that's about. You even had a cousin involved in MOVE (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. You know, MOVE is a real--I mean, it's got a lot of--it was later than '78 [1978]. Let me think. It must've been in-- Speaker 1: It says--well a note here says August 1978. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's before you worked for-- Speaker 2: No, the MOVE-- Speaker 1: It's not? Okay. Speaker 2: MOVE was--occurred while I was at the United Way [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so somewhere the dates are a little bit wrong. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, it's in that timeframe. And the reason I know why is that, first of all, MOVE occurred in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where I grew up but not in my immediate neighborhood, but it was on the block in the house where my first cousin [Frank James Africa] grew up, and his mother [Louise Leaphart James] who was married to my father's youngest brother [Frank James] was sibling to John Africa. And so my cousin because of that association, when his parents divorced, his mother got him more involved with her family and he got involved with--and MOVE really started out as really naturalists and just kind of got out of hand. So-- Speaker 1: What was MOVE anyway? Tell people 'cause this is for, for history. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: People watching this won't even know what MOVE is-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: So what, what is--what's-- Speaker 2: What happened is that there was a, a group of people in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] who were protesting, or demonstrating the importance of going back to nature and, and they were African American, going back to nature and, and living off the land and--initially, but that kind of behavior became an irritation in the neighborhoods, wherever they lived, 'cause they were in a couple of places. So that irritation in the neighborhood got distorted into anger and it somehow became more anger at African American--a little subset within the African American population. And so it got mixed up as a militant group or--you know, there was a lot of people would hear MOVE and they think militant, militant African Americans, you know. Speaker 1: Meaning like guns, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. So--and it did, then, become militant because people started, you know, pushing them out and, you know, one thing leads to the next. So-- Speaker 1: Now, what would cause people--and I've heard different things. I, I don't wanna try to tell this, but what would cause people to be irritated by MOVE? Speaker 2: Because they would move into a neighborhood and have a house with all kinds of people living there, living naturally, which meant it wasn't the cleanest, best kept. And then as-- Speaker 1: I mean, now what does that--you know, I know what that means, but tell us what, what-- Speaker 2: It mean garbage and filth and children not looking like they always needed to look and neighbors getting scared and then eventually MOVE getting, you know--hunkering down, if you're gonna be scared and we're gonna get guns and--you know, and then we're gonna get a bunker and it just kind of escalated. Speaker 1: So, the, the neighbors primarily were black neighbors, right? Speaker 2: The black neighbors, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Primarily black neighbors. Speaker 1: And they did not like the MOVE-- Speaker 2: They did not like it. Speaker 1: --because of the garbage and-- Speaker 2: Garbage and loud. They would start doing loud noises and-- Story_ID: 636277 Speaker 1: I remember watching my cousin [Frank James Africa] who was very much a part of our family, you know, was always around us, and eventually as he got into MOVE, he wasn't allowed--first of all, he wasn't allowed to be with us alone, so someone from MOVE was always there, and then eventually they didn't want him around us at all 'cause they felt we were influencing him, you know, in a way that they didn't want him to be influenced. So, it had like a cult aspect to it. And I think people truly went to MOVE and joined MOVE for all kinds of reasons. I mean, it wasn't like it was one philosophical thing holding everyone together. In a way, it was a bunch of people who were looking for something and needed something, and this became their family and they were living together. So, I think it's almost like the, the story of the elephant. You know, 'cause when you ask people, what was MOVE? Some will say, well, it was, you know, black militant movement or it was this or that, or it was a back to earth movement or back to nature movement, and it was all those things for whoever went. You know, the people that I know who were involved with MOVE were people who were looking, you know. They were just looking for something and got connected and then got pulled in. My cousin was really struggling with the fact that his father [Frank James] and mother [Louise Leaphart James] broke up and his mother was using him as kind of a ping pong ball in the middle of them. So, he would go where my uncle was, which was, you know, on the Main Line and then he'd go back to West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to the house that was eventually bombed. Speaker 2: Now, what is the Main Line? Speaker 1: The Main Line is very upscale, very--you know, he would go to private schools with my uncle. My uncle would send him to private summer camps and everything and then he would have this other experience and the real kind--but, that contrast, he was made to be--feel angry about it. You know, why should these people have this and other people not? So, rather than embracing it, you know, it was--he became angry and angry at himself for having it. So, it got really very, very strange (laughter). Speaker 2: So, he was committing class suicide in some ways, I guess. Speaker 1: So and, you know, I think--when I think of--when I think about the things that African Americans do to themselves--you know, I can remember being told you're not black enough and I go, what do you mean I'm not black enough? And it wasn't about my color. It was about, well, you like to study too much and you're always wanting to go to school. And I'm like, what are--why would you put yourself down by saying that? But that was a little bit what--of my growing up, things that we experienced that we--we kind of somehow are not embracing enough of the differences, you know, within our own people, you know. And I've always been at the core a very, very proud African American and I've worked in a lot of environments where I'm the only one, where my determination is to make sure I don't leave it the only one, you know, whereas other people would say, "Okay, I wanna be the only one, that makes me special." My view would always--you know, so, I think it--I think people need to understand that more. We need to understand that more about each other, you know, about the different ways that we approach the world and the different ways we approach eq- you know, looking for equality and everything. But--so, the MOVE people were looking for all kinds of things. Some people wanted a parent that they didn't have and some wanted, you know, a gang. It was similar to the gang thing. And it got caught up in the politics of the city, you know, the first African American mayor and it's almost like snow removal. You know, if-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --a mayor can't remove snow, he's gonna get--he's gonna lose his job. You better remove these MOVE people from our neighborhood or you're gonna lose your job. Speaker 2: Okay, so Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.] is elected in '83 [1983], right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, I guess the--yeah, the crisis with MOVE would have to come-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it was later (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) after, yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's--there-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: There's a wrong date in there. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. Speaker 1: I don't know what it was. Story_ID: 636278 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know for sure I started-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --United Way [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in '79 [1979], I know for sure. And here's why, I'll tell you why. So, our family really tried hard, my cousins and I, mostly my cousins, really tried hard to convince my cousin to come out of the house 'cause we knew things were escalating. What happened was that it, it, it was creating so much fear and concern in this very small block. They had the police barricades up and they had the horns sound--you know, making noises all times of day and night. Speaker 2: The electronic sound (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The bull horns kind of. Speaker 2: Bull horns, yeah. Speaker 1: And the neighbors were just overwhelmed by it. The police were threatened by it. And they finally just--somebody came up with this idea--and they had built a bunker on the top of their little row house. It was a, a tiny block, a small street and all row homes, homes that were all attached, you know, wall to wall--(cough) excuse me. Speaker 2: And, and MOVE was in one of the units? Speaker 1: And the--MOVE was in one of the units and it was a unit that--where my cousin grew up. And so--and his mother [Louise Leaphart James] still owned it. And, and they built a bunker on the top and that created even more fear. I think MOVE was afraid, too, so, you know, all of this--and somebody came up with the idea that if we blow the bunker off the top, we can get into the building, you know, and get people out. And it went wrong. It burned the whole block down and killed all but I think two people that were in the MOVE house, two or three, Birdie [Birdie Africa; Michael Ward] and--I think two got out. The only thing they ever found of my cousin was his thigh bone, you know. They--everybody was just, you know, burned beyond recognition. Speaker 2: Did they just refuse to leave because of they're--they were afraid? Speaker 1: Well, they also--at a certain point when it was blown off, they--there was nowhere to--some of them were able to get out, but who knows what was going on in that house at that time, you know. Were they--were people holding hands and saying we'll be--who knows what happened. We know that a few ran out, you know, but that was it. Speaker 2: Now, was there a, a--some sort of a spiritual--a spirituality associated with MOVE that-- Speaker 1: Well, not-- Speaker 2: --was special or (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) overtly, but still when the, the back to nature movement has that spirit--you know, there's a spirituality related to that, too, but it wasn't what became--it--after a while, it just became a bunch of misfits getting on our nerves, so you didn't even really hear exactly what it was, you know. And I don't think that people in there really knew, you know. Things get out of hand that way. So, I was working at the United Way at that point in time when it happened and I was in a--in a junior level role and we were asked to help with the situation. And I was asked, in particular, to help. No one knew about my cousin or anything. No one knew the connection. And they wanted us--they wanted me to take a sack of money (laughter) that was gonna be given out to the neighbors on Osage Avenue to help them through until their insurance and other things started to come through. And I had to go to this bank in downtown Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], pick up this bag of money and get in the back of a police van to go to West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to be part of giving out this money. And I can remember sitting in the back of the van, first of all being so happy that we were gonna help these neighbors, and then secondly thinking, I wonder if they're gonna remember me from playing with my cousin on the block? I wonder, you know, how many of these people were there when I was a kid. So, then I got caught up in that fear, and then the fear--suppose this van--I'd never been in the back of a police van, suppose something happens and I end up being sent to jail, you know, so all these crazy things in this short trip. And as it turns out, you know, the people were very, very unaware of who I was, never made any connection I think because they had called my cousin, Frank Africa [Frank James Africa], for so long that the Frank James name was not known, so they didn't make any connection with James name. Speaker 2: I, I just wonder, how did giving away a sack of money go? I mean, how--you know, it-- Speaker 1: We had to give cash because people had, you know, bank accounts that they didn't know the numbers of and things like that. It went really, really well. I mean, people lined up, we took information, we gave out the money, people were grateful. There wasn't a whole bunch of anger at that first time, you know. It grew later when people started to realize the extent of their loss. They lost everything in their homes, you know. But at the time when I interacted with them, it was pretty remarkable, that they were very strong and there was not a lot of crying, any, you know. Speaker 2: And, did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Resiliency, you know? Story_ID: 636279 Speaker 1: Did people blame the--I heard later, you know, talk about it around the country, people blamed Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.]. Speaker 2: Later, you know, Wilson Goode really who was this up and coming star, you know, I think never recovered from it. He never recovered from it for lots of reasons. And I know him really well, and I don't know that he necessarily knows 'cause I never told him about the connection that I had, the personal connection. But, he became to--he was not able to be effective as a mayor anymore, you know, and all of the hopes of this first black mayor, you know, and would his legacy become MOVE, you know, and what he did to the neighborhood [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? And he went into--he became mayor--he started out in community organizing, and he was a man of faith and is a man of faith, and-- Speaker 1: He's a reverend now. Speaker 2: And a lot of that backfired on him because he went in wanting to take care of the homeless with a commitment, and that's where I got to know him first 'cause I worked with him on some committees around dealing with the homeless, and that backfired because then Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] became overwhelmed because people were sending people to Philadelphia who were homeless. They were putting them on buses and sending them because they knew the city wanted to and this mayor had this commitment to help them. So, he--when he came out of office, he came out really totally different from the way most former mayors came out, you know, where they come out with this ability to have a job and do whatever they want to do, but I think he's made--he made a remarkable recovery, you know, by getting involved with helping the children of incarcerated and, you know, getting closer to the church, and doing all the things that I'm sure he's proud of right now, you know, to overcome that. But, it's a story of being the first African American and what can happen and, you know, would--if he weren't African American, would he been--have been given the benefit of the doubt of it just being a mistake, you know, in judgment? He owned it even though he wasn't the one who did it. He owned it. He was the mayor, right? He never stepped back from owning it. We were fortunate as a city to have another African American mayor. It wasn't like they then--the city then said, okay, that's it. We're (laughter) not gonna try this again. We have an African American mayor now in Nutter [HistoryMaker Michael Nutter], you know. Speaker 1: I think the one after Goode was Street [sic. Ed Rendell]? Speaker 2: Street [John F. Street]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Street was--talk about Street, he was a, a man of the streets. You know, Philadelphia had a lot--he was like with the vendors and getting their rights and--you know, he and his brother, Milton Street [T. Milton Street], and they were really mavericks and community organizers and kick the door down kind of people that became--one of them became a mayor, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's pretty remarkable. Speaker 1: Yeah, the whole MOVE story is really strange that, that it kind of--it's--Goode succeeded Frank Rizzo, right? Or--the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Rizzo was known as a (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, wait a minute. No, there was someone in between. Speaker 1: Was it? Speaker 2: Green [William J. Green III] was in between. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Green. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Green was in between, yeah. Green was a pretty, you know--he was like a--an Eisenhower mayor [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower], you know, not a lot of stuff happened (laughter). I mean, he was--he was a good mayor but, you know, it wasn't like a lot of stuff going on. I think the city was tired with the Rizzo stuff and all, so there wasn't a lot going on. Story_ID: 636280 Speaker 1: Just a little bit more about MOVE. You were describing your--what your cousin looked like when he was in MOVE and what he--you know, what his habits were, personal habits. And-- Speaker 2: Poor personal habits and the total opposite. He was the kid--his name was Frank [Frank James Africa], we called him Prank, because he was the kid, he was like the golden haired boy in the family. He was the youngest of the cousins, came along very, very late in life for my [paternal] grandmother [Nellie Kraider James] who adored all of her grandchildren, and he--but he was the prince. So, we called him Little Lord Fauntleroy and we'd go to his neighborhood and he'd have to sit on the step and not play because he didn't wanna get his clothing dirty, you know. And he went from that to hair all over his head and dirt and-- Speaker 1: Did he have dreadlocks at that point or? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --a lot of the movements had-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --dreads. I don't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, had dreads. Speaker 1: I'm trying to just-- Speaker 2: No, he had to do something 'cause his hair was not the dread--I mean, dreads type. I don't know what he did to his hair, but his hair was wild all over his head. And, I mean, a life that could've gone in any number of directions, you know. Speaker 1: So, did they use deodorant? Speaker 2: I don't know. I never got that close as to whether they, they probably didn't because they wouldn't have thought that was natural, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I wonder, but you know you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --say your--but, you knew your cousin, so your, your cousin was-- Speaker 2: See, but-- Speaker 1: He wasn't around. Speaker 2: --by the time he got to that point, he didn't have any contact with us. It, it was a--it was a gradual--you know, he would ta- he would come and he would talk to us about it and we'd tease him and say, you know, get a life, and then gradually, it would be more serious about it. And then he had to bring someone with him, and then he couldn't come at all. So, it was this gradual progression for him. Speaker 1: Was the leader of the group John Africa? I know I've heard his name-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. That was his mother's brother. So, it was his uncle, so he had that extra, you know, pressure of it being his uncle who was the leader. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: So--well, at any rate. So that--I've heard it said it was the bullhorn that really took the neighbor- made the neighborhood rebel, where they couldn't deal with it. Speaker 2: I mean, that was the final. I think that was the final in terms of just people couldn't stand it. I mean, people hated the filth, people hated the amount of police attention, but when you have day and night--I mean, just think of that, day and night, day and night, noise, noise, noise, noise, and you're trying to be in your house, you know, that's, I think, you know, probably what did it finally. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, so, Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.] is remembered by some people around the nation as, as some person who repressed some (laughter) natural movement but, boy are--if you were actually in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you might see it a different way than that. Speaker 2: I think it was viewed in so many different ways-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know. I think it really did end his, his real political career. Speaker 1: Here's a thing--now, here--the Mumia Abu-Jamal case (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jamal, um-hm. Speaker 1: --had occurred just prior to this, right? I mean, his, his arrest-- Speaker 2: It was all around the same time. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's about--yeah--before--I think it was after. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's--my memory is after, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know--Hurricane Carter [Rubin "Hurricane" Carter] that was also another Philadelphia-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well-- Speaker 1: --case. Speaker 2: --Philadelphia has had its share of things. I mean, it's-- Speaker 1: Sonny Carson [Robert "Sonny" Carson], you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: And so, how did--a lot of these--these, these are--seem to be all struggles with police authority (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --around one thing or another or--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of struggles with the police, a lot of struggles. Speaker 1: Or repressing the police department. Speaker 2: A lot of struggles because it was very, very much so. I mean, it was such an overpowering influence on the city and, and yet worshipped by some parts of the city. You know, you've got this statue of Rizzo [Frank Rizzo] that African Americans didn't wanna see, you know, but there it is. Speaker 1: It's right in the city plaza [Thomas Paine Plaza, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], yeah. Speaker 2: Right in city plaza, you know, so--I don't know. It's the tale of two cities, I guess, 'cause there's a very, very strong white ethnic city, very, very strong, very proud, and very different rules. I mean, if you go into white ethnic South Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and you double park your car, the police won't touch you 'cause that's what you do in South Philadelphia. You double park to go into buy donuts or, you know, a steak sandwich or whatever. Other parts of the city, you don't do it. So, it's very interesting the way the city--even when--in early days around snow removal, whose snow got removed first, you know. So, it's a city of--a, a politicized city, it had been. I think it's less so now, but definitely was very politicized. Speaker 1: I know I heard last week that--when Dick Clark had 'American Bandstand' in Philadelphia-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, in West-- Speaker 1: --he couldn't-- Speaker 2: That's West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Yeah, that he could not have African Americans on the show in Philadelphia. Speaker 2: Yeah. And it was--it is now the--I think it still is, at least when I was there, it was the West Philadelphia Enterprise Center [The Enterprise Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that managed--it's in that building and really focused on wealth development for the African American community, primarily in Philadelphia and is doing some really interesting things. Yeah, it was a big change. Story_ID: 636281 Speaker 1: Let's get back to your (laughter), your particular story, I guess. (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. So--but, that is my story. I mean, I am, you know, a--to the end Philadelphian. I, I think Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is an extraordinary city, you know, and I've seen it from all different angles; the good, the bad, and the ugly. You know, I've been on the school board [Board of Education for the School District of Philadelphia] and seen what's done to children of color through the public education system in Philadelphia and probably replicated across the country, community college board, you know, really seeing interesting lenses in to the city, you know, and its people. So--I mean, when I started at the United Way [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I was the first African American woman to run United Way, and there was a little bit of anger in certain places. And I had to be clear that I was run- I was running United Way for everyone in the city, you know, and there's all--that--that's that other tension. But, then--yes, I have particular concern and interest in the African American community and in all communities that are seeming to struggle and feel vulnerable. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had to be it for everybody. Speaker 1: So, kind, kind, kind of walk us through how that--how, how you rose to that spot at, at the United Way. Speaker 2: You know, first of all, the United Way world is a very white male world, less so now, but it certainly was when I got there, and I, I didn't think about that as a challenge neither--nor did I think about it as a bloc, you know. I just kind of did what I wanted to do and worked hard in different areas. For the most part, this is a--the United Way in Philadelphia is one of the larger United Ways. United Ways are divided by size and we're in the biggest category of United Ways, and for the most part, those United Ways, the president has been at seven other United Ways before they become president. So, it's kind of like the corporate model where you move around a lot and--but, I had made a commitment that I was only gonna be in Philadelphia and I benefited from the fact that the world was starting to change, that there were more dua- dual career families, so it was harder to move around, that housing was an issue, so it was just starting to be a little bit of an opening to people who were promoted from within. But, it very, very rarely happened at a big United Way. Indianapolis [Indianapolis Community Chest; United Way of Central Indiana, Indianapolis, Indiana] was the only place it had happened in--where someone from inside had started and worked all the way up. Some of it was happenstance, to be perfectly honest. If you're working hard and have really a commitment to a cause, happenstance sometimes helps. So, the person who directed--the person who directed me was killed on the way into work in a car accident and it changed all the chairs around and I was moved into a leadership role that probably would've never happened if it--if that hadn't happened so suddenly, if they weren't desperate to just find someone and just, just move it. So--and I was on the program side. I--my work was on--in the communities and with the members, and most of the heads of the United Ways were on the fundraising side. But, I had been fortunate to do some major initiatives that had generated revenue where I would have to interact with major donors, so some of the major donors knew me. So, it was a whole series of things and, and I had never wanted to be head of the United Way. I wanted to be head of the program side. And if--as I look back, that was--continues to be my favorite job. But, when our CEO resigned--or retired, I knew that it would be very unlikely that I would be able to stay in my position 'cause it--I had gotten too high in the organization and most people like their own people, so I applied (laughter) for the CEO job to keep my program job, and I, I got very fortunate, although there was a lot of resistance to me on, on the part of United Way of America [United Way Worldwide] and on the part of lots of communities. Story_ID: 636282 Speaker 1: The labor community was very much against me getting the job and so was the Catholic community. Speaker 2: Now, why, why was the labor committee against you (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the United Way [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and labor has a real--have a real close working relationship, and I was never seen as a real friend of labor because I never let the fact that someone was in a union, keep me from saying you have to work in a certain way and do certain things. I wasn't caught up in the politics of it, so I had people in the labor department who knew that if I got the job that they would have to work harder than they (laughter) had been working. So, that was just, you know, a minor thing. In the, in the Catholic Church, I think that they were very concerned that I was a, a liberal, you know, bra burning woman or something. They just didn't know. And I had done that study on the needs of women and girls and had talked about issues that I was called on the carpet for talking about by the head of the United Way [United Way of America; United Way Worldwide], you know, at the time. So, I was this person coming from Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], didn't--not understanding. And I wrote about--when I wrote about the needs, I talked about teen pregnancy, domestic violence, and rape. And I can remember the, the, the person who was killed in the car accident calling me into his office and he had my paper and he said, "You've gotta take these words out of this paper." And I'm like, "What words?" And he said, "Those words." And he had circled, you know, like sexually active and--'cause it was at a time when that's what--that--you know, even then, and by then it was '81 [1981], you didn't talk about it. You know, domestic violence was something that everybody knew was going on but nobody talked about, you know. And so it's interesting because United Way then got in a lot of trouble as a result, you know. Because that same person put down this group that started up called wom- called Women's Way [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and put them down in a negative way and it just blew up in the community because of that conservative streak, you know, well intentioned but, you know, it's like women don't know, you know, what they're doing, so--and we don't talk about it. So, the, the, the Catholic church knew that part of the story, you know. Actually, the person who was killed had said that--Women's Way wanted to become part of the United Way and they got rejected, and this person told them that it was rejected because the Catholic church wouldn't stand for it 'cause they deal with things like abortion and rape crisis things and all of that. So, of course, me coming in having done the study saying we need to be doing more about it, you know, created a concern, you know, on the part--but, you know, I was told--when I got the job, I was told where the pressure points were and I worked on them and developed a excellent relationship with the, the Catholic community and the Jewish community and labor community. But, I knew I had to work on it. So, they gave me a gift of saying that we don't know if we want you in this job, you know, 'cause then you could work on it--work on it a different way. Story_ID: 636283 Speaker 1: It was an interesting time for the United Way. United Way was changing dramatically. You know, it was no longer a given that people were gonna give to the United Way. And then we had a scandal with Aramony [William Aramony], you know, at the national level. Speaker 2: Well, tell us about that. Speaker 1: So, the head of United--so, United Ways are separate and autonomous organizations, but we share the same brand, so we have all--we're mostly named the United Way. And that actually came about because the head of the United Way of America [United Way Worldwide] wanted to create this national brand because of national companies so that--and the way he made it happen was the--was the contract with the NFL. So, he developed--United Ways don't do paid advertising and the only paid advertising came from United Way of America. So, they did this deal with the NFL-- Speaker 2: This is the National Football League, you're talking about. Speaker 1: National Football League, the NFL commercials, the United Way and the NFL, so they struck this deal and said that they would do all this paid advertising and you'd get all this visibility if your name was United Way. So, if--and when I tell you these names, you'll remember some of them. So, there was the Red Feather [Red Feather Society], there was a Community Chest, there was United Fund, all these different names are out there for United Way. But, if you didn't use-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the name United Way, they weren't gonna do--they weren't gonna say any of the other names on those NFL ads except for United Way. So, that pushed these separate autonomous organizations to change their names, and everyone--it--I think the last holdout was Cincinnati [United Way of Greater Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio], I think was the last holdout. They didn't wanna change their name, and this was pretty recent that they finally changed their name. Speaker 2: What were they calling themselves before--I mean, before United Way? Speaker 1: Cincinnati I think was United--let's see--no, the Community Chest. I think it was the Community Chest of Cincinnati [Community Chest of Cincinnati and Hamilton County; Community Chest and Council of the Cincinnati Area], (cough) excuse me. Speaker 2: Right. Right. So, these--so, these were all like citywide coalitions that already existed and then they became-- Speaker 1: They were existing organizations that became members. They were similar and some of them grew up because they saw another one in another town, but they were all separate, their own separate boards, their own separate everything. And so--but, we shared this brand, so anything that one did would reflect on the other. So, when the president of the United Way of America was accused of misappropriating money and doing some other things, it reflected poorly on everyone. And it was right at the same time that people were starting to question United Way being the monopoly. Speaker 2: Now, now, what is the--what year is this that United Way gets in trouble? Speaker 1: So, this was in the mid to late '80s [1980s], late '80s [1980s], and all of this was just creeping up, you know. People were saying, "Why should I have to give to the United Way?" And at the federal level, there was negotiation around something called the Combined Federal Campaign, which restructured giving for federal organizations. And so what United Way went through was similar to what utilities went through with, with deregulation. You know, all of a sudden, they had to compete and it, it was a struggle for the United Way to kind of figure its way around it and through it. And so local United Ways had a difficult time and a challenging time with it. And so by the time I went into the United Way, it was when the United Way was in trouble, you know, where you had to really fight for everything. It wasn't it was a given, you know, where you could walk into a corporate--a corporation and they would say, okay, let's have a United Way campaign. It really became a fight. And the--'cause United Way had only worked on the top, you know, convincing the top leadership, not the bottom, and the bottom was starting to rebel and say, we want to--we--you know, we want to decide what we want to do and if we want to give to another group, we want to give--and then it wasn't helping Philadelphia [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] by the fact that we had rejected the Women--Women's Way [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Women's Way started its own in competition with United Way campaign. Story_ID: 636284 Speaker 1: Let me just for the sake of whoever is watching this, and I guess they could look it up somewhere else-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but, how, how does the United Way [United Way Worldwide] work? I--you know, I think I have some idea of--but, but, how does it-- Speaker 2: So, it's--(cough) primary relationship is with companies to go in an organize campaigns where money is taking out, where people make a pledge and it's taken out of the payroll check and it comes to the United Way. United Way has a plan and works with a group of organizations based on community need and distributes that money as fairly as possible. The idea behind the United Way when it started, when it was at its best, was if you have a good plan and you distribute that money against that plan, it's better than just individuals deciding where they should send their money because maybe they're--maybe everyone wants to help one group and no one wants to help another. And if you really drill down and look at the details, people tend not to help like prevention focused things. So, they'll help a, a, a child--like a dying child, you know, a child that has a deadly disease, but they tend not to do early prevention kinds of things 'cause you don't think about it. It's not top of mind. So, the United Way's role is to kind of play that community planning role. But, what was happening is that when United Ways were first formed, the majority of the not for profit organizations in a given community would be part of the United Way campaign. As the not for profit community blew up and, you know, millions and millions of not for profits, only a percentage of the not for profits in the community were benefiting from the United Way, but yet they still wanted to monopolize the workforce campaign. So, that's what--so the first response that United Ways came up with was that you can designate your money. You can give to the United Way or you can designate it to any qualified not for profit. So, a lot of the United Ways started moving in that direction, which kind of worked against, you know, this idea of a community approach. So, it's still not resolved yet, you know. There's still this hodgepodge of, of how United Ways operate. But-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, how does the national United Way-- Speaker 2: So, the national United Way is--we--local United Ways pay dues to the national United Way, and in return for that get the advertising, get the benefit of the relationship with NFL [National Football League], they get to use the brand, they get training, you know, from United Way. You get to go to training and conferences and things like that. So, it is a trade association for United Ways, but a very strong one 'cause of the brand. You know, it's not a trade association that you can say, well, I'm not gonna be a member 'cause if you decide you're not gonna be a member, you can't call yourself a United Way. So, that's the challenge for the United Way system, that it's such a--and it's a strong brand. It ranks up there with Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and everything in terms of brand recognition. Speaker 1: That's true. That's true. Yeah. Okay. The NFL--I--you know, I forgot that--you know, I didn't really--is it-- Speaker 2: That was a critical connection (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I know I've seen those ads and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and even seen--I think I've known, you know, an inordinate number of Philadelphia football players [Philadelphia Eagles] involved in those ads. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: I guess, Randall Cunningham, Donovan McNabb-- Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Speaker 1: --and those people, yeah. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. That's makes, makes more sense now that--you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what it really is. Okay. Story_ID: 636285 Speaker 1: Your selection as the local Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] head of United Way [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey], you said it was kind of a tenuous one because of the labor and the other--and the, the-- Speaker 2: Well, it was initially, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the beginning, yeah. Speaker 2: --the United Way had been in trouble. We were in some financial trouble when I took over, and I think the other half of that was that I was a trusted face in Philadelphia. You know, I was involved in a lot of different activities, people knew me, even the corporate leadership knew me. I was on the chamber board [Chamber of Commerce for Greater Philadelphia] and things like that, so it was easier for me because of the credibility piece to manage some of what was going on. So, although there was a little bit of, you know, anxiety, I think it quickly turned around. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is '94 [1994] when you actually become the head of United Way-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in Philadelphia. And--now, you were on the--you also served on the school board in the City of Philadelphia [Board of Education for the School District of Philadelphia] as well, and what was that like and-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was--it was wild. It was a personal commitment and it was a organizational commitment. You know, it was a personal commitment because I knew the significance of education, particularly for our children. Our organization also knew the significance, but it was a real dicey time. You know, the school system was eventually taken over by the state. I think I played a good role on the board. I, I was very conscientious about it, you know, and I chaired a lot of the committees. And I didn't get into the constituency service part of it that a lot of board members got into. I was kind of the nonpolitical board member. You know, I wasn't delivered by constituency to the board, you know. And so I didn't have the overwhelming additional job of keeping everybody happy, you know, people calling and saying get my child into this school or get my child into that school. I didn't deal with that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that part of it made it a little bit easier. But, it was the most--probably the most difficult volunteer assignment I've ever had 'cause it was one where you actually had to worry all the time about what you were doing. You know, it was like an emotional heart thing, too, you know. It wasn't something I could just say, okay, now I'm gonna--I'm finishing my volunteer assignment and I'm going home. I kept it with me all the time. Speaker 1: What were the issues in Philadelphia-- Speaker 2: Oh my goodness (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in terms of schools? Speaker 2: Terrible performance, particularly in certain schools, and those schools included mostly the--mostly the African American kids. It was when charter schools were just coming in as an answer. There were funding issues. We were trying all kinds of ways to increase parental involvement in schools and to be more accountable and to be more strongly focused on outcomes. So, it was a lot--it was a time of a lot of different change. Story_ID: 636286 Speaker 1: But back at United Way [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so, so you, you, you were president and-- Speaker 2: For about ten years. Speaker 1: --CEO for ten years, so to 2004. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: There were several things going on in that, in that period of time. I just have some notes about some of them, not all of them, I know. So, feel free to tell me (laughter) whatever that you remember. But, the, the--did, did you play a role in the Convention on the Rights of the Child [United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child] then? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, we did a lot with the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia], a couple of the torch runs. We did--we--when, when all the presidents came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to--around volunteerism, we organized that. I was one of the major organizers of that. I was actually the one who convinced the mayor to do it along with the delegation, about two other people. He wasn't initially for it (laughter), you know, he didn't wanna see all these people come. But then when he figured out that it could help him get the Republican convention or the Democratic convention, political, you know, by demonstrating that we can manage that kind of thing, then all of a sudden he was really--he became a real strong supporter of it. Speaker 1: Now, is this Mayor Street [John F. Street]? Speaker 2: No, this is Rendell [Ed Rendell]. Speaker 1: Okay. Rendell, all right. Okay, and Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was president then. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, it was--okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Now, what about the Million Woman March? I know that hit Philadelphia in '97 [1997] and-- Speaker 2: That was a--I mean, that was kind of a proud time, you know, for Philade- for women, I think. United Way wasn't involved in it and, and we shouldn't have been, it was a grassroots effort and that's exactly how it should've been. Speaker 1: Okay. So, people from all over the country came to Philadelphia for the march and-- Speaker 2: And Philly showed that it could deal with it, you know, handle it. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. It says here, in '98 [1998], you raised $51 million. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Is, is fundraising--you know, do you like fundraising or? Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, fundraising is awful now, particularly around the issues that I'm dealing with. People just don't wanna give. I think that fundra- and fundraising is about relationships that you create. So, Philadelphia, it's a--it's a manageable--Philadelphia region, you know, manage- so we can create relationships, you can work. I worked very, very closely with the different foundations and, and all. It's different at the national level, you know. It's hard to create, develop relationships at the national level. Do I like fundraising? Probably not (laughter). Do I know how you're supposed to do it? Yeah. But it's all about relationships. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. How, how much--how much of time does fundraising take in terms of the proportional time that you spend-- Speaker 2: At United Way? Speaker 1: Yeah, in, in Philadelphia and international [United Way International; United Way Worldwide] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was a lot because we, we were just evolving from workplace campaign fundraising to major givers where we were asking people for a million dollars. So, you, you had to spend a lot of time cultivating and working with those people who you're gonna ask to give you a million dollars. And so it was a--I was fortunate--I mean, I told you I went into that position to save the ability to do the program piece. I was able to do a nice balance. I did a little bit of both. You know, I was a different president. I wasn't just the fundraising president. I was still involved with the members and still involved on community issues and all, but that was my decision. Story_ID: 636287 Speaker 1: All right, 2002, Kenya. You traveled to Kenya as a Red Cross volunteer. Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, you know, that was probably the most significant thing I had done in a long time and I did it without a lot of thought because a dear friend of mine who was the head of the American Red Cross was unable to go and he said that I was the person that he would trust going in his stead, and so he said, "Chris [HistoryMaker Christine James-Brown], please go," and it's like two weeks from now or something, so I had to rush around. I had never been to Kenya. I had never really been by myself out of the country even, and I went. Someone told me when I came back that they knew that I would never be the same again and that I would never--and I probably wouldn't stay much longer at the United Way [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. But--so, I went on this trip that no one would've believed I would've gone on, you know. I'm this real prissy person when it comes to where I eat and how I want my food to look and, you know, is it clean and all of that, and didn't do a lot of stuff on my own, but I went to Kenya to work with the volunteers who were immunizing children from the number one preventable disease in Africa, measles. And the way that it worked--they had spent a year ahead of time doing all of the things that I--that are part of my value system, developing the people in Kenya to own it and to do it, and all we were going to do was support it when we went in. So, it was a grassroots working for a year and half of the trip--half of the people on the trip were going to be with Jane Seymour 'cause there was a celebrity part to it and the other half was gonna do what you really were going there to do, and we got to pick. So, I picked I wanted to do what we really gonna do, you know. And I can remember there (laughter), there were a couple women, women from Cleveland [Ohio] on the trip and they had their St. John's suits on. They didn't know what they were getting into I don't think. And we had gotten off the plane and we were on a bus going into the major hotel and we had to stop to go to the re- to use the restrooms and they are holes in the ground. And I remember when they walked out of that restroom, their eyes were like this big, you know, 'cause they had to figure out how to, you know, balance themselves over this hole in the ground and all of that. And I remember thinking this is gonna be a tough trip, you know, and it was. They, they decided they wanted to go with Jane Seymour and I went to the slums of Kenya to work with the homeless kids and I went to the schools out in the very rural areas. And we would get in a little van and we would drive for an hour or so, and then we'd have to get out and walk, and all the way was walking up this mountain, and you'd get to the top of the mountain, there would be a thousand kids out there, a thousand kids to greet you with song and chanting, and these happy, happy faces and such a interesting way of looking at me, trying to figure me out. You know, I look like them but I didn't look like them, I didn't dress like them, you know. And I have to show the Kenya pictures. These kids were--their parents worked so hard to make sure they went to school, to make sure that they, they got what they needed in school. They were always clean even though I always had mud all over me. I didn't know how to walk yet and the mud was being kicked up behind me. And the--seeing the power of people and yet seeing the poverty and seeing the resiliency and all of that. I came back thinking, why didn't I listen to my professors at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island]? 'Cause I learned so much about myself and about the people in the U.S. by going outside, you know? There is something about perspective that comes. And, I mean, little things like people would have nothing in their homes. I mean, you know, you come in here and you see candles and books and things. People have nothing, but they--everybody had a welcome book that if you went into somebody's home, there was a ceremony around signing the book. That's how much they valued and honored people coming into their homes, you know. And it didn't matter what their homes looked like and it didn't matter what the schools looked like. And the kids knew everything. I, I remember going into this classroom and they had this little piece of blackboard. It wasn't even a blackboard, it was a piece of blackboard that they were passing around, it was all they had, and I, I was talking to them and one of them asked me where I was from, and I said, you know, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. They knew about Philadelphia, they knew about famous players. I mean, they just knew about the world. And I remember thinking, what's wrong with our kids, you know? Why, why are our kids so small in their world and in their thinking? You know, what is--what's been--being done differently. Story_ID: 636288 Speaker 1: So, yeah, when I came back from that trip, I thought--I wasn't--I didn't consciously say I'm gonna look for something else in my life, but it changed me pretty dramatically, you know. We would be in the middle of nowhere in Kenya driving to get to the next location and a mother would walk up behind us with a baby carrying--on her front and her back, you know, one on the front and one on the back. She had heard that there was somewhere that she could get her kids immunized and she was walking to find it, and she had been walking for days. And we had in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--'cause we were doing the immunization campaign at the same time, people who wouldn't get on the bus to get their kids to the health clinic, you know, to get them immunized, you know. And it's not that our parents care less for their kids, but there's something. You know, there's something that we're doing wrong, you know. So, it was really just an unbelievable ex- and not one that anyone would've predicted that I would've gotten through. You know, I can remember going in one (laughter) hotel room and all they had in the room--first of all, hotel was kind, right, this dump, and all they had was a mattress that was pretty dirty and a mosquito net, and that was all that was in the room, you know. And I can remember taking like about five Tylenol PMs and laying down like that on the mattress and putting this mosquito net and waking up in the morning, just 'cause I had to get through the night, you know, and it was so miserable and stinky and everything else. But, I'm telling you, it was an unbelievable trip, it's an unbelievable trip. I'll never forget it. Speaker 2: Okay. So, so you were there for? Speaker 1: Ten days. Speaker 2: Ten days? Okay. Speaker 1: About--more, more--ten, yeah. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: It was pretty--yeah. Speaker 2: And whereabouts in Kenya did you go? Speaker 1: Nairobi was where we did the city stuff, and everything else was driving distance, at least two hours out from Nairobi. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And all of it in the rural schools. So, Nairobi was the one assignment, in the slums of Nairobi and the City of Nairobi where their homeless kids lived. We-- Speaker 2: Nairobi (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) immunized them. Speaker 2: And Nairobi is a city of how many people in those days? Speaker 1: Nairobi in many ways looks like New York City [New York, New York], you know. I don't remember the population, but it's a big city. It looks modern, you know. And then they have slums that you would not believe in the middle of the city. And they have game reserves in the middle of the city, you know, so you could go and see lions, you know, killing animals and, you know, it was really-- Speaker 2: In the middle of the-- Speaker 1: In the middle of the city, middle of the city, yep. Speaker 2: I think I read it was between 10 and 12 million people then-- Speaker 1: Probably. It's a big, sprawling city, lots of people. And I can remember--and I was pretty fearless when I was there, and I can remember I wanted--my dad [Howard James] had--the day before I left, my dad was diagnosed with cancer and I was really worried about it, and so the Red Cross [American Red Cross] gave me a old fashioned satellite phone so I could find out the results of his appointment, and I couldn't get the phone to work. So, they told me there was a phone center in--you know, like a few blocks from the hotel, and when I said I was gonna go, they were like, "Oh my god, you can't do that, you can't do that, you can't walk on your own." So, then they finally made me turn everything over, my pocketbook, my money, just enough to go and make that phone call. But, the people there were wonderful and it was like going into a mall, you know. It wasn't frightening at all to me. It was a good experience. Story_ID: 636289 Speaker 1: In 2004, you became the president and CEO of United Way International. And, and how did this happen? So we got like 2002 you go to Kenya (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, Kenya was a part of the puzzle. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Kenya was a part of the puzzle. My husband [Donald Brown] decided he wanted to--wanted--that we broke--would break up after almost thirty years at that point in time and I didn't want to stay in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so--although, no one ever thought I would ever leave the United Way [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I also thought it was time to leave, that ten years as a CEO was probably enough for the organization. The organization could use new energy and new creativity and things, all those things together. And some- and someone called me on a Sunday night and said, "What do you think about this job?" And we just, you know--, "But you need to get your paper in by Monday." And, again, if I had been given too much time, I would've intellectually thought my way out of it, but I didn't and I ended up getting the job, and probably traveling to about forty countries, none of them the countries that anybody would want to be in in the places that I was in (laughter). But, United Way International, it was established as a--almost a consulting group to help countries start United Ways. And so it was different from United Way of America in that there was no United Way brand, you know, outside of the U.S. except in a couple of places. The oldest United Way outside of the U.S. and Canada is in Cape Town, South Africa. But, most of the times, United Ways would be started by like people from the ambassador world who would come and spend time in the U.S. and get to know about the United Way and want to see something similar in their country. And so, it started--it got started to help. And it was housed in the United Way of America but a separate entity, but the United Way of America wanted to create a global United Way. And so, part of the idea was that I would work with them towards a merger of the two organizations into what would be the--and it did happen. There was a merger and it is now global United Way [United Way Worldwide]. And--but my approach to doing it was pretty different from what I think they wanted. My approach, again, was to build it, you know, to say we need to help them understand what it means to be a United Way, what are the standards of excellence around United Ways, and also to show them how they can help themselves. I didn't believe--I believe that the power of a local United Way is raising and distributing money locally, and I think that that same power was important for other countries. 'Cause, you know, the way you raise money in Bogota [Colombia] where people shoot you if they think you have money or kidnap you, is very different from the way you raise it in Hungary or, you know, other places. So, part of it (cough), I felt was to tap into the philanthropic kind of spirit in those countries. But, I think what happened was that United Way of America brand is so powerful and so much of what's driving the growth of United Ways outside of the U.S. is a growth of U.S. companies outside of the U.S., where those employees want something that looks the same as the U.S. So, rather than wanting to see, you know, an organization with its own name and its own culture and take on the world, there was a real desire to see United Ways everywhere look the same and be called the same thing, and that was not comfortable for me. So, I had gone there just to facilitate the merger, hoping it would be a different kind of merger, you know, and would've stayed I think if it was gonna look like it was going to be more tapped into what people want in their countries for their countries, so went to the Child Welfare League of America [Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 636290 Speaker 1: What is the Child Welfare League of America [Washington, D.C.] and why was that attractive and, and-- Speaker 2: It was--it's an advocacy and standard setting organization for the child welfare field. So, it started a hundred years ago. It started with the--it was started by a group of organizations that were primarily orphanages that believed that there needed to be consistent standards across the country in terms of how children who are abused and neglected are treated. And so the United Way--United Way--the Child Welfare League became the group that worked with members and others and experts and researchers to define what does good service look like and then to do advocacy, at the federal level primarily 'cause that's where most of the child welfare legislation is set, although more and more is--it's also at the state level, to influence policies that would enable the delivery of these high quality services for children. And so we have an advocacy component, we have a publications component to get information out, we have training and technical assistance and consulting. So--but, I wasn't asked to go there for that reason. It was a turnaround situation. Organization basically, very much teetering on the edge and, and 'til this day still is around having to rethink its business model. The consulting network that--our, our budget had been around twenty million [dollars]. (Cough) The--a large part of it was dues from members, but also money from--revenue from providing consulting services and from publications. Consulting services now over the years have been picked up by the federal government through what's called resource centers for free, so people can get what we used to deliver, you know, for free from resource centers and from foundations that are now doing it too and the publications business has changed dramatically. So, both of those things have really kind of significantly reduced the revenue that the organization can get and membership has changed from what used to be big orphanages and residential facilities that were members and could give a lot of money a year for a membership. Child Welfare, and I think it's the right direction, is much more community based, smaller organizations who can't afford. So, we're in the middle of a fight for our lives right now, also--always questioning the mission. Is this mission still relevant and still valid? A lot of people tell me it's not because of the political environment that we're in. Who cares about abused and neglected children? You know, and I feel because of the political environment, it's more--even more important for us to be out there. And I think our advocacy is to the federal government, but also to our members to step up and provide higher quality services. So, I feel strongly that it's an important thing that is required. We're the only group that focuses specifically on abused and neglected children, that no one else--their parents don't fight for them, like the parents of mentally ill kids or sick kids, because their parents are often the ones that are abusing or neglecting them, so they have no voice. So, I feel it's critically important to figure out a way to keep the organization moving forward. But it's--I don't know by the time that people are watching this where it's gonna be, you know. It's a scary kind of time for our nation, I think. Story_ID: 636291 Speaker 1: We have places like the Hull House. Have you heard about the Hull House going out (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Hull House, yeah. Speaker 1: You know, who would've thought that a--that, that the settlement movement, you know, that, that came about to serve people and cities and all would go out of business, you know? It's, it's a real (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't know that--really about that, actually. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a-- Speaker 2: The Hull House Association [Jane Addams Hull House Association] in Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Yes. Yes. Speaker 2: --went out of business? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know there was an attack on juvenile court a few years ago-- Speaker 1: Oh, there's attack now (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that--which is just a hundred years old-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there's an attack on juvenile--the juvenile justice system is the other one where people think that the kid--not only are the parents of the kids the enemy, but the kids are no darn good, you know, as far as people are concerned. And that's really--the kids in the juvenile justice system, I'm gonna tell you a story about the juvenile justice system and the link to the child welfare system. So, a young woman--and this is a young story that's not about a particular girl but it could be about lots of girls in the child welfare system and in the juvenile justice system. So, most of the children who are physically or sexually abused are abused by some man that they know, you know, the mother's boyfriend, the uncle, the cousin, whatever. So, a, a girl is abused, sexually abused and is taken away, put into the child welfare system, put into a foster home, runs away from the foster home, wants to be home still, wants--you know, runs away from the foster home, runs away again, is put in another one, runs away again, ultimately ends up on the street. What do you think she does to keep herself alive? Speaker 2: Prostitution, yeah. Speaker 1: What she was taught, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, when she's picked up for prostitution, no one ever looks back and says, how did this child really get here? What's the trauma in her life, you know? And, and she becomes one of those kids that everybody wants to look down on. Whose fault is it, you know? And so that's, to me, the number of kids that are in that situation in this country that we don't know about, we don't talk about, we don't care about is I think just outrageous. So, yeah, we gotta--we've gotta do something about it even though there's not enough money. Someone told me Sunday, I was talking to them, they said, "You're crazy, Chris [HistoryMaker Christine James-Brown], to be trying to make this organization work when our country is so bad off economically." Well, this is the time we need to save our resources if they're gonna help us pay for our future, and our resources are our kids. You know, so what do you mean how dare I try to help these kids (laughter)? You know, it's crazy. It's like crazy making to me, but it's where the country is right now, you know. It--it's, it's absolutely where the country is. And did the Child Welfare League [Child Welfare League of America, Washington, D.C.] bring some of it on itself for not getting on top of these changes and thinking of a new business model? Absolutely, it did. You know, but, that doesn't mean that we shouldn't try to figure out a way around it and continue for someone to provide these services, no matter who it is. Story_ID: 636292 Speaker 1: Does the Child Welfare League of America [Washington, D.C.] have--is it armed with or is there enough legislation in place and--to support the work of Child Welfare League at this time? Speaker 2: Well, we don't get any federal money for our services-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, I--yeah. I, I--yeah. Speaker 2: But in terms of the federal policy, there's federal policies in place to serve abused and neglected children, but the policy right now is flawed because it was--it, it has three goals: safety, permanency and child wellbeing. The safety goal is around taking a child away from an environment where they're not safe, permanency is around, get them settled somewhere. All of the money--and usually in foster care--the majority of the money, the overwhelming majority of the money that is connected to legislation is around the safety piece. So, it's not until a child gets into the system that you're gonna draw down money, and the reality is, we should be thinking about how to keep those children out of the system, how to keep them in their homes and their--and their communities. What do we need to do to support parents? So, even when a child is sent back home and the child welfare system is blamed if the child then ends up, you know, abused again, it's because there's no money to support those families. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: There's pressure to give the children back 'cause you want the children to be with their families and their communities, but there's no money to help them keep those kids and keep them safe and keep them ha- healthy. So, it's this crazy bizarre misalignment between the goals that we should have as a society for kids and the way the money flows. So, mostly what we're working on is trying to get that changed. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've--I know in, in law enforcement, it's always tougher to get money for crime prevention because people don't seem to react to that the same way as they do-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the repression of--or, or punishment of criminals. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I--so, I guess that this is similar, that people don't see the problem until it's a problem (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Once it's-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --a problem, then it's already happening. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: And then you've got-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, so how do you--do, do you have a way of showing, demonstrating that prevention works? Speaker 2: Well, you know, there are, there are studies that show that prevention works, probably not enough because there's no money to do the work to then show that it works. And the reality is there's such an unpredictability to when a child is gonna be abused, you know. It, it--it's often the coming together of a lot of things. So, a young parent, the child is sick, the parent has a mental issue, a little bit of a mental health issue and is drinking, and it's usually when all those things com- come together for an extended period of time that you start to see things. So, there are predictors of risk and if they all come together in a certain way, the child could end up abused, right? But, there's also times--there's no direct relationship between poverty, for example, and abuse or neglect, but there's a, a correlation between it because poverty creates the risk indicators that could re- could result in it, you know, because you're--poor housing and, you know, all the things that could end up with a child being neglected. Speaker 1: And the frustrations that lead to drinking and drugs (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Frustrations. Speaker 1: --drug abuse. Speaker 2: Unemployment. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, feeling like you're a failure if you don't have a job, so all of these things coming together, yeah. Story_ID: 636293 Speaker 1: So you've got an uphill fight in particular around these--in these days when-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the country has become so-- Speaker 2: Cold. Speaker 1: --polarized in terms of being-- Speaker 2: Extremely polarized. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, who are your allies in this struggle? Speaker 2: Right now? I'm trying to figure that out (laughter). I'll find out from my board in a few minutes, where they're going with all this. I think that the strongest allies are people, the people who believe in accountability in our society, accountability for doing certain things, and probably about half of the member organizations that we have. The other half are so concerned about provider advocacy right now, their own survival, that they're less willing to think about child advocacy. See, our focus is on what's in the best interest of the children. Our providers, many of them that are residential facilities are under attack. And people are saying residential facilities are not the best place for kids. They want us to fight that, but if we are saying we need what's in the best interest of kids, we can't fight for residential facilities. We think that they have a place for the right kids, but you shouldn't leave kids to languish in a residential facility. The ma- the--too many of the children in the deepest end of child welfare, which is a residential facility and--are children of color. And so I can't--I mean, we have to help residential facilities change. We help--we have to help them take their expertise to more community based settings. We can--they cannot continue to do what they've always done. But, the other--in their defense, too, the other side of it is that's how their money comes in. Their money comes in based on their--how many kids they have, you know. And so they have to hold on to these kids, so there's gotta be a different model, you know, in terms of how money flows that allows us to do what we need to for our kids for the right amount of time and at the right time, and the system is working against all of that. It's forcing people to behave in ways that are not very positive. Now, we have--some extraordinary residential facilities have, have tried to figure it out, you know, and have done a good job. Some of them have changed their facilities into charter schools or--and then used that money to do community work based on the knowledge that they have. There's some really extraordinary stories about that. But, a lot of them are mired in just fighting. You know, how do we fight to hang on to what we have, you know? Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, what--you, you said you're, you're in the midst of trying to figure out what your prospects look like, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, it's been an, an, an important discussion since I got there, you know, that people--some people are surprised that we've held on as long as we have, you know, and we--I've got a board meeting this weekend that we're really gonna be looking at what is the best direction forward for us, you know, as an organization, as so many other organizations are dying around us, including a lot of our members, you know, which is lost revenue, too. So, I think we've got a lot to work through, you know. Speaker 1: Do you think that people in this country realize what the country would be like without something like the Child Welfare League [Child Welfare League of America, Washington, D.C.] or what-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or without-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --a juvenile court or-- Speaker 2: I don't think that people realize it because--I think there's some people who don't care. Here's where I think the difference is. I'm gonna really pay attention to the time. When the Child Welfare League was first founded, there was a--there was less of a distinction between the children we were dealing with and all other children. So, one of the first things the Child Welfare League did was focus on the need for children to get adequate healthcare, you know, immunizations. And at that time, no children were get- getting immunized. So, the fact that we focused on those who were very much at risk and made sure it changed for them, it changed for everyone. The next things that we focused on were related to the war--that were major, these were big headline things. We did other things, but--so when people came back from the war and women started to go back to work or go to work for the first time, childcare became a big issue, and the Child Welfare League focused on making sure that children are not neglected by being left at home, you know, while their mothers go to work, but that benefited all women. And then we focused on homemaker services, which benefited all women. So, right now, people have this perception that what we do is for those kids and what I think our biggest challenge is is to help people understand it's for all kids because to the extent that we help the vulnerable kids deal with their vulnerable situation, most of our kids at some point in time could be in a vulnerable situation or could be--could experience trauma. So, we've gotta do what we did a hundred years ago, which was make it clear that our work is to benefit society as a whole, not just this little group of kids who you don't like anyway, you know. Story_ID: 636294 Speaker 1: --was just asking you about the--so, the future of, of the organization [Child Welfare League of America, Washington, D.C.] is, is, is being formed as we speak, right? Speaker 2: It absolutely is. Speaker 1: And, and it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --depends on-- Speaker 2: Depends on a lot of things. I think--you know, and it's--unfortunately, too, for so many organizations right now, we're at this really interesting moment. Now, on the one hand, it's true that there are way too many not for profits in this country, you know, and we probably want to make sure that the right ones survive, you know. And I think it's hard to know which are the right ones. I know for me, I had to really ask myself, are we bringing anything unique and different to the party? Because if we're not, we don't just wanna continue to just to continue, you know. I think it's dangerous for an organization to continue just for continue--and you convince yourself you're bringing something unique to the party. I think that we do in terms of the hundred years of knowledge of, of what good practice looks like, what good services look like for children, accessibility on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], being able to get in and talk to elected officials about the needs and interests, the publications business that we have that disseminates information. But, you know, people could--you know, everybody has to go through that process and we are going through that process. We're trying to tweak, you know, how--what we focus on and how we do our work, but at the same time, we're saying, you know, we need to be realistic, too, about, about where the world is right now and where we are as an organization. So, it's, it's a challenging time because you're worried about people, you're worried about lots of things, but, you know, it's--it is what it is, right? Speaker 1: All right. Right. Now, what are your future plans? Do, do you have plans beyond, you know, your position right now in terms of what you want to do (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I've been so focused in the last, you know, close to five years on this organization that I--it's been difficult for me to think about what I want to do. I know that I want to take what I've learned over these many, many, many years and share it. And I don't know what that looks like, you know, whether it looks like working for an organization that works with other organizations and helps build, you know, their boards and, and things like that or going into a university environment. I'm not sure. But, I know that I don't want to waste what I've learned 'cause it's been difficult (laughter) learnings that--particularly in the last five years. It's been a real, you know, challenge to have to learn about how you manage with limited cash and how you keep staff motivated, how you keep yourself motivated, how do you really think through what are the most important things about an organization to get to the core of its work? It would be shame on me if I didn't figure out a way to share that in some way. So, I don't know what it's gonna look like, but I know that's what I want the outcome of whatever I end up doing to be, to be able to share what I've learned in some way. Story_ID: 636295 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. When you--what, what--you've already discussed a lot of your--these concerns, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I have to say two. One is the education and the need for us to be as a community much more committed to making sure our children get the education they need to compete, you know. I don't think we can give up on that. I think we have to be much more demanding than we are of our schools, of each other, to make sure our children get the education that they need. And I think the second thing is to figure out--figure out our way back to that sense of community, you know, where community ca- communities cared about each other, cared about the children, looked out for the children. They weren't looking for someone else to do it, you know, and families were stronger. In anthropology, you know, I read about the strength of the African American family and now it's--it--it's portrayed as the opposite. And I know that that's not totally true, but there's been a lot of breakdown in that--and some of that has to do with how mobile society is and you don't live near your grandmother anymore, you know, necessarily. But, we've gotta figure out how to rebuild the sense of family and then a sense of community around those families if we're gonna have any opportunity to be stronger as a people 'cause that's what we've looked to in the past. I mean, in through slavery, it was the family and the collective families coming together where we supported each other and got ourselves--got our--found our way through. And there's a spiritual side of that, you know. And I'm not talking about the big megachurches where you go to be seen and all of that, but I'm talking about the--you know, just the spirituality of being part of a community, being part of a people, being proud to be African American, and we absolutely have to find our way back to that. I mean, I've been in situations as a child where I knew anything I did in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], if it was not something my mother [Eva McCollough James] would want me to do, somebody was gonna tell my mother. First of all, they were probably gonna grab me, you know, and say something to me. And then if you fast forward to me as an adult, you know, I'm inclined to say to young people--I remember I was walking through the mall with my daughter [Arica Brown Booker] and I saw a young woman who had this--what are those little tiny panties called (laughter)? Speaker 1: Thongs or something? Speaker 2: Thongs, yeah, thongs, and she had a thong on and her pants were lower. And I went--walked up behind her and I said, "Sweetie, your panties are showing," you know, just really quietly behind her. Well, she was furious and my daughter was mortified, and I thought, wow. And my daughter said, "She wants them to show, mommy, that's the whole idea," you know. And I thought, where have we come? And it's not the thong that I'm talking about, it's, it's the--it's the adult being able to be a, a mentor and advisor to a young person and say, you know, you really need to think about your own self respect and what you look like and what people may be thinking, and for that to be welcomed, you know, rather than resented (background noise), deeply resented. Can you hear that? Something else is ringing. Speaker 1: Yeah. I don't know. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: All right. We'll keep going. But, yeah, now do--were you--were, were you done? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm done. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I mean I'm going back to say we have to be looking out for each other more. We have to respect each other more and we have to regain that sense of community, the sense of family, and education has to be paramount again. I mean, there are ways to make sure our children are bet- better educated. I mean, we used to do that before when they weren't allowed in other schools. We figured out how to do some teaching ourselves, you know, to make sure that, that children got the additional work that they needed and I think we need to--we need to go back to that 'cause we're not gonna get it any other way. We need to figure out how we can start to look out for ourselves. We just have to do that. Story_ID: 636296 Speaker 1: Another question we always ask is, when you look at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy. What do I want it to be? Speaker 1: What do you consider it to be? Speaker 2: I consider (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not want it to be. Speaker 2: --it to be-- Speaker 1: That's--yeah. Speaker 2: --my daughter [Arica Brown Booker] and my granddaughters [Cayden Booker and Kylie Booker (ph.)]. I think that people looked at me when I was the head of the United Way and doing all this stuff and thought that I was about my career, but I was about my family 'cause they're connected, you know. My daughter--I grew up in the Ys [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] that I was helping as a United Way and my daughter did, too, you know. So, in my view, if you--if, if you do what you need to for your, your children and that--and you take that same perspective beyond that, then that's what I want my legacy to be. Story_ID: 636297 Speaker 1: Likewise, when you--if you look over the same period of time, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Do differently? On the professional side, I think--(pause) I think I would have been a little bit more patient about certain things and a little bit faster about others. I tended to not move fast enough when it came to staff issues, you know, making hard decisions about staff. I kind of labored over them and, and all and probably to the disadvantage of a bigger group of staff. I took too long to make, make some decisions. So, in that arena, I wish I had a different kind of pace. But other than that, I sometimes move a little bit faster than people are comfortable with around change, and I think that that was because for so many years I had no--everything was so stable in most of my life that I could (laughter) tinker around in the work life a lot, you know, so I think those are the things, the pace, getting the pace right in different things. Story_ID: 636298 Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about your family. You, you mentioned your girls. What are they doing now and-- Speaker 2: So, my daughter went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], had a phenomenal experience there, and is married now living in New Haven [Connecticut]. Two granddaughters, a grandson that passed away with--after only a week, but is part of our--when we talk about it, it's a grandson and two granddaughters. My oldest granddaughter--the little one [Kylie Booker (ph.)] I don't really know enough because she's new, you know, she's a couple months old. The three and a half year old is absolutely my heart. I mean, she is smart about the world around her and caring and very curious about everything, and that's exactly what I was. I always said, and I said this about my daughter, what I want most for her is to be happy. You can never be any happier than your children are, right? So--and I can remember, she was in Freedom Theatre [New Freedom Theatre]. Freedom Theatre is a African American theater in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and she grew up in Freedom Theatre, and she was a dancer. And she, she was a good dancer, and we had these performances that we used to go to and the girls used to write a little blurb, and it makes me upset when I think about it. So, my daughter had to write a blurb and most of the girls would write I've been in this production and that production, and Arica [Arica Brown Booker] wrote, "Sometimes I'm so happy I could burst." And I was sitting there reading and I thought, oh my goodness, you know. That's what you want. That's what you want. And so--and she's got this happy spirit about her and my granddaughter has it, and on top of it (laughter) has this unbelievable curiosity about everything. So--and this uncanny technical ability that our children have I think is amazing with computers and all. She finally--she's figured out now how to get into the phone and find my name and call me, you know. So, she called me Sunday and she said, "Grandma." And I said, "C.C. [Cayden Booker], what are you doing?" And she said, "Oh, I'm just talking to you. What are you doing?" And I said--and then I heard her mother come in and say, "C.C., what are you doing?" She said, "I'm talking to Grandma" (laughter). She had figured it out, gotten--took her--took her mother's phone and was calling me, you know. And they can do it now. They can figure out turning the TV on, you know. I'm still trying to figure out which of the buttons on the remote you fix--you know, you push, you know. So, I, I mean I think I have been so fortunate in so many ways, you know, with the kind of childhood I had, with all the people in the community, talk about take a village to raise a child. I had that. My daughter and her family, they have it. Her husband [Ulish Booker] and his family, they're all in New Haven and they do everything together. When we had to make the decision about my grandson, we did it as a family and we did it together and everybody was--there was never a time in the hospital where there were not a least fifteen people, you know, just to support each other. So, then I look at the children that I want to help through the Child Welfare League [Child Welfare League of America, Washington, D.C.] who are traumatized every day. They're traumatized by being in a family environment that they're in and then the whole community is traumatized by it, you know, 'cause I can't imagine growing up in a community where children are taken away very visibly from their parents because of neglect, you know, or abuse. And where a child is in a home and a young social worker has to go in and make that decision and then put the child in the back of car--seat of a car and the child has no idea, you know, where they're going or why, what they did wrong. So, they've been traumatized by the neglect or the abuse and then they're traumatized by being taken away, you know. And, I mean--I--it's just unbelievable to me that, that that happens to kids 'cause I've had only the opposite. So, I have--I've had people who will stand up and tell a story about why they're so committed to these causes because of what happened to them. You know, "I was in foster care and--." I stand up and say I'm committed to it because of the opposite, that I had all the opposite. You know, I had the love and the permanency and the safety and everything else, and I want it for, you know, for all kids to have. So, my grand- my granddaughters and their happiness, I'll fight to the end for that, you know, to the very end. So--and I think you would for yours, you know. I think that that's what--and I think we need to figure out how to let parents feel that way 'cause I think most parents really and truly love their kids, but I think they're sometimes overwhelmed, you know, by so much that they don't know how to, they don't know how to express it, and they take it out in the wrong way, so we need to help some young parents and other parents do what I know they want to do, you know. Story_ID: 636299 Speaker 1: Now is, is there anything else I haven't mentioned that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: We didn't talk a lot about my international travel, which was pretty extraordinary to me, learning different countr- I mean, going to South Africa and, and knowing people who were around and meeting people and interacting with people my age who were around on apartheid, and hearing them talk about one day you couldn't be on the beach and the next day you could, you know. Flying back from Cape Town [South Africa] with a African who--white African who when I sat down was visibly upset by the fact that I sat down next to him and--because-- Speaker 1: When was this at-- Speaker 2: This was--couldn't be more than three or four years ago, you know--five--well, no, wait, three--so, 2006 maybe, 2007. Speaker 1: Yeah, so I, I guess it--what, what I'm asking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Recent-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in other words. Speaker 1: Why, why I'm asking is because it's been since 1991 I guess that apartheid, or '92 [1992] that apartheid-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but think about, you know, there are lots of our-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --contemporaries who--you know, the woman from the--who's head of the Cape Town United Way [United Way International; United Way Worldwide] is still in that position and I went over to go on a, a, a major corporate call with her, and she said to me, she said, "You know, we were never allowed to ride up on these elevators and I would go on my calls, but I'd have to ride up on the service elevator," you know. And I thought about that and I thought, what--how remarkable that this country could move forward as quickly as it did, you know, to--that it didn't just implode, you know, to have--'cause the guy on the plane, the guy who was sitting next to me on the plane when we finally--when he finally got comfortable and we were talking, he was, he was saying how disappointing it was for him that his daughter was getting such a poorer quality of education than he had received. He said, "My daughter's education is terrible," and, and that was where his anger was coming from, one of the things, that my daughter won't have what I have. And I said, "You know, I, I can understand that as a mother. The reason your daughter was able to have what she had was that everybody else had, had nothing. So, now that it's evenly distributed, everyone's quality has gone down, so you all are just gonna have to work to figure out how to make it all go up." But--and you can appreciate his anger, right? You know, but, you certainly want to see apartheid continue because of his anger (laughter), you know. So, the--meeting people in Bogota [Colombia] who--we were going in for a major meeting to raise money and they had--it had to be secret and we had to go through all these bomb checks and everything. And just as I was going through the final bomb check, I saw a group of five year olds come in and have to also be searched and also go through the bomb check. And I--and I said, "Where are they going that their mothers, their parents would expose them to this?" And they said, "They're going to a birthday party," and this is their life now and they just dealt with it, you know, and was--they weren't gonna let it be that they couldn't have a birthday party at the hotel, you know, just 'cause the kids were gonna have to be exposed to going through all these, you know, checks. So, the, the fact that people can figure out in remarkable places across--in, in Hungary and in Korea and, you know, Ghana, that people are figuring things out, Nigeria, you know, are figuring things out and moving forward, you know. It--the, the, the opportunity to travel internationally and learn how similar people are, to sit in a, in a meeting and be in Hungary and for a moment, the people that you're talking to seem like they are the same people sitting in your boardroom because at the--at the core, people are the same no matter what, no matter what language their speaking or anything else. Story_ID: 636300 Speaker 1: Is there a place where you think that the treatment of children is the best or the--or the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The best? Speaker 1: --ideal? What's the--is, is there an ideal--I mean-- Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: --not, not an ideal, but a-- Speaker 2: I don't know that, that-- Speaker 1: --a system that works the best? Speaker 2: I think that, that Kenya was remarkable in how it treats its kids. I think the U.S. is probably at the bottom of the, the barrel. I think that, you know, when, when you do--when you look at the UN [United Nations], does its survey and look at child happiness and the U.S. is tied with Canada to be at the bottom, you know, and we don't celebrate our kids, you know. We don't--you know, just because they, they don't vote doesn't mean we shouldn't be looking out for their best interest. So, I don't know what the best country is. I know that ours is not and I know it's one of the worst. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And that's kind of heartbreaking. Speaker 1: It's interesting, you're saying that really Kenya, I guess, is a country where the material conditions are not-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but, you know-- Speaker 1: --(unclear). Speaker 2: --you go into those schools and those kids are learning despite not having the books, you know. So, how do they--how are they doing that? You know, why are those kids smiling and happy and not pretending to be smiling and happy? Why are their parents sac- sacrificing to get them in those schools and walking for miles to get them immunized? You know, it's not just about the money. It's about some kind of resiliency and pride. I mean, you could not ask somebody in Kenya--and I'm sure I didn't bump into the bad people, right? There's bad people in every country. But I would say to someone--we, we would be walking down the street and I'd say, "Oh, that's a nice plant, you know. Do you know what kind of plant it is?" And they would know the botanical name and--I mean, they were just like--just the depth of knowledge and pride in being able to tell me that was just remarkable. You know, and that's what I think we need to recreate here, that sense of pride and the--and thirst for learning. Story_ID: 636301 Speaker 1: Now are we ready for the last one yet? Or, or-- Speaker 2: I guess. Speaker 1: If there's something else, it's, it's all right. Speaker 2: No, I'm ready for the last one (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. Well, the last question is just--similar to legacy. It's just, how, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think as someone who really cared and who tried to do the best that she could and that sometimes wasn't successful but always tried again, you know. I, I struggle with how do I feel if this organization [Child Welfare League of America, Washington, D.C.] doesn't move forward? You know, and I--if I were--I mean, I hope that people will look and say, "We know that if it was Chris [HistoryMaker Christine James-Brown], she did everything she could," you know. And that is where--what I want. Not that I was the smartest or the best, just that I tried to do what I could, you know, in every arena. I think that that would be a pretty remarkable legacy to have. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Um-hm, thank you. Story_ID: 636302 Speaker 1: So, this is from Kenya, and a tradition in Kenya that I think is extraordinary is that when you go into a home, you sign a book, a guest book, and every home no matter how poor has that guest book. So, if you look at the kind of curtains that they have on the window, but you'll still see that they were very proud to have the guest book. Speaker 2: That is a really fun picture. That's a group of women in Kenya and we challenged them--they, they taught us some African dance and we were teaching them line dancing, so that's what they're doing. They're doing line dancing. Speaker 1: This is also in Kenya and this is when we were doing measles immunizations, and measles is the number one preventable childhood killer for children in Africa. Speaker 2: And these are--this is just an extraordinary picture. This is at the top of a mountain after having--we, we drove for a few hours and then we got out and walked, and we came to the top of the mountain to immunize these children and they were out there waiting to greet us, and that's the greeting. Look at those smiles on their faces. They're just pretty extraordinary. Speaker 1: That is little Cayden turning three, my granddaughter, Cayden Booker, and that's her party, 'Yo Gabba Gabba!' party. Speaker 2: And that is her sister, Kylie [Kylie Booker (ph.)], and she is the newest wonder in my daughter's life and in her husband's [Ulish Booker] life and my life. Speaker 1: And that's a younger picture of Cayden with her at the time favorite, Cookie Monster. She's my little cookie monster, too. She loves cookies. Speaker 2: Oh, that's me, [HistoryMaker] Christine James-Brown, in high school [Burlington City High School, Burlington, New Jersey], probably just dumped by somebody or something like that who knows (laughter), had a little bit more hair. Speaker 1: So, that's from my fifth grade class and I'm the little chubby one, the third one on the second row, and had the nerve to be wearing horizontal stripes (laughter). Speaker 2: Fashion faux pas. Speaker 1: Yeah, chubby and stripes, huh? Speaker 2: That's my father, Howard James, and he's holding at that time my daughter. Speaker 1: So, that's me, Chris James-Brown, and my brother, Michael James. We are close, just like that. That's us now. Speaker 2: Is that about 1954, you think? Speaker 1: Probably 1954, '55 [1955], um-hm. Speaker 2: That is my father's grandmother, Mary Kraider [ph.]. She's of German descent. My dad looks just like her, except a little browner (laughter). Speaker 1: And I think that's her again. Speaker 2: Is it? Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, Lou Rawls, and, and that's me, Chris James-Brown. That's somebody that came with Lou Rawls, I think his helper, and Ned Montgomery is on the right hand side. He was head of major gifts at the United Way [United Way of Southeastern Pennsylvania; United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and he had come to do a performance on behalf of United Way. Speaker 1: So, that's my cousin, Juanita [ph.], and her brother, Jack--or John James [ph.], the oldest two cousins. Speaker 2: That's my mother's mother, my grandmother, Alma McCollough, very prim and proper lady she was. Speaker 1: So, that's me, obviously, Chris James-Brown, my daughter, Arica Booker [Arica Brown Booker], and her daughter, Cayden or C.C., obviously going out for trick or treat. Speaker 2: So, that's my dad and his family. So, my dad is in the back on the right. I don't know who he's looking at. His brother George [George James] is beside him. My Uncle Frank [Frank James], my Uncle John [John James], my Uncle Bob [Robert James], and my Uncle Shuggie. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And that was from left to right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Charles [Charles James, Jr.]. Um-hm. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: So, those are my father's oldest brother's children and it is Bobby [ph.] and must be Caroline [ph.] on the other side, and that's probably Richard [ph.] in the middle. Speaker 1: So, I worked with United Way for a long time and one of the things we did was a annual event with the Eagles [Philadelphia Eagles], so that's Jeff Lurie [Jeffrey Lurie] next to me on the right hand side and Christina Lurie [Christina Weiss Lurie] on the left hand side, and then their--and then the cheerleaders in the front and then volunteers from the United Way on either side. Speaker 2: That's my father's mother, Nellie James [Nellie Kraider James], the matriarch of the family. Speaker 1: So, this is my dad's family again. So, the woman in the beautiful red hat is my Aunt Juanita [ph.], probably my closest aunt ever, Bunny [ph.] is a good friend of hers is next to her, my Aunt Thelma [ph.], who is my Uncle Shuggie or Uncle Charles'--one of his wives (laughter), the longest running wife. I can't tell who's behind my aunt. The, the woman in the front is my Aunt Irene [ph.] and next to her is, is her husband, my father's brother, Bob. And behind them are--I don't know the woman next to him, but the woman in the middle is my cousin, Caroline. I can't tell who the other person is. Speaker 2: And that's me doing a United Way Care Day cleanup and I was actually cleaning up. I wasn't just posing for a picture (laughter), I was actually cleaning up, irritated to have to take a picture final- probably...