 Story_ID: 74608 Speaker 1: [My name is] Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Gerald Oren Johnson, G-E-R-A-L-D, O-R-E-N, J-O-H-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 3/2/47 [1947], Charlotte, North Carolina. Speaker 1: All right and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: CEO and publisher of "The Charlotte Post" newspaper and chairman of Consolidated Media Group. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: 12/5/2002. Speaker 1: It's 12/03, I think. Yeah, I think it's the 3rd. Third of December. Speaker 2: Okay, 12/3/2002. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the conference room at "The Charlotte Post" newspaper, Charlotte, North Carolina. Story_ID: 74609 Speaker 1: All right, before we go into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions we ask, and they just require a brief answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Lamb. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Anywhere in the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Do you say no a lot? Speaker 2: Just say no, I guess that will be it. I don't have one of 'em. Story_ID: 74610 Speaker 1: Well let's talk about your background and do, do you have any, any idea or any in, information about the beginnings of your family or where your family came from? Speaker 2: I can only trace both my mother and father and their parents back to South Carolina. My father and his folks from Anderson, South Carolina. My mother and her folks Chester, South Carolina, and ultimately the families migrated to Charlotte [North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories that your grandparents told or your parents told about that were hand, handed down through the family about what was going on with the family in, in the 19th century or beyond? Speaker 2: Very little primarily because I think they were trying to disassociate a lot of what was going on during that time with and why they moved to Charlotte [North Carolina] in the first place, so there's very little that got to me anyway in terms of what, what actually happened in those days. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember your grandparents? Speaker 2: No, they were all dead when I was born, by the time I got here. Story_ID: 74611 Speaker 1: Okay. Could you give us your father's name and spell it for us and give his date of birth? Speaker 2: Okay, Willie L. Johnson. W-I-L-L-I-E, L-E-E (it's actually Willie Lee Johnson), J-O-H-N-S-O-N. He was born on 03/07/1917. Speaker 1: Okay, and he was born in South Carolina? Speaker 2: He was born in Anderson, South Carolina, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what kind of a person was he and what did he do? Speaker 2: Well he did a lot. My father was a postman. He was the--after he got out of the service and came back to Charlotte [North Carolina] he became the first African American postman here in Charlotte, became the first African American newspaper writer for a major daily paper, which is the "Charlotte Observer". He was the first African American to do that and then of course he ultimately started a newspaper that was targeted to the African American community that failed and through a course of happenings he ended up with this particular publication in 1974. So, he has been a lot of different things, but newspapering and, and reporting was his first love. Speaker 1: Now did he go to college? Speaker 2: No college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Got all of his training in the military. Speaker 1: Okay, so did he serve in World War II? Speaker 2: World War II, yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Where did he serve? Did he serve in Europe or in the far east--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: In Europe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And for a couple--he, he ended up catching jaundice and they had to ship him back home to the, to the States, but it--he served in Europe. Speaker 1: Okay, so he began a career as a journalist in the Army or did he-- Speaker 2: Yes, the way I understand it they had a, a base publication that, that he was assigned to help gather and report news for that base publication and, and that's where he first got his love for this and it just stuck with him. It's something he wanted to do. Didn't know how he was gonna make that happen, but it was just something that he wanted to do. Speaker 1: That's, that something. He had a high school education? Speaker 2: A high school education. Speaker 1: To be able to write, you know, usually people take, you know, have to have a little more. That's good, that's good, I mean that's, you know, that's remarkable he was able to, he was able to do that, you know. Speaker 2: Well I agree. I agree. Several things that under today's standards he was able to accomplish with, with just a high school education. I marvel at a lot when I look back over it today. He accomplished a lot with just a high school education. Speaker 1: Okay, well can you give us your, your mother's name and her date and place of birth and tell us something about her? Speaker 2: Thomasina Johnson, T-H-O-M-A-S-I-N-A, well her maiden name was McCullough, M-C-C-U-L-L-O-U-G-H. She was born in Chester, South Carolina on November the 2nd, 1919. Raised three boys, basically worked as in domestic capacities. Same thing high school education and that's pretty much it. Very, very active in the church and other civic organizations. Story_ID: 74612 Speaker 1: Now did, did either your mother or your father have a story of, of or pass along to you a story of how they met? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father lived in at that time in Charlotte [North Carolina], a section called Greenville, and my mother lived in a section called Biddleville, and the guys from Greenville used to come over the Biddleville to try to date the women, and my mother was a great dancer and my father--she caught my father's eye through dancing and he asked her out and it just basically went from there. Interestingly, my, according to my mother, my grandmother didn't like my father and so they had to do some tricks to be able to go out and ultimately get married because and even after getting married my, my grandmother still didn't like, didn't like my father. She thought he was a slickster, so she (laughter) didn't care much for him, but they ended up getting married anyway. Speaker 1: Was he slick? Speaker 2: Oh yeah (laughter), oh yeah he was a slickster. Yep. And ultimately they after some, I guess, twenty years or so of marriage they ultimately got divorced, but yeah my father, my father was a pretty smooth guy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's was a ladies man. He was a ladies man. Story_ID: 74613 Speaker 1: Now you said earlier that both families may have had reason to move to Charlotte [North Carolina] from South Carolina. What prompted, you know, both of the families to, to move, if you know? Speaker 2: Just the, the, the conditions, the poverty conditions of South Carolina. They were not that far removed from slavery and they were living in very poor conditions in both of those cities with no job opportunities, nothing to do, and felt like Charlotte [North Carolina] provided more of an opportunity for both families and so they started a migration to this, to this area. Speaker 1: Okay, are there a lot of Charlotte [North Carolina]residents that come from South Carolina? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Well, today there are Charlotte residents that, that come from everywhere now because we are a fast growing city that's attracted people from everywhere, but back in the, those days a lot, the black community anyway, came from South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. South Carolina has a huge black population. At one time, the black pop, population was larger than the white population of South Carolina. Well, so what, what neighborhood did you grow up here in, here in Charlotte? Speaker 2: Biddleville. Story_ID: 74614 Speaker 1: Okay. So, I want you to reflect back on your early years, some of your earliest memories and tell me about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Biddleville [Charlotte, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: That's--we grew up in a, in a very old tenant house that had no indoor plumbing, no indoor refrigeration, no--had, we had an attached bathroom, but it was actually didn't have any heat in it or anything, so it was just a bathroom in the back that--and I remember growing up for the longest and hated to go to the bathroom in the winter. In fact, I would, I wouldn't go to the bathroom in the winter to the point that I would get sick because it would just be entirely too cold to go to the bathroom in the winter. But, I can still smell the coal and the burning of the coal heater that we used in the house. My aunt had the house--we had an outhouse, then a backyard, and then my aunt's house and so we grew up together, the two families grew up together and I could remember the dirt in their backyard to this day running back and forth from their backyard. I could remember the switches that my mother used to tear off of this tree to beat us with when, whenever my brother was acting bad and I ended up getting a whipping, but that's another story, and just a lot of things. I grew up being scared of spiders because we had to keep the coal under the house to do the heating of the furnace and so growing up, spiders used to collect along the side of the house, big spiders, and we would have to go under the house and get the coal and I would always be scared of those, those big spiders. But, even with all of that, it was, it was a remarkable childhood, I mean, I didn't know that we were actually poor in those days until I left and got much older because that was never something that we dwelled on and it was, it was rough conditions, but we never felt like things were rough because it was just so much love in the family, and we had a very tight unit that lived in the neighborhood and so it was, it was a great childhood. A lot of fun, a lot of playing, a lot of family connectedness, and so it was a good childhood. Speaker 1: Now what was the neighborhood like? It sounds like a rural area rather than-- Speaker 2: It wasn't, wasn't rural as much as it was, it was a lot of small houses that were in the neighborhood, but I--we just--we would--most of the houses in the neighborhood had fairly large backyards that would run into another, another house, but it was a very poor area with I would say the neighborhood had roughly forty to fifty families living in it, but it was a very close-knit neighborhood. We--everybody knew everybody. You couldn't get into too much trouble without your parents finding out about it because the neighbor would tell about everything that you did. It was just a very close-knit neighborhood, but, but it was a very poor neighborhood. Story_ID: 74615 Speaker 1: Well, give, give us an idea of what, what kind of house did you, did you, what kind of house, housing was it? Speaker 2: It was a wood, a brick base with everything else wood. It was actually two bedrooms, sort of a living area and the kitchen, so it was a four-room house with a bathroom that was attached, but no heating in it or in the back of the house and-- Speaker 1: There was plumbing at the time? Speaker 2: There was plumbing. There was plumbing, but no heat and so there was three boys. We all slept in the one bedroom and my mother and father slept in the other bedroom and then we had the sort of a living area where we had a little beat up television and radio and then the kitchen area and in the--there was another important area that stands out very clear to me now. In those days we had a refrigerator that--it wasn't, it was actually the icebox, and we would have to--the same guy that we would buy coal from we would buy ice from to put on top of the icebox to keep food and everything cold. And I can remember twice a week the ice man with the coal would come by there on a horse and buggy and you'd hear the horses or the horse coming from about four or five blocks away, you could hear the hooves just click, click, click, click, click, click, click, click, click, click coming down the street every, every other day. And we used to run behind the horse and play with him. If it was a bad day, throw rocks at him or whatever, but it was, it was just, just fun times, just fun times. Rough times, but it was a lot of fun growing up. Story_ID: 74616 Speaker 1: Did the black community have any businesses or that sort of thing going? Speaker 2: No not, not at the time that I was coming along. Right before I was born there were a lot of, of black businesses that--at the time integration was just beginning to get ready to start coming into the area, and a lot of the businesses were forced out of business because integration caused the, the money to go into the white communities and not the black communities and so with the exception of barbershops, and I think we had one theater that lasted for a little while in Biddleville called the Grand Theater. And that lasted for a while where we could walk to that theater and see movies and get jobs, but that, that was about it coming up in Biddleville. Everything was downtown, ultimately moved downtown and you had to either catch the bus or walk downtown for the bulk of the businesses and very few were black owned. Story_ID: 74617 Speaker 1: Did you have a sense when you were coming along of the newspaper business at all? Did you all get the, the "Pittsburgh Courier" or "Chicago Defender"--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father always had a love for this and so he, he literally became the distributor for "The Afro American" and the "Pittsburgh Courier" in Charlotte [North Carolina], and that ultimately led to him starting his own for, his own publication called the "Queen City Gazette" in this area which lasted about as long as it took a banana to turn green or yellow, but he did, he started that newspaper and it taught him a lot and ultimately he ended up with this particular publication. But, yeah he was, he was a distributor, and he actually wrote for both. Whenever they would print news about Charlotte he did it. Speaker 1: Now, did you help distribute the papers? Speaker 2: Oh no, no, not at, not those. I was too young to do it then. When the "Queen City Gazette" started then I became a paperboy for the "Queen City Gazette" and had a route, so I did do that, but at the time he was distributing the "[Pittsburgh] Courier" and "The Afro American" I was entirely too young to do that. Story_ID: 74618 Speaker 1: Okay. What kind of a little boy were you? Speaker 2: Bad (laughter). I'm sorry go ahead. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: No, I was, I was the youngest, and as many would say I was the mistake of the family because no one had expected them to have anymore, my parents to have any more kids after my first two brothers were born, and then, and then I came alone about five to six years after the fact. And so I grew up around a lot of older siblings and, and relatives and I was always in the way and it just, just made me a bad kid. I was always in the way, but I wanted to be in the way and finally they wouldn't let me be in the way and so I just, I just grew up to be a, be a bad, spoiled kid. Because I was so late, I was really spoiled because not only did my parents spoil me, but all of them spoiled me too, my brothers. I can remember by brothers not allowing me to take a whipping, that anytime they would start whipping me then they would go push me out of the way and try to take my beating for me and of course I wouldn't stop 'em from doing that. I thought that was a noble thing to do (laughter)--(unclear)--, and that happened quite often by the way, but--my oldest brother who works here said--who always tells everybody the story about my mother getting a switch to whup me with one time when I was about I guess three or four. She swung and I jumped out of the way and I yelled, "swung and missed" because I used to, I used to see baseball. That's what the, what the guy on TV would say when somebody missed a pitch, swung and missed, so I just repeated that, swung and missed, and she really laid into me after that. They still tell that story about after that smart comment. But,--yep I was--I stayed in, I stayed in a lot of trouble. Speaker 1: What kind of things would you do to get in trouble? I mean what-- Speaker 2: Anything somebody told me not to do. I would--not to go eat, not to go hang out on, on the corners, be home at a certain time because my, both of my parents worked and they worked different shifts and a lot of times my brothers had the responsibility of, of trying to keep me or keep up with me and they did the best they could, but I would just go do, just go do stuff and get in the way. I got more scars and bumps on my head from just being in the way, nobody seeing me being there and then, and doing something they would either hit me or almost put my eye out or whatever, so they would end up having to leave work to come home to take me to the hospital or come and get me out of the hospital or whatever. But, I don't know just anything that at the time would aggravate people. Story_ID: 74619 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let's talk about school. What school did you go to? What was the name of the school and how did you like it? Speaker 2: I started off at Biddleville Elementary School, went to Northwest Junior High School, and then to West Charlotte Senior High School before going off to college and I--well we moved out of one area of Biddleville to another one, so I, I did do two years at Lincoln Heights Elementary School, four years at Biddleville [Elementary School], and two years at Lincoln Heights, and I, I loved school. It was, it was a good challenge for me, and, and it kept me out of trouble, but I really, really enjoyed going to school. Speaker 1: Now what was--who was Biddle anyway? I see a lot of things named for Biddle here in North, in Charlotte. Speaker 2: Mrs. Biddle was a very rich lady that donated a lot of money to the community including Johnson C. Smith University. At the time, it was called Biddle University. Everything in that area was, was, was Biddle related because she was a very rich wel, very wealthy white lady that donated a lot of money to that community, to build it to what is was then and everything was named aft, after her and so that's how all--in fact it still carries that name Biddleville still, still, the elementary school and a lot of things are called it, but streets and everything is still pretty much the same. Speaker 1: Now Biddleville was it an all-black school? Speaker 2: It was an all-black community. It was all, yeah, everything was all black. In Charlotte back in those days interestingly Charlotte started off as a very integrated city and then over time it, it, it was purposefully segregated, purposely segregated into predominately black sections and predominantly white sections, so through the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] and it stayed that way up until recently, so yeah it had basically two major black communities and everything else was predominately white communities. Speaker 1: So, the two major black communities were Biddleville and-- Speaker 2: And Second Ward. Speaker 1: Second Ward. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay what kind of--what, what subjects did you like in grade school at Biddleville [Elementary School] and why? Speaker 2: Math was, was, has always been my favorite subject. The only thing that I can recall in my old days that geared me to math was that my father, which I later found out was playing the numbers, I guess, but I would always see him writing numbers down and he would just keep writing numbers down and then he would take something and start adding numbers up and he would always be dealing with numbers and watching him go through that rigorous process on a regular basis just fascinated me and I guess that's what started me to get to that point. And my mother tells the story about asking me one day that, that if there was anything in the store I wanted I could have if, and it had to cost a certain amount of money, so she thought I was going to buy candy or something and I bought this little hand calculator that was in those days was just a wheel, a wheel type of calculator and I bought that and she was just sort of taken aback because she thought I was gonna buy something else, so she sort of figured at that point that it was, that I was going to end up doing something with numbers. But, I, I just liked dealing with numbers and so early on in the second, third, and fourth grade I can remember winning contests that had to do with arithmetic and numbers and the teacher would put a lot of numbers on the board and ask us to add 'em up and the one that could do it fastest would get something out of it, and, and I would win most of those and so I just loved that, just loved dealing with numbers. Story_ID: 74620 Speaker 1: Okay, now was there, there any particular teachers or individuals, individuals in the community that, that helped you or, or mentored you? Speaker 2: Quite a few, quite a few. Julian Powell, Barbara Davis, Mrs. Davison, Kat Crosby. It, it, it was a list, because when we were coming up everybody across the employment spectrum lived in the same community, rich, poor. We had doctors living in the neighborhood, teachers, mail carriers, lawyers. Everybody lived in the little, in the neighborhood and so they were just a great support group for everything and so teachers would, would literally if we did poorly in school they were our neighbors and so they would go and tell, tell that, you know, he could be doing a lot better. So, yeah, we had a lot of support coming up in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay and did this continue through high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, continued, continued all the way through high school. In fact, the year that I left high school was the first year where they were getting ready to start experimenting with integrating the school system and so by the time I got out and got into college they started slow integration of the system and then by the time I got out of college they had fully integrated with a lot of problems that took us about three or four years to get over, but at that time I never came back I was still in Pennsylvania when, by the time all the heat cleared before I got back here. Story_ID: 74313 Speaker 1: Tell me about high school [West Charlotte Senior High School]. Speaker 2: Well Charlotte High school--well can we to junior high for just a minute, because of the crowds that, that I hung out with nobody took me very seriously for, for intelligence because I would always hang out with a rough crowd and so I was always--we were actually tracked in those days so that the math tracking and the college group would go one way and then everybody else went into another track. And even though I passed all of the tests, when, when teachers would see that I passed the test they didn't believe it and so they still would try to track me in another direction and then ultimately would come back and take me out and put me over in the college track, and so I ended up getting into the advanced math classes in junior high school and that carried me all the way through high school. And, and when I entered high school I was in the college and math track and I, and I really enjoyed high school as well. We had some very, very good teachers at West Charlotte and I did well in both English and math and it was just, it was just an enjoyable experience. Speaker 1: Okay. Who were some of the teachers in high school that, that took an interest in, in you or you looked, looked up to or impressed by? Speaker 2: Julian Powell was my math teacher that pushed me very strongly in math, always would like to play chess. I beat him in chess. He couldn't beat me in chess, then he took a special liking to me in terms of making sure that I got to college in math. Barbara Davis was my English teacher. She took an interest in me because of a story that I wrote in her class. Those two were the two that, that just stayed on me. Had--we never had computers when I was in high school, but we did get introduced to data processing with some equipment that West Charlotte got donated to it, and Mrs. Fitz (ph.) took a special interest. In fact, Mrs. Fitz tried to get me to take a job to, to use this equipment because I learned how to use it and taught her how to use it to, to a certain extent because she hadn't been introduced to it either. And so from that she tried to get me a job with Exxon and then some other teachers came and talked me out of doing that and made sure that I went to college. But, we had quite a few teachers that pushed me and pushed me to college. Pop Miller was assistant principal and then ultimately principal, and he, he knew my family quite well and he, he stayed on my case as well. And in, and in those days they could whip you and we had a lot of teachers beating us when we got out of line and so-- Speaker 1: In high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Or middle school? Speaker 2: Middle school, high school, yeah we were still getting beatings going through school and people taking special interest in you to make sure that you, you did what you were supposed to do. And so, it was a good, it was a good experience, good experience. Story_ID: 74314 Speaker 1: Okay now did you--where you involved in any extracurricular activities in high school or? Speaker 2: I played in the band. I was in a science club, and I was in a social club called the cavaliers, a group of which was, I guess, a predecessor to being in a fraternity, but we had some, some social clubs for guys in the school and I, I became a cavalier. So, yeah we did, we did have those things going. I wanted to play sports, but was too little and couldn't, couldn't do that, so I--well, I, I don't remember even studying that much now that I think about it. I, I didn't spend a whole lot of time studying in high school now that I think about it, but I got through it so. And I remember, one of the stories that I remembered the best coming out of high school was and again nobody thought I had any sense or any intelligence at all and we took the SATs and we're sitting in the room and I'm in the back cutting up and the teacher comes in and says that the SAT scores are back and they ask and I just want you all to take a guess as to who scored the highest in this class on the SATs. And everybody started throwing out names and everything and then he kept saying no. Then they finally said well who scored the highest? And then he called out my name and he had a shocked look on his face as well as everybody (laughing), as well as everybody in the class. Everybody in the class was shocked that I, that I had any, any intelligence whatsoever, but I scored the highest. I scored around 1450 on the SATs coming out of high school and, and it just, it floored everybody and so it, it was--it's amazing how you get classified just based on how you act and who you hang around with in high school, but-- Speaker 1: The whole tracking system, I mean, I, I guess they, they may still use it someplace. I guess they don't use it now like they used to, but they did track people in school like, like that when I was going. It's the same way that you're with a slow group, you stay in that group, you're in the middle--(unclear)--and they hardly ever-- Speaker 2: Switch it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's done now. It's just done more, it's not as overt as it, as it used to be, but they still figure out ways to do that, to track you because it's supposed to be against the law now I thought, but they still do anyway. In fact, they still do it here to a certain degree. Speaker 1: Do you think it might be more behavior based rather than based on what you actually know? Speaker 2: I think that's how, how, how it starts be, because it's perception based, I'll put it that way, and people have a perception of what you can do based on who you hang out with and, and what you do, your behavior. They just perceive what you know based on that and so yeah, yep, so I, I had, I had that stigma all the way through junior high school and high school. Story_ID: 74315 Speaker 1: Now when you were a senior, now you're on the verge of graduation, did you have the sense that you would go to college Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: and what did you-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Never, never, a doubt, and my, my, my parents because they didn't have a college education they sort of made sure that all of us ended up going to college and, and the teachers, especially in math, wanted to make sure that I, that I went to college and so yep I knew I would--I didn't know where I was going though, but I knew I would go somewhere. And then at the time right before graduation the scholarships started coming in, then I started getting some scholarships then it was evident that I was gonna go. And I got a couple of full scholarships to go to schools and I chose to go to the one where I got a half scholarship, and that didn't go over big with my, with my household. But, I knew that if I'd gone where I had the full scholarships all the guys that I hung out with in high school they were going to those schools and I knew what would happen, that I'd, I'd, I'd do the same thing I did in high school and hang out with them and it would be away from home at that time and no telling what trouble or what I would have ended up doing, so I decided to go somewhere where I can get away from those guys and ended up going to Lincoln University [Pennsylvania]; best decision that I made. Speaker 1: Okay, now that's one of the oldest black universities right? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Lincoln University in [Oxford] Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: In Pennsylvania yep. Speaker 1: Well, what, what was it like? Was it-- Speaker 2: It was, it was great, it was great. It--had an opportunity to get away. It was a rural setting. It was a beautiful university in a rural setting. Great off-campus, I mean, it was just great to be away from home for me. It was great to be away in a, in an environment like that. Got to meet some guys that were really very smart and liked to study a lot and that, that was one of my shortcomings was that I wasn't good at studying, but I ran into some guys that basically taught me how to study and that, that was a life-saver for me in school and then being away from the, the--(unclear)--that I used to hang around with and I really got into the groove of education and, and I did quite well in college especially in math; did quite well in math and so it, it was good, it was good. And there's nothing like being in a rural setting to get educated in, personally, that's my personal opinion. You aren't caught up in the hustle and bustle of city life, you're away from everything so you don't have much to do but study when you at--well you really don't have much to do. Everything was brought in for us. We'd have homecomings and things like that. We'd have to bus people in from everywhere to come to the homecomings and everything, but it was, it was great. Pledged a fraternity. Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: Omega Psi Phi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that kept me going through college with the brotherhood, going through school was a great asset, so. Story_ID: 74316 Speaker 1: Who were some of the pro, pro professors on the campus that stood out and did you, did they bring in speakers or that sort of thing for y'all or? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had all of that. During that time, we had the all of the movements going on and so got to hear quite a few people. Got to hear Stokely Carmichael, H. Rap Brown and all of that crowd. Brought Muhammad Ali in during his early years when he was just becoming a fighter. Got to hear Bill Cosby and Sidney Poitier and so we, we had a good, good way of attracting people to come and talk to us before they became superstars, so it was a good breaking ground for them as well. So, yeah had my math teacher stood out for me, Dr. [James W.] Frankowski was a great teacher, Dr. Phillips was my economics teacher, was a great teacher, sociology teacher was the worst teacher I've had in my life. Speaker 1: Really. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --Why? Speaker 2: Well, it was, wasn't one my favorite subjects, but he didn't, he didn't care, so he would come in every day and start the class off by saying, "I got mine, you got yours to get, so I really don't care what you all do (laughter) and so I nearly flunked that class because I just-- Speaker 1: I heard people, I heard teachers say that before-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but I don't know why they-- Speaker 2: I don't know if they think that's cute or what, but it just, it completely works the opposite of they are trying to do because once you hear that you immediately realize that they could care less about you when they tell you that I, I got mine, so if you come in here and mess up it's on you and that's, that's not what education should be about. And, so I didn't have to take but one semester of that thank goodness, so I got out of that. But in college is where I met my wife and so it was, it was a good experience, good experience. Speaker 1: Okay did you get married in college or? Speaker 2: No, we got married my senior year. I was graduating. We got married when I was, when I was leaving college, and she, she was a sophomore, so she had to leave to have our first child, but we left after I graduated. Story_ID: 74317 Speaker 1: Now you were in college when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was the atmosphere on campus when that happened? Speaker 2: Very, very bad, very bad. We--it--we were having a program of sorts at the university. I can't even remember what the program was about, but one of my frat brothers ran down, ran down the campus and started yelling that, that Dr. King had, had been assassinated and then the school just went berserk. And we did have some white students on the campus at the time and then people started going around hunting down--in fact, I had to pull him off of some, off of some people 'cause he just snapped. He was, he was from Dallas, Texas, and he just snapped, and so we literally had to pull him off of some people, and the school just went in turmoil and started burning down and tearing down the school and very, very sad situation. It got so bad that they closed--the president came and made an announcement he was closing school, announces, says, "We're closing the school, get your stuff and, and leave," and you know nobody had transportation. I mean a lot of people didn't have transportation and then a lot of people didn't have any arrangements to get home and it was just a mess and luckily some guys from Gastonia, North Carolina, had cars and they asked me if I needed a ride home and I told 'em yeah I'd ride with them to come home. And sad, even more sad than what happened on campus was the ride home. We had to go through cities like Baltimore [Maryland] and Washington, D.C. and so all down the 95 corridor going through cities was just, it was just really, really a sad sight for sore eyes because the cities were burning, people were looting, throwing stuff at cars, and it was just, it was a horrifying sight. It was a long sad drive home. Very little was said in the whole time. It took us almost sixteen hours to get home, and very little was said during the whole time on the drive and just the turmoil that we saw coming home was, was something. So, yeah that was, that was a moment in my life, yeah it really was. Speaker 1: How did you feel about it, you know, personally? Speaker 2: Very upsetting, very upsetting. It was very upsetting. I felt hurt, betrayed. I felt I couldn't trust anybody anymore. Just hurt, just hurt. He had spoken on campus before as well, and, and I looked at Dr. King as being a spokesman for the community, the African American community, and his assassination meant that we lost a spokesman and it also made me feel like we were, we were betrayed and that nobody wanted us to have a spokesman that could actually stand toe-to-toe and speak on our behalf and so I just had a lot of mixed, mixed emotions at the time. Speaker 1: So, what did they--how, how did they--so what did they--how did they regroup and get you get, get the students back, you know, and graduate, you know? Speaker 2: Well, that--we had to be back I think what he, he told us that they were gonna open the school back in, in a week. They were gonna close school down for a week, so we ended up having to come back in a week and, and it was tough. Everybody got back and just went through with what we had to do to get through and graduate. In fact, I was a junior, so I still had one more, one more year to go. No, what year was that, sixty-- Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a junior, I was a junior and so we got back on campus and went through, went through the rest of the year, but that, for the rest of that school year it was just not the same. Just, the, the emotions were just too much. Story_ID: 74318 Speaker 1: Do you remember the transition, I guess, in the media, you know, from calling black people Negroes to calling them black people, you know, that was a--that happened around that period of time and I've yet to find anybody that could tell me when that started, it started, you know. Speaker 2: It started, it started--in, in fact it started around sixty, the year before, that started around '67 [1967] because there was a movement and--there was a movement going on about self-identity and that we didn't want, we didn't want to have anybody tell us who we were and that are negroes, that that was the name given to us and that we were gonna at that point become black and I remember it from '67 [1967] 'cause Nik, Nikki Giovanni came on campus and gave a speech that announced that, but I, I don't think she was the one that started it. She had picked up on it and just started when she put it in, in some of her, her talks. But, yeah that--it was about the same time. In terms of reading material in those days, what do you think was the most influential reading material, I guess, I mean for you a black college student at that time? Speaker 1: Other than, you mean outside of-- Speaker 2: Outside of text books--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Actually it was whatever I could find in the library because they didn't carry interestingly, African American newspapers in the library and so it was normally the, the "Philadelphia Tribune" or the "Inquirer" where we got most of our news from or the, the "Ebony", "Essence" and those type--we'll "Essence" wasn't, "Ebony" and "Jet" were the publications that people would subscribe to that I could get a copy of and read and so those were the two major publications, but the, the newspapers even the "Philadelphia Tribune" wasn't on campus and so we didn't have access to, to the African American press like I would have liked to have seen at that time, but-- Speaker 2: That, that's not unusual. There are other schools that I've heard about where they don't keep black newspapers or order the black newspapers for the library. --(Unclear)--like the "Afro-American", the "Defender", you know, those. Speaker 1: I know, I know. That's sad, but it's true Story_ID: 74319 Speaker 1: You went on to grad school after, after college right, after-- Speaker 2: Not right after I had--I was--I got married and had my oldest daughter and took a job with UNIVAC Sperry Rand in Blue Bell, Pennsylvania, and started living up there and at the time that I realized I was gonna have to get married I, I had, I had a scholarship to go for my Ph.D. in math and I had to turn it down 'cause I had to support a family at that time and so I ended up having to take the job. And after working the job for a year, I applied to go to Villanova [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to study math and UNIVAC Sperry Rand picked up the tuition. I was holding a pass, so I was able to do that at night. I had to work during the day and then go to school at night. Speaker 1: Tell us now what was UNIVAC? UNIVAC is a name you don't hear anymore in those days. I think people who not, who are not older when this was taped will wonder what UNIVAC is--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: UNIVAC Sperry Rand was a computer company they, they, they comput, they made computer hardware. They were IBM's competition during those days, and they would literally make the hardware and we, the teams that I worked on, had to write the software to make the computers work and so we would literally put the system software together and put it in the hardware and test it to make sure it works and ship 'em out the door. So, UNIVAC Sperry Rand was a computer manufacturer, or turnkey hardware and software and then send it out the door. Speaker 1: Okay now what, what, now give us an idea of what size the computer was in 1969--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, interestingly, the actual physical size of the computers took up the size of this conference room. People can't see the size of this conference room, but it was, they were, they were very large machines that had tubes and everything in 'em that, that took up a lot of space, created a lot of heat, and interestingly the size of my desktop computer sitting in there now, my PC, or it's actually a MacIntosh, but a little MacIntosh now actually has more capacity than those big machines in those days had. We're talking about 32 megabyte machine that took a room this size, which now you can fit in a watch as a matter of fact. You can, you can fit that much memory in a watch, so that's where technology has, has gone, but that was a huge, very hot machine that took up a lot of space and created a lot of heat and that, that's where I got my computer skills from start, starting, yeah, but it was-- Speaker 1: Now the software was, was prepared through punch cards, right. You could use--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes you literally would have to put all of your instructions--I mean today we key in everything on a keyboard. Back in those days, you would literally have to key everything in on a punch card and, and the machine would actually punch holes in a card that you would then have to take and put into a card reader on a computer and feed that information to the computer that way. It was--but today it looks very archaic, but it was the input device for computers back when I was coming along. In fact, you can't even find a card reader or, or those cards in today's environment, but that was the input device for the cards and not only, not only was it difficult, but if you dropped that card and the cards had to be in a certain order, so if you dropped 'em then (unclear), which I've done and so it was like starting over. We used to have these big boxes of cards that, that would hold programs on it and we eventually learned to put a sort key on the end of the card that wasn't being used so that if you drop it you can go take 'em to a card sorter and sort 'em back in order. But, if you hadn't done that and you dropped 'em it was like you had to start from, start all over again. But, it was, it's an interesting discipline to teach patience and to get you acclimated to the machine more so than it is today. Today anybody can, can, can do that and, and become programmers and, and make computers well, but in those days if you didn't have a math background you couldn't understand the discipline because it all related to zeros and ones on a computer card and you had to be able to interpret what that meant in terms of letters and numbers and everything, so it was, it was an interesting experience. Story_ID: 74320 Speaker 1: Okay, so you went on to Villanova right? Speaker 2: Un-hum. Speaker 1: And Villanova is in Philadelphia or? Speaker 2: Right outside. It's actually in Villanova, Pennsylvania, which is right outside of Philadelphia. Speaker 1: All right. What was Villanova like? Speaker 2: Didn't, didn't get to, well Speaker 1: You need to go back? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Do, do we need to go back? Speaker 2: No, I, I mean- Speaker 1: We can, we can. Speaker 2: Well Villanova [University] was just night school for me and so I, I didn't, I didn't get the full effect of being there all the time like I did when I was at Lincoln [University], but it was a good school. It was very tough math teachers and doing it and part-time, doing it at night and then working during the day and then having to be a father and a husband. It, it took, it took a toll on me, but it, it was very, very interesting. To get your Master's Degree you had to go, you had to finish another forty hours of, of credits, which wasn't bad. That wasn't the bad problem, but to get your actual degree they put you through an oral and all of your math teachers and all of the disciplines for, for the Master's would come to this oral and give you a piece of chalk and tell you to go to the board and each of them could ask you any question about that particular discipline that they wanted to ask you and you literally had to stand at the black board and, and solve or answer their questions, and that was the toughest thing I've ever been through to this day in my life sitting there for about two hours being grilled by a bunch of math professors, and then waiting another thirty minutes after you go through that process just to see if you passed. Because if you didn't pass that oral, then you would literally have to go back and take some of those courses again and then come back through the oral and so that was an interesting process to get, to get a Master's Degree, but I got it. Story_ID: 74321 Speaker 1: So after you got your Master's from Villanova [University, Pennsylvania] I think you were at [UNIVAC] Sperry Rand for another year and then you got a position at Johnson C. Smith [University], correct? Speaker 2: Well, there was, there was some, there was some stuff right before that. One of my, one of my best friends at UNIVAC [Sperry Rand] decided to get a position at another company called, well in fact it was Leeds and Northrup in Pennsylvania because they paid him more salary and they, they were looking for some more people to hire and had a great job at UNIVAC, but he talked me into talking to them and they offered me more money and I went over there. Worse, that was the worst mistake I made in my life and a very bad job, very bad job and at the time I think I was there for, for about a year and decided that I didn't like the job and right before I took that job my, my wife's parents, her father had died a couple of years before that, but then her mother passed and her mother left us the house in Washington, D.C. and several other things that--and we were sitting there debating, 'cause I knew I was gonna quit the job I had at Leeds [and Northrup] and I knew I could have gone back to UNIVAC, but all of my friends down here who were making far less money than I was they had homes, yards, the whole nine yards, and we were living in a cramped apartment in Pennsylvania and it was something wrong with that picture, so I decided that why not move back to Charlotte [North Carolina] and see if I can get a job in Charlotte with something in technology and my wife agreed that we could do that because we were trying to raise two kids at that time and that apartment wasn't getting it. And so, we sold her house in Washington [D.C.] and bought one in Charlotte and moved down. Story_ID: 74322 Speaker 1: And actually my first job was--I was turned down at all the banks in, in Charlotte and ended up getting a job at a, at a motor company, Johnson's Motor Lines and did that for about a year or so before somebody approached me about the, the job at Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and asked me if I wanted to, to do that, and I interviewed for that and, and got it. And so, I became a math teacher and a computer science teacher at, at Johnson C. Smith and then developed--at the time talked them into getting a computer and, and developed the software to do their admissions and a lot of their administrative, a lot of their administrative stuff during the time, so. In fact, IBM donated the computer. I had a buddy at, at IBM that I met down here that was working with that account and he, he gave us the initial set of equipment and programmed it to actually--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--be mainframe computer--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Well, it wasn't a big mainframe computer. They had started--they called these mini computers. It was still a lot bigger than what you see now, but it wasn't as big as the ones that I, that I came up with. It was about half the size of those, but it was still bigger than what you see today with the PCs, but, but yeah we programmed that and got it to do a lot of the, the work on, for the campus. And I, and I really enjoyed teaching. I, I had some, some very good students there, but enjoyed teaching for my student's side. From the administration side, teaching is not something that you wanna do. That I wanna do because the school--we took--worked out a deal with Prudential [Financial] to help train some students, send them up to Prudential for the summer and did all this on my time and Prudential say well we'll give you a grant to do this. Well the school found out they were giving me a grant they deducted my salary that they were paying me (laughter) for the amount that the, the grant was from Prudential and I said oh no, so once that happened I knew I had to get out of there because that made no sense to me, but, I, I gave 'em four years, but it was, it was something, it was something. And at that time, the bank that turned me down when I first came here was looking for somebody, and I interviewed with them again and they, they accepted it. Speaker 2: So, that's Bank of America right? Speaker 1: Bank of America. At that time, it was NationsBank, NCNB. And I gave them eighteen years of my life. Speaker 2: And you primarily did programming and that sort of thing or? Speaker 1: I started off programming and then I ended up managing a group of programmers and then ended up managing a department, but it was all related to, to computers, yeah. Story_ID: 74323 Speaker 1: Now in the meantime your father acquired the "The Charlotte Post" or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, during that time, "The Charlotte Post" was, was being, was being produced by a guy by the name of, oh gosh his name escapes me now, but anyway he was, he was doing the paper and he was having it printed by Garland Atkins out of Belmont [South Carolina], and Garlands was a white publisher that had about five white weeklies and when, gosh I can't think of the guy's name, couldn't pay him he literally took the paper as, as compensation for not being able to pay the, the print bill and--but because he was doing all white papers, he didn't know the black community nor did he know Charlotte [North Carolina], so he needed somebody to, to run that paper for him, and he hired my father to do that. And my father started doing that for him and four years later decided that he wanted to buy and talked Garland into selling it to him, and so in 1974 we penned all of the documentation for him to become the owner of the publication. Speaker 1: Then what, what was the philosophy behind "The Charlotte Post?" Was there a particular editorial mission for "The Charlotte" Post at that time? Speaker 2: At that time, to concentrate on, to concentrate on news in the black community that nobody else would cover, but that was not controversial. So, I considered it mostly the "Ebony" of local newspapering, but that was pretty much it. It was sort of a society publication for, for this community, black community, anyway. Speaker 1: So, you'd keep track of what en, entertainers were doing? Speaker 2: Entertainers-- Speaker 1: People with money. Speaker 2: Church people that sort of thing. A lot of fluff news. It was a lot of fluff news, but that, that was, that was the key thing primarily because--you'd have to talk to my father about this, but I'm assuming his concentration was to make sure that he could make money and if he started making people upset and then he wouldn't be able to turn that into dollars, and so he decided just to keep it fluff. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Was the paper moved by any of the issues going on in those days or any, any big issues in the black community? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nope, just fluff. It wouldn't, it wouldn't attempt to tackle any of the major issues that were happening, that were controversial. Plus he, plus he didn't have, he didn't have talented enough reporters to handle that type of situation anyway, so he--the only controversy came in with his first love which was sports. And so he would do stuff about Johnson C. Smith [University] and their sports program, athletics program, but that was, that was basically it. Speaker 1: Okay, so he would discuss a controversial sports issue in the paper, but wouldn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, like whether a coach ought to be fired or something like that right? Speaker 2: Correct and the coaches were his buddies, so he wouldn't, he wouldn't even deal with that, but in terms of how the administration possibly was treating the coaches he would deal with stuff like that or, or players that weren't given scholarships or whatever, for whatever reason he would deal with those types of issues. Story_ID: 74324 Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you gradually get involved with the paper? Speaker 2: (Laughter) My father called me in--I would--he, he asked me to come and help him all along. Since '74 [1974] I would come in, but we would always bump heads, and I had another job and so I was just helping him on the side and, and anything I would suggest we'd bump heads 'cause he didn't want to do that. I wanted computers in here. I wanted to upgrade, do a lot of things, and he was, he was doing fine just the way, the way it was and so we would always bump heads. So, I would come in and, and help him out for a couple of months and just get fed up and, and leave. But, one time he called me in and told me that he was, that the doctors were gonna stop him from working for a couple of months because he was sick, and he asked me if I would come in and sit in for him while he was sick. I told him, "What you mean sit in for you while you're sick?" He said well, "I'm a, I'm a have to take a couple of months off and I just need somebody to oversee the place for me until I get back. It won't be but a couple of months," so I said, "Fine I'll do it," and started coming in and sitting in. Now he never said what he was sick from or, or what was bothering him. He just said his doctor told him that, and when I started coming in here a couple of things happened that just upset me in terms of how the employees were acting, and so I, I literally reprimanded several employees and immediately they ran off to tell him what had happened. And when they came back in, sort of with their tail between their legs, he told them that I was in charge and that whatever I said that was the way it had to be. And at that time, I knew he would never come back because otherwise he would have, we would have done that again. But, he said whatever I said was, was it and so I took over in March, had the con- had the conflict in April, in June he died. He had acute leukemia, which he never, he never let on that he had that until the, the final stages and once he died my family asked me to stay here and run it, and so I did. I stayed at the bank and did this for ten years and I left the bank in '96 [1996] and started doing this full time. But, I was tricked into it in other words. I was tricked into taking over the paper. Best trick that, that's ever happened, but he tricked me into it. Speaker 1: All this time though, had you ever thought of yourself as one being involved in journalism at all (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, and that's, that's, that's very interesting because he, he, he would always ask us if we were going to get involved with the paper. I told him no I knew I wasn't gonna do it because I had no interest in it whatsoever, so I told him I had, I didn't have any interest in doing this and my other brothers none of, none of them took an interest either, and so we had no journalistic interest at the time. But the interesting thing to me about all of that was when, when he got ill and I had to come in and sit down and take over a job it was, it was no training. It was almost like when I got in the chair I knew exactly what to do and so just by hanging around him all this time and not necessarily working here, but I knew everything to do and so it was, it was sort of like a no-brainer, sort of like I was going through a training for this, for this position because it was, it was just a no-brainer, just coming in sitting down and, and start directing the ship the way I wanted it to run. And philosophically, we had several points of difference, but just changed the philosophy of the paper and moved on. Story_ID: 74325 Speaker 1: Now what did you really change the philosophy of the paper to? Speaker 2: Well, to me I wanted the paper to be something that I would be interested in reading and that meant controversy. I mean, I'm, you know I--in the past he would never do endorsements of candidates because he didn't want to make any candidate mad because he wanted to make sure that he could get monies from all of them that were running, and I, I think the reverse view of that. I figured if I make all of 'em mad then all of 'em would do the same thing and, and so I thought controversy and dealing with issue or any topics throughout the paper would make it a much better publication, and, and I, and I came in the door with that philosophy. And one of the first weeks when I was hear the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] was coming to town to do a march, and I thought one of the best stories we could do as a black newspaper is cover the Klan. So, I called a staff meeting and, and told the reporters I wanted somebody to go down there and cover the Klan during the march to see what kind of story we could get out of it and everybody looked at me like I was crazy and said oh we aren't gonna do that, we aren't gonna do that and one little girl in the back said I'll do it, and I knew that's who I was gonna have to ride through this process and ultimately fired everybody else and made her the managing editor, and she went out and tried to get that story, but didn't get it because the police wouldn't let her close to the Klan. They didn't know what the Klan was gonna do, so they wouldn't let her close to 'em, but her story turned out to be that she couldn't get close to the Klan 'cause the policemen, the police wouldn't let her close to the Klan, so, but she turned out to be my managing editor and she turned out to be a good one. In fact, she's in Chicago [Illinois] now as a matter of fact. Speaker 1: Okay, what's her name? Speaker 2: Jalyne Strong. Speaker 1: Did she, she, did she work for Johnson? Speaker 2: She started working for a newspaper called "Afrique News" and now she's with the daily newspaper that's free that they put on the street, News Street, something she was working with-- Speaker 1: "StreetWise." Speaker 2: "StreetWise" that's where she is now. She's working with "StreetWise." Very talented, very talented young lady, but yeah that's--that got me started in the business. Story_ID: 74326 Speaker 1: Okay, well was it difficult those ten years that you tried to do both jobs? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm without a family now, my wife's gone (laughter). It was difficult--(unclear)--and, and what really made it difficult was at the time right after all this happened Hugh McColl decided he wanted to buy up the world and, and he did. He went out and started buying up the world and because I was in the technical side of the business as soon as he'd go out and buy a bank my team would have to get, get up and fly wherever we were buying a bank and try to merge the two systems to work together and so I was flying all over the country trying to do that as well as trying to run this newspaper and, it just got worse and worse each year 'cause he was buying more, we were flying to more places, and the places he was buying were a lot bigger each time and once I started spending so much time on the road that I knew eventually that this had to go because I couldn't continue to do both. Yeah, it was very difficult, very time consuming to spend eight hours there, get off at six and come over here from six to nine, and it was tough. Had some good people working here though that we, we had groomed to take over some departments and that made it a little easier, but it was touch. Speaker 1: Did the pa, paper do well financially, I guess or? Speaker 2: Eventually, eventually it, it--initially when I came in and started taking over it wasn't finan, it was in financial straits, but we just made some changes, changed rates, changed the look of the paper, changed the readability of the paper and then started going up on the advertising rates and the circulation rates, then and that's, that's all it really needed was a better product and then you can demand better rates and that worked out. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have an editorial board? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, and was it a pretty str, strong group of people on there? Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, yep. At--be, because I wasn't a journalist one of the things that we did about making that was the test that I put Jalyne [Strong] through to find out who would go cover a story that I wanted started me with the people that I knew could become great journalists, and with her in place we just went out and got my weaknesses which was somebody with a journalist--(unclear)--and so, we, we got a strong journalism department, a strong editorial staff, yeah. Story_ID: 74327 Speaker 1: Now do, do you--there's a paper in St. Louis, I can't think of the name of it, but-- Speaker 2: There are two. Speaker 1: Huh. Speaker 2: It's two. Speaker 1: Two--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: "St. Louis Sentinel" and "St. Louis American" Speaker 1: American, right. Well, one of them was famous for covering, you know, every murder in the black community in St. Louis and they have gotten some national coverage for, I mean, you know people have written their approach to it, you know, there are some papers I know that have a philosophy where they only cover good news and if it's not good they don't put it in the paper and there's a, there's a movement to do that and I know there are several black papers that follow that example and some are, some are sponsored by the Republican Party and some are sponsored by the Democrats, and some are, you know, there are lots of different ways to do this. There are black papers I know in the '70s [1970s] that would boycott businesses, you know, and then end up getting that--(unclear)--. That was a way to do it. What, what, what's the story of Charlotte Post? Speaker 2: The story, our story is we take position--well first of all we feel like that we aren't gonna try to boycott anybody. We're gonna present to you a package and a program to say that we got an audience that follow us because we do good journalism and we'll reach that market, and if you want your product and services to reach that market, we're the best avenue for you to take. If you don't want to take us, that's fine, but we'll get enough people that, that will take us. But, our philosophy is that we want to present the news the best we can and on our editorial page we want to present as many positions as we can because we take the position that we feel like the readers are much smarter than we are and all we got to do is present the positions to you and then you make up your own mind. It's not our job to try to, try to dictate or force you to think a certain way. That becomes a public relations firm, and good journalism is you present the facts and you present diverse opinions and then let your readers decide and we've been very successful at, at that, at that approach. Now, what we don't do we will do controversial news, but we do not do murders and rapes and the crime primarily because the, the major news will be the first people on the beat to, to do that. If a murder or something happens, they have the radio, the whatever they call the things that are tied to the police department so they know where the crimes are happening, when it's happening, so they follow that. They would call that the street beats and we, we don't do that kind of news. That's not, that's not where we are. We figured they can cover that, but what they can't cover is the, the news that happening in, in our community that, that impacts us outside of crime. Well, they could, but they don't and so that's where we, we sort of fill the void that they aren't doing. And so I'm not trying to run behind them to do crime news I can--there's enough news that we're creating that's not being covered at all and so it's like filling a void. And so that's how we looked at it and that's how we've approached it. Interesting though the "St. Louis American" is the paper--we, we have a national convention each year and there are four papers that always compete to be the top paper in the, in our organization in NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association]. It's us, the "St. Louis American", "The Afro-American", and the "Philadelphia Tribune", and for the last two years St. Louis has been the top dog and, and so that they have to be knocked off that per, that perch, but they, they produce a good product. I don't care about some of the news stories that they do, but they do a good job. So, they're, they are king on the throne right now. Story_ID: 74328 Speaker 1: Do you think you, you offer a unique point of view, you know, in, in your paper for the black community that's not, that they can't get elsewhere. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yep, 'cause no, nobody else, nobody else cares about that. "The Daily" paper I had to go talk to their editorial board. The publisher asked me to come and talk to their editorial board to just talk about covering news and etc., and I, and I gave a little speech and one of the questions that I was asked, and I can't remember if the, if she asked me, the publisher, or was it from one of the reporters, and the question was why is it that we can't get the, the type stories in the African American community like you all are doing, and I looked at the group which was with the except--it was about sixty people in the room and only one black and then I just told 'em, said look at, at who you asking to cover the community. People, news people aren't any different than anybody else they cover what's comfortable for 'em. They do what's comfortable and it's not gonna be comfortable for someone that's not African American to go into an African American community and just find stories and cover it. It's not, it's just not gonna happen, and that's why when you see crime beats it's an easy beat because the police department does all the work. All you got to do is write it down and that's why most papers and television cover crime beats because it's easy coverage, and we don't do that. But, but yeah we-- Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--point of view or an analysis--(unclear)--reporting--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Now, the analysis piece of crime we will do and that's something they don't do, but we will if, if we see that, that there is something going on in the community that's impacting that community, then we will come back and do an analysis on why this is happening and, and possible solutions to correct it and we will do that, but the crime itself we don't cover; that's a waste of time, a waste of our time anyway. Story_ID: 74329 Speaker 1: Do you, do you delve into police misconduct and that sort of thing in the black community? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Yeah, lately though we've been, been diving into citizen review board misconduct that the police department put together to sort of cover their basis, and they turned out to be worse than the police department and so yeah we, we'll do stuff like that. We'll do analysis to make sure that people see all aspects of what's going on in the community. Speaker 1: Now, now what is going on with that, I mean, you just talked about the citizens re, review board. What, what are they doing? Speaker 2: There, there, there have been cases where, where there were literally very bad police officers that did very bad things that the police department fired, but under due process now you have to send fired policemen through the citizens review board, and the citizen review board has literally hired, over protest of the police department, these people back and put 'em back on the police department, and, and the way we're set up right now, which we're gonna see, I'm gonna personally see to it that it gets changed. They had to hire these people back and in both cases more things occurred similar to what they got fired for the first time, and once it happens the second time it doesn't have to go back through the citizens review board. You can't request to go back through that process. And so they ended up getting fired and, and in several cases you're talking about police officers raping people and just stupid stuff and they go and give these cases to, to citizens and, and they just feel sorry for 'em, I guess, and just say put 'em back on the force and that's, that's just stupidity and we can't, we can't have that happening. I mean the police department in a lot of cases can police themselves, especially when, when they're talking about dealing with their own and, and, and doing things like getting rid of 'em for whatever reason, and then you come back and gonna put 'em back on the, on the force. Speaker 1: This citizens review board works just the opposite of the way most, most of 'em are designed to work. Speaker 2: Yeah, and what they're supposed to do is just make recommendation to, to either hire or fire--and then one of the things that had happened, especially prior to this other police chief stepping in, was that some police officers felt like they were getting fired with, without due process and so the citizens review board decided to take that on as well as how the police were treating communities, as how they were treating other police officers, and so they took that on as part of their review process and they were just given too much power. They, they should have never been given the power that they were given to, to allow police officers to get their jobs back, so interesting story but bad situation. Story_ID: 74330 Speaker 1: What, what was the, what's the biggest story that, that "The Charlotte Post" has covered and? Speaker 2: The biggest in terms of just national attention was we did, we did a story on the Hispanic population. We have a fast growing Hispanic population in Charlotte [North Carolina] and a lot of the Hispanic population is moving into predominately black neighborhoods, and we just went out to find out how that was impacting the African American communities. And we heard a lot of statements that were racist in content, the same things that people said about us when we were moving, when African Americans were moving into white communities. Some of the same verbiage that we used to hear during that was repeated by African Americans about Hispanics moving, myths. Speaker 1: Now, what Hispanic group is, is moving in predominately? Speaker 2: Predominantly, it's, it's Mexicans. It's predominately Mexicans moving into Charlotte, even though there, there are other classes of Hispanics moving in, but the predominant, especially moving into the African American communities are Mexicans. And so we ran the story. The story was picked up by NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association] and put on their website. It was put on our website. A national news company out of Atlanta picked it up and ran it on the, on the air nationally. Then another Florida company ran it on the air nationally, and then Rush Limbaugh picked it up and before long we were getting calls from everywhere, and them we're getting calls from Hispanic groups cursing us out about whatever and we did the flipside as well. We did--we went into one of the communities that is predominately a Hispanic community now and a young lady that used to work for us speaks fluent Spanish we took her to interview some Hispanics, and she literally got the exact same story about how, how the Hispanic population felt about African Americans, and we ran that. So, the two-part series actually snowballed with, with attention and we went from--we get about 10,000 hits, well 10,000 visitors per week on our website and that particular three-month period jumped from 10,000 to like 90,000 hits per week just people wanting to read that story and then emailing us their comments about it, and so that one was, was really, really, really big. It got to be so controversial that NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association] couldn't take the heat, and they took it off of their website (laughing). They removed the story altogether and had on when you clicked on the story it gave you this little message about we aren't racists and so we've decided that we would remove this from our, from our site. But, it really got hot and heavy, but it was a good piece. It was a real good piece. Story_ID: 74331 Speaker 1: Now, what did Rush Limbaugh say about it? Speaker 2: He basically came on the air and said, said that, that African Americans are, are, are, having racial sentiments about Mexicans moving into their neighborhoods and went on with a whole race thing about every--that, that the racism in, in us all more or less is what, the way he, he took it. And, gosh I can't think of the other guy, because Rush Limbaugh got it from the other radio TV commentator that comes on, but he, he's, he's more news versus issue oriented, but he, he did put the story out there on his show too and I can't think of his name right now and he says that's what happens when--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Not Paul Harvey? Speaker 2: Paul Harvey, that's who did it. Paul Harvey, thank you, picked up the story and ran it. When Rush heard it on Paul Harvey's show, he took it and, and sort of editorialized it in terms of his perspective on racism being in us all. And so it, it, it really got a lot of attention for about three months it-- Speaker 1: Three months, that is a big--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it got batted around for three months 'cause everybody--when people that weren't used to--'cause people that weren't used to "The Charlotte Post" like in California and other places where they were told by people that this story was on our website, then they would come to the website, pull it up, read it, and then we hear the comments also, and it lasted for a good three month period before it started dying down. Speaker 1: Well, did it, did the story do anything to improve relationship between blacks and Mexicans? Speaker 2: Yeah, it really did because what it showed--we had, we had this cursory opinion about the, by both leader groups, the groups on the black side that were, that they considered themselves leaders felt like everything was hunky-dory and so did the Hispanics believe that everything was hunky-dory. And what this story showed was that at, at the level that you all are talking it may be hunky-dory, but the ordinary citizen that's dealing on a day-to-day basis with people of other cultures they see it differently, and, and so they realized that and actually started coming and, and having meetings to, to see if they could make a difference and change perceptions of, of both groups and so yeah it helped. It had a good impact. Story_ID: 74332 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what are some of the major issues that impacted the black community here in Charlotte [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Our schools, our schools primarily is the, is the biggest issue that we are going to have, have some major challenges with. Charlotte [North Carolina] has been under a desegregation plan for a very long time where we were literally bussing kids to get a racial balance in the school system. And last year the school system got sued for discriminating against whites who couldn't get in some of the seats where we had special programs set up for people that wanted special types of training like say if you wanted your kid to get special language training or special math or science training we had magnet schools set up in the system and the Hispanics and African American kids got first preferences to those schools, and the school system got sued and in going through the courts the courts decided that desegregation was no longer needed in Charlotte because we had met all the criteria that caused us to go under that plan anyway. So, they released it and in releasing it they challenged the school system to come up with another plan that didn't discriminate against anybody because of race, religion, and, and all those sorts of things. And we came back with a choice plan that, that really is a neighborhood school plan more or less and with that we're gonna end up with a lot of predominantly African American schools and poor schools. And the challenges is going to be that from an equity prospective we have to make sure that we're pouring the necessary resources into those schools to make those kids able to compete at any level. And what we had proven in our school system was that kids if given the proper resources regardless of how poor they are can learn and will learn, and our problem all along has been when we segregated kids we sent the resources away from the kids that needed the resources the most, 'cause the resources always went with the, with the richer side of town and, and the fear is that the resources aren't gonna follow the kids that need it the most, and, and that's our challenge. We are gonna have to make sure that since everyone agreed that this choice plan was what was needed, let's make sure that the resources goes along with, with the plan that's put in place and already we're getting rumblings because the Republicans swept the last elections and along with that sweeping they've already come in with some, with some changes that their gonna make. And a lot of the changes that they are talking about making is going to directly impact what everyone had agreed on was gonna be one of the equity prospects of doing this plan in the first place because the reason the plan sold was the fact that everyone agreed the equity would have to be number one priority with this plan. And now they're changing, they're talking about some changes they gonna put into all of this and so that's the number one challenge. The number two challenge would be equitable housing for, for people that, that can afford housing. We, we have a housing problem in Charlotte right now that we don't have affordable housing for people that should be able to afford housing. And we're literally going through a gentrification process because everyone is trying to come back into the inner city part of the town, and they are really uprooting urban centers because right around the downtown area when, when everybody was moving out to the suburbs a lot of the urban centers right around the downtown area became predominately black neighborhoods. And now that everyone is coming back downtown, you're uprooting those people that were living in those houses because the real estate is going through the roof now and they can't afford to live there anymore 'cause the tax rates on those homes have gone through the roof and the people that literally own these homes free of mortgages can't stay there anymore because they can't afford the taxes on 'em and so people are coming in and buying them from under 'em because of the taxes that they can't pay and they just pay the taxes and ended up with the homes. And so, that's another serious problem that we're facing. And those are the two major problems 'cause Charlotte is a city that's in major transition right now. We're, we're, we're growing fast and we're growing faster than we know how to handle a lot of the issues that's happening and we're just gonna have to see how we transition through a lot of this stuff, but still a great place to live and work though. Story_ID: 74333 Speaker 1: What makes it [Charlotte, North Carolina] a great place? Speaker 2: Quality of life. The things that we fight about are things that when I was living in other cities they didn't fight about because it wasn't anything for them to fight. They were fighting about basic needs and in Charlotte [North Carolina] all the basic needs for the most part are being met for most people. It's a, it's a wealthy city in terms of you got people here that could afford to do things and you got companies here that have no problems with helping fund extracurricular activities. They donate. We're, we're a very giving community. We give a lot of money back to help out when needed. And so, everyone, corporations, individuals, everyone is interested and focused on the quality of life across the board. And the issues that we're fighting here is basically trying to determine how or who gets what, distribution of resources basically is what, what, what the biggest fights are right now is distribution of resources and to me when you talk, when you have fights over distribution of resources the way we were having them then that means you gotta, you gotta a lot of resources to fight over, and so it's, it's, it's a good quality of life city. Everybody likes to--we got fine arts programs here that's growing all the time jobs for, for those that really want 'em. It's, it's just a good city. It's a good city to live in. Story_ID: 74334 Speaker 1: So, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community here? Speaker 2: Well, not so much just for the black community it's for Charlotte [North Carolina] altogether but we are--what I really like about this city now as opposed to when I was growing up here that it's a very diverse city now. We got people from every walk of life, every culture, everybody--when I was growing up you were either white or black; that was it, and culture was not ever in the picture. Now, culture is very much a part of this society. We got people from everywhere living here and, and what I see more than anything else and my worse fear is that with all of this richness in culture and diversity we don't take advantage of it. Everybody wants to go and, and hang out and do things with people that their comfortable with and that they know, so blacks hang out with blacks, whites hang out with whites, Asians with Asians, Chinese with--so we don't, we don't mix and mingle like, like we should to make the city become what it has the potential to become and that's what I would like to see happen. A lot of the issues that we are facing in Charlotte are because we just don't understand each other because we don't spend time talking and getting to know each other and we end up fighting over things that aren't even worth fighting over. But, I think, I think there are, there are several things that are happening that's gonna cause that to change. Story_ID: 74335 Speaker 1: Okay. And I know you are still relatively young, but what, what would you see at this point as your legacy? Speaker 2: That's a tough question. This, this, this publication continuing to survive after I'm dead and gone and continue with the missions and goals that we've set for this publication in terms of the uplifting of African American community through exposing it to, to the city at large and so that's, that's what I'd like for my legacy to be. And, we've, we've done some things to make sure that, that can, that can happen. So, that's what's I'm looking to see happen. Speaker 1: And, well I know your father intentionally passed this on to you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I guess he was, he felt that you were capable of doing this right, I guess. Speaker 2: I guess, I guess. He, he didn't, he didn't let me ask him before he--but I guess, and, and, we have--I, I can't--what we've done or what I've done was just to make sure that this exists is that I've turned it public, I've take my stock and put it in a charitable remainder trust so that when I pass the stock and the life insurance and all that goes into that trust and then the trust will actually own the newspaper and even if my kids decide that they don't want any part of it they can get paid from it being here and then somebody else can run the paper and make sure that it, that it exist, but if they do want to come in they can. So, I, I tried to set it up so that there were some options left for them to, to keep it running, but even if they didn't want to keep it running or come in and keep it running that they could still benefit from it staying up and running. So, hopefully it a, it a, it a still be here long after I'm gone. That was one of my number one goals coming in here was to, was to see to it if we could sustain it after we've passed on. Speaker 1: Now did your mother get a chance to see--is she still alive or? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother is still alive. Speaker 1: And, what, what does she think about that? Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she's going into an Alzheimer type phase now, but before she got to this point and she was up on it she, she was very happy to see that, that both me and my older brother actually came over here and was keeping it going and that we were trying to put some things in place to make sure that it would be here even after we were gone. So, she was very pleased with that and felt like my father would have been very pleased with that as well. Story_ID: 74336 Speaker 1: Okay. And sir this is different from the legacy question, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, I guess if, if I could be remembered as trying to make a difference. That's, that's about it. I mean trying to make a difference so that we all could just get along. That's how I would like to be remembered. I belong to a lot of organizations and groups where we, that's where we spend all of our time just trying to make sure that we get people talking and everybody can sort of understand other perspectives of things, and I would just like to be known as taking that very seriously and just trying to make a difference so that this world can be a better place, and that's a tough job, but that's, that's how I'd like to be remembered. Speaker 1: All right, well thank you sir. Speaker 2: Thank you I enjoyed it. Story_ID: 74337 Speaker 1: That's me and my brother. I'm seated. My brother is standing up. That was shortly after we had come in full-time to take over, take over this operation. So, that was probably in the '94 [1994] time frame. Speaker 2: And which brother is that? Speaker 1: Oh, that's Robert Johnson. Speaker 2: [Off Camera discussion] Speaker 1: That's that's at the NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association], NNPA convention where we're receiving first place award for news print, and that's the gentlemen from Anheuser Busch, I believe, that's giving out that award. He was one of the sponsors there that was, that was giving out the awards. Speaker 2: And year? Speaker 1: That was in 1999. Speaker 2: That's a Christmas photo of me on the left, my mother in the middle, and Robert[Johnson] on the right. That looks like that had to be, I had hair it was black, so that had to be, and he had a beard and he hadn't dyed his hair yet, so that had to be in the late '80s [1980s] about '88 [1988], '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Gosh, that's Danette Gaither (ph.) with me shortly after I'd started taking over this operation. She was the business manager at the time. That had to be in about 1988 as well. Speaker 2: That's Jackie Carr and me. Jackie was the production manager at the time, and that, that was probably about '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: And the spelling for Carr? Speaker 2: J-A-C-K-I-E, C-A-R-R. Speaker 1: That's my father receiving an award for--I don't know what he's receiving an award for. And that's duh, duh, duh, duh, duh, duh Reverend Deeks (ph.) sitting down. You gonna have to skip that one--(unclear)--I can remember his name. Speaker 2: But your father is the man in the white? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah my father is the one on the left. Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Okay, and you don't remember the gentlemen on the right? Speaker 1: I know it, but I can't, I just can't think of his name because he's much older now and I can't remember (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Do you remember the name or type of award that it was? Speaker 1: No. Now that's Fran. That's my ad director. She probably can give you both of those at the time 'cause she was there. That was before I got over here. Speaker 2: That's Fran in the back? Speaker 1: That's Fran in the back. Speaker 2: So that would have been before what date? Speaker 1: Oh, that had to be, and as young as she is right there, that had to be in the, that had to be in the late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Okay, that's Jalyne Strong and Jackie Carr. Jackie is on the right. Jalyne is on the left. Jalyne was the managing editor. I made her the--that's the one I was telling you about that did the story with the Klan and me standing up over our first set of computers. So that, that had to be in the early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: She's with StreetWise now? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And how does she spell Jalyne? Speaker 2: J-A-L-Y-N-E. Speaker 1: That's Herb White my--then he was a reporter. He is now my executive editor and Fran, my managing advertising director and me. I would say that was probably in the late '80 [1980], '89 [1989] probably. Speaker 2: And that's at a staff meeting with my brother standing the closest to the film on the right, then that's Fran next to him, then I'm standing. And then that's Danette Gaither, the business manager and Jackie Carr, the production manager, Jalyne Strong, the managing editor. Speaker 1: That's my father in the center, and that's my niece who worked here for a little while. That's Bobbie's daughter, Sabrina Johnson, S-A-B-R-I-N-A and-- Speaker 2: She's the one on the camera left or camera right? Speaker 1: She's camera right. Camera left--so this had to be in the early '80s [1980s] because that young lady was the managing editor before I made Jalyne the managing editor, and I can't think of her name either. Speaker 2: That's the front of the building, "Charlotte Post" back in the, that's like '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: That's at a Christmas party with Fran that I'm hugging, and I can't see whose back that is to me. Don't know who that is sitting down. Of course that's the same young lady that's that was the managing editor at the time and I can't think of her name. Speaker 2: When was this taken if you recall? Speaker 1: That was it had to be like '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: That's the black publishers of North Carolina meeting with Wachovia. They used to have an annual luncheon for us to get together to talk about Wachovia and how they were gonna work with the black press for the next year, and that was in November of '96 [1996]. Speaker 1: Now what was Wachovia, and how do you spell it? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERVA MALE VOICE): Bank, and I've got the spelling on the screen, thank you. Speaker 1: It's a bank. Speaker 2: It's a bank. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's me and Robert in 1988. Speaker 1: That's me on the right with Lise Timmons, that's L-I-S-E, T-I-M-M-O-N-S with Dr. Lloyd Wimberley, L-L-O-Y-D, W-E-M-B-E-R-L-E-Y, and that's Lashya, L-A-S-H-Y-A Lewis, L-E-W-I-S. We were giving her a scholarship to go to school, and Lashya was her counselor and Dr. Timmons was her principal. They suckered me into giving, I mean they talked me into giving her a scholarship. Speaker 2: That is Thomasina Johnson. That's Thomasina Johnson, my mother. T-H-O-M-A-S-I-N-A, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N. That picture was taken late '70s [1970s]. I'd say around '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: That was--I don't know the two gentlemen there, but that was in a golf tournament for--that was the Speaker 2: That was the Dell Curry Foundation tournament for his scholarship found. He raises money with his golf tournament and he just pits us with various players. The guy in the middle is a football player somewhere, and the other guy was one of the sponsors and I just, I don't remember their names. We all played poorly, so it wasn't nobody I wanted to keep up with (laughter). That was, in fact that had to be 2000...