 Story_ID: 545204 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me? Speaker 2: My name is Burnella Jackson-Ransom [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom]. Burnella is spelled B-U-R-N-E-L-L-A, and I use a hyphen between Jackson and Ransom. Okay. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: November 16th, 1940. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Louisburg, North Carolina. That's L-O-U-I-S-B-U-R-G. Speaker 1: Okay. And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a business owner and a public relations consultant. Speaker 1: Okay. And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: 450 Hickory Glen Lane, Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 26th-- Speaker 1: Twenty-seventh-- Speaker 2: --two thousand seven [2007]. Speaker 1: --today's the 27th. Speaker 2: I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --March 27th. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's okay. Story_ID: 545205 Speaker 1: We're gonna begin with me asking you what I call People magazine-ish type questions. Okay? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, blue (laughter). Speaker 1: As we could tell, okay. Speaker 2: Blue has always been my favorite color. When I was in college [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], I was in a store, shopping around, and I had, had this blue dress in my hand, on, rather, and a gentleman, a very handsome gentleman, came up and said, "Oh, you look so nice in blue, you should wear that color all the time." It stuck in my head, and I found myself doing just that. And for about twenty-five years, I wore nothing but blue, various shades of blue. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), all right. What do you like to eat? What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Lobster is my favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I like to eat lobster (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --springtime. Speaker 1: And when you go on vacation, what is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: A city, like New York City [New York, New York], Rome [Italy], Venice [Italy]. I'm not a sun bug. I, I like the city. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Several phrases-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but the one that pops into my mind right now, that I find myself using a lot is: say what you mean, and mean what you say. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So, so, this month, that's my favorite phrase (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's your favorite phrase tonight--this month, okay. Story_ID: 545206 Speaker 1: Now, you told us that your name was Burnella [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom], but people call you what? Speaker 2: Bunnie. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's what you prefer to be called (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Been called Bunnie all my life. It's a wonder my driver's license don't say Bunnie-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: --but my name is Burnella. Speaker 1: Who started calling you Bunnie? Speaker 2: My father. My father's nickname was Bun [ph.], and his name was Burnell. And so, obviously, I was named for my father. So, Bunnie, Bunn-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Burnella, Burnell. Speaker 1: All right, let's, let's talk about your father, Burnell, what was his last name? Speaker 2: Burnell James Hayes [Burnell Hayes] was his name. I am Burnella Jane Hayes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father was a teacher born in 1902 or '3 [1903], something like that, went to dental school at Howard [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.]. His father [George Hayes] passed away. He had to come back to North Carolina to take care of his family. He was a baseball player, played with the Negro baseball leagues, Negro baseball league, rather, and played with any number of black teams, was a pitcher. And his conversation at the dinner table was the game he pitched against Satchel Paige, which of course, he lost (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was a very loving taskmaster kind of man, was a principal in a high school. After, after he moved back to North Carolina--his father passed, and he moved back to North Carolina, and stopped pursuing his career as a baseball player. He and my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] moved to Louisburg [North Carolina], and he was a principal of a, of a school there, and that's where I was born. Speaker 1: Where did he complete his education? Speaker 2: Johnson C. Smith University in Charlotte, North Carolina is where he got his undergraduate degree. And he went on to get his M.B.A. degree from North Carolina College [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], and I typed his thesis (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you? Okay. Speaker 2: That was, that was a bonding experience, believe me, typing your father's thesis. Back in the old days when you, when you--when it was no electric typewriter, and you had to use carbon paper, and make three copies. Speaker 1: Do you remember what his thesis was about? Speaker 2: No, I don't, but it had something to do with elementary education because that's, that's what his--he taught. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 545207 Speaker 1: Well, we'll talk more about your father a little bit later, but tell me about his parents. Speaker 2: His parents, Nannie Morton Hayes and George Washington Hayes [George Hayes]. George Washington Hayes was a carpenter, built a lot of, of houses and things in Louisburg, North Carolina, and his wife, Nannie Morton Hayes, was a housewife. He built the home that they lived in, and I remember that he built the pew in the church that we went to [South Main Street Baptist Church, Louisburg, North Carolina]. I remember that as a child, because he used to say, "Your grandfather built that." And I thought it was really pretty. It was shiny and shellacked, and he was a carpenter. And I think my father picked up some of that trade from him, because my father was a tinkerer around the house, building stuff. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: My grandmother, as I said before, was a housewife. She cooked and washed, and see, that was in the day when people had the big, the big cast iron pots in the backyard. And she would boil clothes and make soap. And I would have, have to pass through her backyard going to school from my house to where the school was [Franklin County Training School, Louisburg, North Carolina]. So I, so I remember all those smells and chickens in the yard. And it was, it was a little town, Louisburg was, and is a little town, but it was a suburb of another little town. There were no, there were no paved streets. There was no running water. We lived in the country. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there any talk about their parents or their lineage before your grandparents, like your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes, there was. Now, my father's side--remember my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] came to live in Louisburg, so it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, we're still talking about your father's side. Speaker 2: Right. So, it was my father's family that I got to know more of as, as a child because we lived in the same city. My, my grandfather [sic. great-grandfather] was named York Morton. And it was my, my grandmother's side of the family got, that I got to know because my grandfather was deceased at the time that I was born. So, York Morton is the person that I grew up with, with him in my mind, and I have a picture of him; I was able to find a picture of him. And then, there was some, some brothers and sisters of my grandmother that were around, so I got to know them, some other Mortons. She had a sister that lived in Raleigh [North Carolina]. I used to go visit her, so I got to know that side of the family pretty well, but I don't know anything about my grandfather's family, George Washington Hayes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I don't know anything about him, but he had some brothers who lived in the city, Henry Hayes and Zolly Hayes [ph.], and so forth, and so on (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: And there's a street in Louisburg called Hayes Street. So, I grew up in a very loving situation with a grandmother, a mama, and a daddy, some aunts, and some uncles, and-- Speaker 1: Now, Morton Hayes, going back in the lineage, was there any talk of any of your family being in slavery? Speaker 2: Yes, there was, there was Yodie Morton [ph.]. Yodie was York Morton, Sr.'s mother. York Morton, Sr. had York Morton, Jr., and York Morton, Jr. was Nannie Morton's father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think I got that right. Speaker 1: Right, okay, all right. Speaker 2: So, Yodie was a slave, and I have a photograph of her, too-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that I'll share with you later on. Speaker 1: All righty. Now, did your, did the, the Morton or the Hayes family, did they own land? Speaker 2: Yes, they did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They owned a corner of a block, and that corner is still named Hayes Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was a big white house that my grandfather bought--I mean, built--the one that I said was the carpenter. And I remember, as a child, these two cinderblocks on the side, and these tall steps that after all, didn't look that tall when I became an adult, but as a child, they were humongous. And it had an upstairs and it had lots of rooms. I thought it was a mansion (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about the education of your grandparents. Speaker 2: My grandparents weren't educated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father and his sister--there were two children, born to George Washington Hayes and Nannie Morton Hayes. Geolia, G-E-O-L-I-A, Geolia Hayes, and my father, Burnell Hayes, and both of them went to college. Before that, there was no college. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, Burnell, do you know where that name originated? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 545208 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your mother. I know you said you didn't have much information about her family. Tell you--tell me your mother's name. Speaker 2: My mother's name was Elizabeth Day Hayes. My mother was born in Washington, D.C. Her mother was Sarah Day, Sarah Hockaday Day, and her father was McKinney Day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't know any of them. She had a brother whose name was Johnny Day [ph.]. I did know him. He had no children. He lived in Linden, New Jersey, and my mother migrated south. Now, my mother's mother, Sarah Hockaday Day, Sarah Hockaday came from a huge family, so I did get to know the Hockadays, big family of Hockadays. So, we were like second cousins, but I thought they were my sisters and brothers because that was my mother's family. So, my mother's mother, Sarah Hockaday, had lots of brothers and sisters, a Sidney Hockaday [ph.], a James Hockaday [ph.], a Myrtis Hockaday [ph.], and on (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right. Did your mother share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: It--I can't recall any right now other than--yes, I can, I can recall one. My mother had a favorite uncle. His name was Sidney Hockaday, and he married Minerva Faulkner [ph.], and they had twelve children; I think it was twelve. But my mother and my father [Burnell Hayes] would travel to Baltimore [Maryland] in the summertime to, to visit Minerva Hockaday. Sidney had passed, so it was just Minerva who was there and her children. They were a little older than me, but I felt like I was their little sister. Now, remember, this was during the days of segregation, and there was no place to stop on the road for food or, or accommodations, so we would get in the car and drive from Louisburg [North Carolina] to Baltimore. And that's where we would spend Christmas sometimes and summer vacations. My father, I said, was a taskmaster, would not let me go to segregated movies. So the only chance I got to go to a movie was when we went to Baltimore. So my mother would tell the story about visiting Sidney Hockaday and Minerva Faulkner Hockaday in the, in the country when they lived in the country in North Carolina. And my mother was a seamstress, so she would talk about the clothes that she would make for Minerva and Sidney's children, whom I got to really, truly love: Bertina Hockaday [ph.], Buddy Hockaday [ph.], James, Sidney, and they had a lot of kids (laughter). And then, their children, I got to know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. How much education did your mother have? Speaker 2: My mother was a high school graduate. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I know you said you didn't know much about her parents, but was there any talk about any of that lineage being in slavery? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, not that I know of. Speaker 1: And what about interracial marriages? Speaker 2: There had to be some interracial mixing because of the way I look, and because of the way my mother looked-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I don't--but it was something that we didn't talk about. We didn't discuss that. Story_ID: 545209 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] and father [Burnell Hayes] met? Speaker 2: Met--yes. My mother was a waitress in a restaurant, and my father was playing baseball in Baltimore [Maryland]. And she was working in the restaurant in Baltimore, and he was playing with the Baltimore Black Sox. And he would go to the restaurant where my mother worked, and that's how they met and, and dated, and fell in love, and married. Speaker 1: Now, you said your mother didn't live in Louisburg [North Carolina]. Speaker 2: She lived there when they married-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --and moved there, yeah. Speaker 1: --oh, she had already moved there. That's when he-- Speaker 2: No, she moved there after he married her-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and she moved there. Speaker 1: Tell me where she was from. Speaker 2: Washington [D.C.], grew up in Washington, in the Washington, Baltimore area, grew up in Washington, and then moved to Baltimore and lived. Story_ID: 545210 Speaker 1: Tell me what you would think would be your first childhood memory. Speaker 2: My first childhood memory, wow. I remember, had, I had plaits. My mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] would part my hair in the middle and plait plaits. And they were long plaits, and the kids used to call me Indian [Native American], and tease me, and make me cry. And my mother would try to make me feel good about, you know, having long plaits, and, you know, that wasn't something that you should cry about, you know, be proud of your long plaits (laughter), so to speak. And I remember my aunt, who was also, also a teacher, my mother's--my father's sister [Geolia Hayes]. But she had a beauty shop over her house, and she would teach and, and do hair. And so all the rest of the kids were getting their hair straightened. I had a bunch of curls. I wanted my hair straightened, and I went and got some Vaseline, and slicked, or whatever it was my aunt was using in her beauty shop, to make my hair, you know, look like everybody else's. So, I remember that. I also remember walking to school [Franklin County Training School, Louisburg, North Carolina]. Walking to school was where you, you know, you, you saw, you saw everybody. And I remember having to go through some back roads, and the kids would tease me, and so my mother would walk me to school part of the way, and then I would say, you know, let me go the rest of the way by myself 'cause I didn't want them to tease me more about my mother walking me to school. And so my mom would have to figure out a way to get the kids on her side. So she started making dresses for these two little girls who would bully me, and so that's how she solved that problem. Speaker 1: Oh (laughter). Speaker 2: So, they stopped bullying me, and then they became my best friends because my mother would make them a dress or two. Story_ID: 545211 Speaker 1: Now, tell me--well, let me ask you, do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: No brothers, no sisters (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sisters, okay. Tell me about the neighborhood or the community in which you lived [in Louisburg, North Carolina]? Speaker 2: It was a poor community, but at the time, we didn't know that. As I said before, there was no running water on the black side of town. We had electricity. To this day, I don't know how we got it (laughter), but I wouldn't doubt that my father [Burnell Hayes] didn't run the lines himself. I know that we had a, a, a pump in the backyard. And now, my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] coming from, from Baltimore [Maryland] was a bit challenged, but nevertheless, we had a pump. I remember priming the pump. But the community was a loving community. My father had bought the lot from both sides of our house, and so we had tenants on both sides. There was a block; on this end of the block was my [paternal] grandfather [George Hayes] and my grandmother's house, Nannie [Nannie Morton Hayes], where she lived, and then there was a little street on that side. And then, at the other end of the block was where we lived with the two houses that my father owned on both sides. And then, my father had this little store. And another childhood memory was eating all the bananas because the bananas would be sold in bunches, and they would hang from the ceiling in the store, and I ate a lot of the bananas, and got very sick with bananas. But, you know, I could go on and on with little childhood memories like that but-- Speaker 1: Well, that's what, we want to hear the stories. Speaker 2: That's what you want to hear? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Uh-huh. Speaker 2: As I got older, I would go and work in the store, or piddle around in the store, I don't think I was doing much work. I was eating the candy, and eating the bananas, and eating the ice cream because people would come, and bring the big tubs of ice cream. And my mother would work in the store during the day. And, and, and so, she had a little, she had a sewing machine in the back of the store. I remember people who lived near me. There was a lady named Ms. Estelle Jones [ph.], who did not have electricity in her home, but I remember she made some of the best sweet potato pudding in the world (laughter). There was another neighborhood across the street from where my grandmother and grandfather lived. They had their house that I had to walk through. There was an area known, owned by a man named Jerry, Jerry, I don't know, Jerry. I don't remember his last name--Mr. Jerry [ph.]. He killed hogs, he killed pigs, and there was pig pen, a big one over there, and I would find my way going through. My mother didn't like me to go through there because of the odor, but I--it was a short cut, so I would go through there. And I would see pigs hanging from, hanging from the top of a, a, of a, scaffold, for lack of a better word. They would hang there, and let them bleed, and then they would, you know, cut them up and cure, cure them, put them in the house to cure them, so we always had cured ham, so to speak. Story_ID: 545212 Speaker 1: Then, during the summer, in another area of, of property that my father [Burnell Hayes] owned, he would plant tobacco and cotton, and during the summer, he would harvest the cotton and the tobacco. And he would get people to go out and pick cotton and, and, and pull tobacco, where you would pull it from the bottom of the stalks. As the stalks would grow, you'd pull the tobacco out, off, and get them cured. And there would be thick worms, oh, and the worms would frighten me, obviously. But my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes]--this is a story--my mother had some white leather glove, and my father wanted me to work with him in the summertime. So I discovered that working in, in the tobacco part would keep me out of the sun because there was a big shade tree, and they would wrap the tobacco. In other words, they would harvest the tobacco, bring it to this particular area in a manmade tobacco truck, which they pulled. And the peo- and the people, the workers would take the tobacco leaves out of the truck, and wrap them around a stick. You call that wrapping tobacco, so I discovered that if I wrapped the tobacco around the stick, getting it ready to put it in the barn, so it would cure, that I could do that in the shade, rather than in the sun, where they were really pulling it. So I got my mother's white leather gloves, put them on, because when you handle tobacco, there was sticky stuff that would get all over your hands. It would turn your hands black. It, it would coat your hands. So, I'd gotten my mother's white leather gloves (laughter), put them on, and wrapped tobacco (laughter). Obviously, my mother was furious. She never had another pair of black leather, black, I'm sorry, white-- Speaker 2: White-- Speaker 1: --white leather gloves because I ruined them wrapping tobacco. But I remember her telling me, "Sug, you know, you should not have done that." But my mother was very loving and very kind. She didn't spank me. I wonder why--I would have spanked me (laughter). Story_ID: 545213 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your relationship with your mother. What type of relationship did you have? Speaker 2: My mother was kind and giving and probably one of the most selfless people that I have ever known. If I have inherited anything from her, I feel, I hope that it is that temperament about her. She was very giving. My father [Burnell Hayes] would give, would give her twenty dollars, and say, "We're going to go to Raleigh [North Carolina] and buy shoes." And so, instead of buying herself a pair of shoes, she'd buy me two pair. And, and, you know, as a child, I was happy to get two pairs of shoes. It didn't, it didn't dawn on me that my mother was still wearing a pair of shoes that she got last year, but I had two pair. And so that was my mother's makeup all of her life. Near the end of her, her life, after my father passed away, my mother moved to Atlanta [Georgia] with me. That's another story which I can go into now if you want. Speaker 1: No, we'll, we'll talk about that a little bit later. Speaker 2: Okay. So, she was just very selfless, very giving. She was--I thought, a beautiful woman, 4'9", tiny, wore a size four shoe, just sweet. We call--everybody called her Liz, her name was Elizabeth [Elizabeth Day Hayes]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about your relationship with your father? Speaker 2: As I said before, my father was supportive, not kissy huggy, but I knew he loved me. He worked hard, was always there, didn't hang out while in Louisburg [North Carolina]. Where were you gonna hang out? Well, and then, there were little juke joints around, but my father didn't, didn't go to them. He played pinochle with some friends, so they would come over and play pinochle. But my father was supportive. He played the ukulele, and I took piano lessons and played the piano. Somebody gave us a piano, and my father drove to Baltimore [Maryland], picked up the piano, and brought it home in a truck. I remember that. And when we got the piano home, and I took piano lessons, so my father would get on his ukulele, and I would get on the piano, and he would play, 'Please Don't Talk about Me When I'm Gone' (laughter). And I would play it on the piano. And we had a little dog (laughter). That little dog's name was Pup Pup. I named him Pup Pup. He was a puppy; I named him Pup Pup. And one day, as my father was banging on the ukulele, a string in the ukulele, and I was banging on the piano, Pup Pup sat in the background, and began to howl. That was certainly a sight, you know, because he was howling, we were playing. And I'd stop playing, he'd stop making that little funny noise, so he was singing along with us. Story_ID: 545214 Speaker 1: I asked you off camera, why did the, the children bully you or tease you? Speaker 2: I think, I think they did that because of the way I looked. I had long hair. I had what they called, back in the day, (air quotes) good hair (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Good hair. Speaker 2: My mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] was fair, and so I was a mixture of my mom and dad [Burnell Hayes]. And remember, this is, this is in 1947 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Forty-seven [1947], um-hm. Speaker 2: --and the races were not as mixed as then, especially in a country town like Louisburg [North Carolina], as they are now. So, when you look at my, my yearbook, I really stand out. And I'm, I'm positive that, that's why I got teased. So, I tried to make myself look more like them by, you know, wanting to have my hair straightened, and wanting to have my hair cut, so it would be short and not long, and trying to blend in with, with them. My mother, in her wisdom, fixed it by making friends with everybody. She had a skill that they needed: she could sew. And so, she made her skill available, and made friends with the people in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell me about your elementary school time. What was the name of your elementary school? Speaker 2: It was, it was a training school. It was called Franklin County Training School [Louisburg, North Carolina]. It was from first grade to twelfth grade. In North Carolina, all of the counties had training schools for black people. And so, that's where I went. My first grade teacher was Miss, Miss Yarborough [ph.] who married, and became Mrs. Sargent [ph.], but I remember her very well. I started school when I was five years old. I was a, a smart kid (laughter). My mother taught me, my father taught me, so remember, my mother was a housewife, so she didn't have anything to do but teach me, and, and keep the house clean and cook. My father refused to let her work in, in a white woman's kitchen. And there was no other work for a black woman to do, you know, without a college education, you could teach-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --or, or you could preach or whatever. But so my mother stayed at home and taught me. So, I started school when I was five years old. I was in the first grade, and then I skipped a grade. I didn't go to the second grade. I went to the third grade, so that was another reason for the kids to pick on me, 'cause I was a smart little cute girl. And I thought I was Miss It, but I, I didn't--I think I was rather humble because I didn't want to get my little behind kicked (laughter). So I grew up knowing not to fight. I've never been in a fight in my life. I knew that I could walk away from it. And then, my mother and my father always told me that, you know, you, you--there's no reason to fight. Just, just walk away from it, and I, I took that advice. I did. But elementary school was good for me because when I got home, I had my family around me. My mother and father, as I said before, were there and, and very loving. I was in all the school plays and I played piano for the junior choir. Story_ID: 545215 Speaker 1: And I was on the usher board in, in elementary school and high school. My father [Burnell Hayes] was very involved in the church because this was a church that his father [George Hayes] was involved in. Remember, he built the pew. So, my father was a deacon, and my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] was, was there. And my aunt [Geolia Hayes] was a member of the Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star], and my grandmother [Nannie Morton Hayes] was in the choir. So every time the church doors opened, I went in, the BTU, the Baptist Training Union. And my father wouldn't let me do anything if I didn't go to church. So, there was no basketball practice, or no going to visit Shirley [ph.], who was my best friend, if I didn't go to church. So my childhood--elementary school and high school--was church and school. Speaker 2: Okay. What was the name of the church? Speaker 1: South Main Street Baptist Church [Louisburg, North Carolina]. Story_ID: 545216 Speaker 1: Tell me about any of the other teachers [at Franklin County Training School, Louisburg, North Carolina]. Were all of your teachers black? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All of them were black and until I got to junior high, they were all female. My first male teacher was a Mr. Johnson [ph.] in the sixth grade (laughter). I remember him, I don't know why, but I--my teachers, my first grade teacher was Ms. Yarborough [ph.]. My third grade teacher was Ms. Price [ph.]. My fourth grade teacher--I believe was Ms. Simms [ph.] or Ms. McKnight [ph.], and then the fifth grade was Simms or McKnight--I don't remember--and then, sixth grade was, was Mr., Mr. Johnson (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Johnson. Speaker 2: And I was, I was a good student. I studied and did my homework and made good grades. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I guess some people might have thought that I was the teacher's pet 'cause I was always doing something, and my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] was the grade mother. You know, how back in the day, they had grade mothers in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association]? This is the mother who went to the school and did things for the school. That was mom 'cause she didn't work. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you went to that school all the way through to the twelfth grade (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the way through to the twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there other activities besides basketball that you were allowed to participate? Speaker 2: I did everything-- Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about it (laughter). Speaker 2: --as I (laughter), I did. I was the editor of the, of the yearbook when I graduated. I edited the yearbook. I sang in the glee club. I played in the band. Speaker 1: What instru- instrument did you play? Speaker 2: I played something called a glockenspiel because I played the piano. And I could transfer my piano to this thing they called bells, that you banged on the little bells. I was a majorette. I got tired of being a majorette, and wanted to get in the band, so the easiest thing to play was the bells. What else did I do? Speaker 1: Part of the student government? Speaker 2: Yes, I, I did that; student council it was called. I was in the French club. I don't remember a word of French, but I did that. It, it was during that time that the colle- the high school started the commerce department. It was called the commerce department. They--a room full of typewriters and the teacher who taught, and there was a teacher named Ms. Jones [ph.], who had just graduated from college, who came to run that department. She was a young woman; all the boys in the class flirted with her, talked about how, how pretty her legs were (laughter). And so, I wanted to be like her, so I went to college to, to get a degree in commerce. So, I wanted to teach typing and shorthand in school. Of course, I, I didn't. I got the degree in that, but I didn't end up teaching it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But I graduated from high school; I was valedictorian of my class. Speaker 1: This was in 19- (sneeze) oh, excuse me, 1957? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Before you graduate, is there a senior prom? Speaker 2: There's a senior prom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, my, my strict father [Burnell Hayes] did not necessarily want me to date, but by this time, I had a boyfriend, and his name was Walter Harris [ph.]. And I would talk to him--we called him Blip. And my dating Blip was walking home from school with Blip, because--and by the time I got home from school, everybody knew that I had stood on the corner, and talked to Blip for half an hour before I came home because we walked to school together up until one particular area. And then, he went one way, and I went the other way. But, yes, I went to the senior prom. I stayed with my girlfriend, Althea [ph.], at her house. And Althea and her date, and me and my date, went to the prom together. Speaker 1: Okay. Was it a theme prom? Speaker 2: I don't remember (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You don't remember, okay. Speaker 2: I remember this purple and white evening dress that I wore. And I remember it was strapless, but that's all I remember about the prom. Speaker 1: And your mother made the dress? Speaker 2: No, my mother didn't--we bought it (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter). Story_ID: 545217 Speaker 1: Now, you talked about the fact that you weren't allowed to go to the movies, and that was basically because your, your father [Burnell Hayes] wouldn't let you go to segregated movies. Is that right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay. But what about television and music? Speaker 2: Television and music descended upon me when I was in high school [Franklin Country Training School, Louisburg, North Carolina]--no, because television wasn't there. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The first television in the neighborhood was owned by a family, the Dents [ph.], and everybody would go to the Dents' house to watch TV. And so, you know, my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] and I would go to the Dents' house. I don't know where my daddy was, but he, he didn't, he didn't go, and we would watch TV. It was radio. It was 'Baby Spooks' [sic. 'The Baby Snooks Show'], and the 'Hit Parade' ['Your Hit Parade'], and the, the--what's this (unclear), 'The Shadow,' 'The Shadow.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm sure some others will pop in my mind as we talk. But we would get in the bed and listen to those at night time--'Amos 'n' Andy,' of course. Of course, I like music, you know, I liked--help me out. This was in the, this was '57 [1957], '56 [1956], this was The Teenagers, yeah, The Teenagers (laughter). I remember going to New York [New York] with my mother and daddy, and going to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] and seeing The Teenagers. My father let me go to see The Teenagers with my cousins whom I was visiting. Remember the Hockadays? Well, the Hockadays had moved from Baltimore [Maryland] to New York. That was a, a part of the Hockaday family that had moved. I called her cousin, cousin--what was her name--it, it'll come to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm having a senior moment. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: Tiny [Tiny Hockaday Grant (ph.)], her name was Tiny. We called her Cousin Tiny. She and her husband moved to Jamaica [Queens, New York]. And so, by this time, I was spending some summers with Cousin Tiny and her husband, Roosevelt Grant [ph.], because I, I was a teenager then, and my father and mother would let me do that. I remember one, a couple of summers, they let me go by myself. My father trusted me enough to let me go by myself. I was--and I had a boyfriend on the street. I had stopped dating Blip [Walter Harris (ph.)] (laughter), the boyfriend on the same street they lived on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my exposure to movies and music was when I was in, in the high school. We would have socials, they called them socials, sock hops, after school, after classes were, were over. In order to raise money for the band or this, that, or the other, they would sponsor little sock hops, and you would pay ten cents or fifteen cents to go. And because it was at school, I could go. So, you know, I would go there and I loved to dance and I didn't like the slow dances; I liked the fast dances. I was becoming a little fast child (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) And do you remember some of the dances? Speaker 2: Well, of course, jitterbug, you know, that was--they didn't have names to dances at that time. You just slow dragged and jitterbugged. When I got to college [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], the dances were beginning to have names. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I don't think names or dances got to Louisburg [North Carolina], you know. You either danced very close, which was a slow drag, or you danced--or you jitterbugged. Story_ID: 545218 Speaker 1: Was there a teacher at your school [Franklin County Training School, Louisburg, North Carolina] that guided you to what college you would attend? Speaker 2: It was my father [Burnell Hayes]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because, you remember, he got his master's [degree] from North Carolina College [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. I wanted to go to North Carolina College. I would go to North Carolina College in Durham [North Carolina] with him during the summertime when he was working on his master's. So, I got to go to the, to the canteen, and pretend that I was going to college, and hang out in the library, and pretend that I was a student there, so, you know, and, and see some of the boys and the girls, and that's where I wanted to go. But there were several teachers that I bonded with. My father's best friend was a Mr. Conway [ph.] and his wife, Mrs. Conway. They both, both taught at the school. And Mr. Conway was my coach and so, Mrs. Conway taught me and so, I bonded with them. And then, there was a Mrs. Hawkins [ph.] who was my senior teacher, who taught me biology, whom I bonded with. She was really sweet. She was the sister of the principal of the high school. Mrs. Hawkins, Mrs. Jones [ph.], who was the commerce teacher, Mrs. Conway--I'm sure I'm going to miss some, Mrs. Price [ph.], who was my third grade teacher, were, were like substitute mothers. I couldn't do anything without my mom [Elizabeth Day Hayes] and dad knowing that I had done it by the time I got home. So, I was a good child until I discovered that I could do things without nobody knowing it (laughter), so I could, I could go to movies without people knowing it. And, and so, I did get to go to the movies in, like tenth, eleventh, and twelfth grade. My father relinquished his, his strictness, his idea that I couldn't go to a segregated movie. They were still segregated, but I think my mother and I kind of got to him because I would say, "My life is just going away and (laughter), I'll never be a teenager again." And, and I think I got to him. I think I had him wrapped around my little finger so. So, I would go to the movies and, and my, my mother would walk me down the street. We'd go to visit some of her friends, and then we'd, I'd go to the movie, and then I'd come back to her friend's house, and then we'd go home. Story_ID: 545219 Speaker 1: So you are the valedictorian at your graduation [from Franklin County Training School, Louisburg, North Carolina], and you had decided what school to go to. You had applied to how many schools? Speaker 2: Just that school. Speaker 1: Just that one (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where I wanted to go. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, tell me about your, your summer being going to--away to school? How did you prepare to go away? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I spent that summer in Jamaica [Queens, New York]-- Speaker 1: New York [New York]? Speaker 2: New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I met a girlfriend there who was also going to North Carolina Central [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. I don't know how I got to meet her--yes, I do. The, the boyfriend on the same street, where my cousin [Tiny Hockaday Grant (ph.)] lived, knew a girl who was going to the same school. What I didn't know is that he and she were boyfriend and girlfriend, too, but it didn't matter by that time. I was so excited about going away to college, but I remember a conversation I had with Blip [Walter Harris (ph.)]. He had not gone to school, and I remember telling him on my front porch that I'm going away to college. I'm sure I'll meet other people, so we can't be boyfriend and girlfriend anymore, because I, I need to explore other opportunities (laughter). Now, I didn't say like that back in that day. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I don't remember what I said, but that was the message. I went to North--I went to Jamaica that summer, and worked babysitting for a little boy in a, in another area of Jamaica, a really upscale neighborhood, earned some money. I don't know what I did with it. I probably spent it on clothes. I'm sure I did 'cause I remember shopping and buying some red shoes, and went away to school. My mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] and father [Burnell Hayes] paid my tuition, and that's what happened--went to school. Speaker 1: All right. So tell me about the transition from living at home, and now living on campus (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was, I was just out from under my father's strong--I probably did everything I was supposed to, and then some. I was, didn't have anybody to tell me what time I had to be at home, except the people saying that you had to be, you know, in, in the dormitory at a certain time, you know. But I quickly learned that you could sign out to the library, and the library closed at nine, so you had to be home at nine, in the dorm by nine. I continued the interest in commerce, but when I got to college, it was called business, so I had decided that I was going to major in business. One of the first things I learned that I wasn't the smartest person in the class anymore. There were other valedictorians (laughter). And there were lots of cute boys and smart girls and around, and so, I just, you know, I, I was just relishing and oh, look at the choices I have here. I placed well in all of my placement tests with the exception of one, and that was English. I failed the English placement test. I was, I was hurt but, you know, that probably was the best thing that happened to me because it let me know that I was not Miss It. I had to study and I had to get my little act together. I had to read all the questions from beginning to end. I couldn't just read two, two words and figure out the answer, but I did well. I made the dean's list my freshman year in college. Story_ID: 545220 Speaker 1: I met the, the captain of the basketball team [of North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. I fell in love with the basketball. At the end of my freshman year, I--he was a jun- he was a, he was a junior, okay, yeah. At the end of my freshman year, we were dating very heavily. I went to Jamaica [Queens, New York] that summer to spend the summer with my cousins, because, at this point, I'm a young lady and I'm finding a little work to do. But, unfortunately, I don't remember what job I had that summer, but I'm sure I did something 'cause that's why I went up there. But the young man that I was dating, his name was Donald, Donald Burke. He was from Pennsylvania, near Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], a little town called Monongahela [Pennsylvania]. He came, too, worst thing that could have happened, but he did, so we dated through the summer. And when we came back to school, I decided that I didn't want to live in the dormitory. It's coming together now. So, I lived in--off campus in a, a rented room. I had a friend who had pledged sorority. I pledged sorority. I pledged Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. Speaker 2: Delta, okay. Speaker 1: And so my friend, Ann Pulley [ph.], and I rented a room. She was dating a young man who was the quote, manager, unquote for the basketball team. Remember, they used to have students who would, who would sit with the team and so forth. His name was Aubrey, Aubrey Lowe. So, Ann was dating Aubrey Lowe, and I was dating Donald Burke, and we were living in this room. Well, as things would have it, I decided to get married to Donald. Don and I got married; I got pregnant. I decided that I wanted to be Mrs. Donald Burke, and have this baby. I moved to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania--no, I moved to Monongahela, Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: Can you spell that, please? Speaker 1: I knew you were going to ask me that. M-O-N-G-A-H-E-L-A [sic.], and I'm sure I'm spelling it wrong. Speaker 2: Okay. But at least we have, we-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that's fine. Speaker 1: I'll write it down and clean that up in a minute. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But if you--I need to finish this story before I forget it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, we--I moved to Monongahela, Pennsylvania. My daughter is born. Her name is Elizabeth, Elizabeth Louise Burke [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges]. I named her after my mother who is named Elizabeth [Elizabeth Day Hayes], and Donald's mother whose name is Louise [Louise Burke (ph.)]. But it just so happens that my mother's name is Louise, too, so Elizabeth Louise Burke was her name. Story_ID: 545221 Speaker 1: And then, the bottom falls out. I discover that living upstairs over a pool room in Mono- in Monongahela, Pennsylvania was not what I was cut out to do. Donald [Donald Burke] was not working, and so we're living on basically zero budget with his mother [Louise Burke (ph.)] and father taking care of us. I don't know where my sewing ability kicked in, probably because I watched my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes], but all of my daughter's clothes that she had as a baby, I made, and stitched with my hands because they didn't have a sewing machine. But I remember washing diapers, hanging them on the line because we couldn't afford a diaper service. I remember my back hurting like holy hell, and I remember saying, "This is not the life that I want for me and my child." So, I remember calling my daddy [Burnell Hayes], and saying, "You got to come and get me." And within a day, my daddy and my mother were in Monongahela. I was in a car with my daughter, Elizabeth [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges], and we were on our way back to North Carolina. Now, this is where my mother and father, devotion to their daughter just, just was unspeakable. It, it just topped over anything that one could expect a mother and father to do. My father rented a house in Durham [North Carolina], moved the furniture in our house in Louisburg [North Carolina] out of the house--moved it into the house he rented in Louisburg [sic.]. My mother moved to, to Durham with us. My father lived in one room in the house that we owned in Louisburg and taught, and came to Durham on the weekends. My fath- my mother took care of Elizabeth, whom we called Beth. And I went back to school, and made excellent grades, made up for the year and a half that I missed by taking double duty, taking as much course load as I possibly could. I got permission from my dean to take the exam of the classes I'd dropped out of because when I left, I left in the middle of my sophomore year. The first semester of my sophomore year, I left, without taking exams. So, when I came back, I got permission to take exams for that semester. And I was taking a double load trying to make up for the semester that I had missed. My mother was there. My mother was taking care of my daughter. And I was walking to school back and far. There was a professor, a Mr. Fulbright [Stewart B. Fulbright], who lived on the same street where we rented a house, and he taught in the business department. So I would get rides to and from school with him, 'cause it was, you know, a good distance to walk. And so, I would go to school with him, come back with him. And I bonded with him and his wife, Della Fulbright. I remember her. She was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], too, by the way. And so I, I went on and, and, and saw my pledge through and became a Delta because I had just pledged before. So, I'm becoming a Delta, taking all this load, trying to make a--my mother became my daughter's mother because all I could do was study. I got a job on campus. I was the secretary/bookkeeper for the James E. Shepard Memorial Foundation [James E. Shepard Memorial Foundation, Inc.; North Carolina Central University Foundation]. That was a Dr. James T. Taylor who hired me to do that job. I worked that job for the rest of my stay at NCC [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. Story_ID: 545222 Speaker 1: So you continue to work for the foundation until you graduate [from North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: So tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: That year, back in school, the first year back in school, with my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] taking care of my child [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges], and my father [Burnell Hayes] taking care of all the expenses, I got an assistantship, a graduate assistantship, that paid my tuition. Mr. Taylor [James T. Taylor] helped me get that--Dr. Taylor, rather, the person who was the director of the Shepard Foundation [James E. Shepard Memorial Foundation, Inc.; North Carolina Central University Foundation]. Every year, I mean, every day, after I finished my schoolwork, I would go to the Shepard Foundation and, you know, type letters for him, and do whatever little bookkeeping I needed to do. But the James E. Shepard Foundation was in the administration building, and right next to the administration building was the law school, and I'll get back to that later. But something happened to me while I was work- working hard like this. I was taking all these courses. I finished with my class, and I was able to make up that semester. I went to summer school one summer to fill in the gaps. And I met, I, I, I met a man whose name was Perry Little. I think this, I think more people know about this than not, and I feel compelled to tell the story, because it's part of my life, and it formed my life, and I learned a lesson from it. I was coming out of the James E. Shepard Foundation office and the, the director, the alumni fans director, was standing there talking to three men: two men, and, and he was there. And I walked down, and he introduced me to this group. And the gentleman whose name was Perry Little was a dentist, lived in High Point, North Carolina, and said, "Show me Durham [North Carolina]." Okay, show him Durham, it was still segregated (laughter). It was just beginning to segregate--to become desegregated. If you went over to Chapel Hill [North Carolina] where the University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] was, there were other places to go. And mind you, I'm living at home with my mother. So, I'm not, you know, I'm not (unclear), I'm not--I can do what I want to do basically. So, I start a torrid love affair with Perry who is married. This, this love affair teaches me a lot. First of all, it teaches me that it is something I shouldn't do. After having done it, and after having my heart broken, and I'm not going to dwell on it, but I think it's, it's a lesson that I learned, that I passed on to my children. But Perry was also good and kind to me. We went through a lot. When we finally separated, it was for the good of his children. And I'm, I'm going to leave that there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'll come back to it only if you insist. Story_ID: 545223 Speaker 1: But something else happens to me. As I am transitioning from my love affair [with Perry Little] to the real world. Remember the school, the administration building is right next to the law school, and Maynard Jackson is a student at the law school. And at this point, I'm, I'm earning money from wherever I can earn it from, so I'm typing papers for law school students. I typed their briefs; I typed their papers; they pay me, and all is well, so I'm earning money from typing papers. It's a law school. I'm earning money from the Shepard Foundation [James E. Shepard Memorial Foundation, Inc.; North Carolina Central University Foundation], and I have an assistantship. So, I'm able to help out with the, the care and expenses of my, of my, my daughter (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Daughter, um-hm. Speaker 1: --in the house at home. At this point, my dad [Burnell Hayes] says, "This is a bit much for me to continue. I need to move back home." So he moves the family back home. I have graduated from college. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I--we're in the process of graduating, I'm in the process of graduating. He's seen me through graduation. He says, "Now it's time for me to move home. It's time for you to get a job." And I'm saying, "No, I'm not ready to get a job. I need a master's degree." So, I work at North Carolina Mutual insurance company [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina] during the summer, this particular summer. I still maintain my graduate assistantship, but now at the graduate level. And I go and enroll in NCC school, graduate school, and I work on my, my M.B.A. I meet Maynard. I meet him at a little place called the College Inn on Fayetteville Street [Durham, North Carolina]. He impresses me with his voice. He's, he's huge, he's, he's large; he's always been large. He tells the story that he was overweight when he was born, but my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] and father have moved back to North Carolina--I mean, moved, moved back to Louisburg [North Carolina]. And I have rented an apartment of my own by this time, and we start to date. Speaker 2: Okay. Did your daughter go with your mother? Speaker 1: My daughter went to Louisburg with my mother and my father. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Beth [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges] moves back to Louisburg. I'm, I'm going to grad school, working on my master's, typing papers, and doing other little things around the school. I worked for every department on the, on the campus, you know, making enough money to make, to make ends meet. So, Maynard and I start to date. His mother [Irene Dobbs Jackson] is teaching French at North Carolina Central [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. She doesn't teach me French. I'm in the graduate school at that point. Maynard and I didn't date when we were in undergraduate school, only when we were in graduate school. Let me see--we date all the way through his, his matriculation at NCC law school [North Carolina College at Durham School of Law; North Carolina Central University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina]. I finished my course work while we're dating, and start to write my thesis. He graduates from NCC, and goes to Atlanta [Georgia] to take the bar. I stay in Durham [North Carolina] for a while, and then I follow him to, to North Caro- I mean to Atlanta. Speaker 2: To Atlanta. Now, this is 1961 when you graduate from, from North Carolina College at Durham? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. And you, your major was-- Speaker 1: Business (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) business, and you minored in education? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So, you also got your teaching certificate? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 545224 Speaker 1: Now, I left out something. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can I go back and fix it? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. When I was in graduate school [at North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], before I finished writing my thesis, Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] had a teaching position--not a teaching position--a position, and they were looking for someone to fill it mid-year. I finished all my courses, so I went over to Bennett to teach for a year. I taught in their commerce department or business department. I think it was called the commerce department. I taught there, I taught typing and shorthand, and I ran the--what do they call it--the secretarial pool. I used students in their commerce department to fill the secretarial pool, and we did all of the typing for all of the professors. So if somebody wanted a paper typed, or a test typed, or whatever typed, they came to me in the secretarial pool, and I did the work and, and fulfilled it. And so, I spent one year teaching at Bennett College. Speaker 2: Do you remember who the president was at Bennett? Speaker 1: Willa Player [Willa Beatrice Player]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was as young as some of the students, the senior students at Bennett. I was their age when I was there, and I think Dr. Player wanted me to abide by some of those rules which I didn't like at all. I've always been somewhat of a little rebel in terms of the rules that I'm going to play by, and the rules that I'm not going to play by (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 545225 Speaker 1: We're in 1961, 1962, '63 [1963]. And-- Speaker 2: I'm, I'm back in Durham [North Carolina], yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now, civil rights is heating up all over the country. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we left that out, didn't we? Speaker 1: No, we didn't leave it out. We, we're going to talk about it (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Tell me about what's going on as far as that's concerned? Speaker 2: Okay. I'm a freshman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At N- in--am I a freshman, '57 [1957]? What year was the sit-ins? Do you remember what year did they sit-in, in Greensboro [North Carolina]? Wasn't that '57 [1957], '58 [1958] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think, '50s [1950s], I think it was '58 [sic. 1960]. Speaker 2: Yeah, it had to be because I was a freshman. The sit-ins started in Greensboro. Speaker 1: And some of the Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] students were also involved? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause that's where I met Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. He was a student at A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. I was teaching at Bennett, but mind you, I'm of student age. I come from NCC's graduate program to fill in a gap. But when I was a freshman at NCC [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], this is in '57 [1957] or '58 [1958], and I don't remember the year partic- specifically, but I'm a student. They sit-in at, at A and T. The next day, or the next week, certainly, it spills over to NCC, and we want to do the same thing. This is no--I mean, this, this--the motivation is not necessarily the fact that we're discriminated against. Let me be real specific on that because it's going to sound like, I'm criticizing, and I'm really not, because by any means, get the job done. But we saw--and this is my point of view. Floyd McKissick was the leader in that area, and he galvanized the students at NCC to do the same thing that the students at, at A and T did, and so, we went to sit-in and protest. I'm among that group of students simply because everybody's doing it. Everybody's doing this, you know. "Why are you doing it?" "I'm doing it because everybody's doing it, Daddy, Mama." Now, it doesn't take me long to wake up to see the valiant in me doing it, but the motivation was clearly Thelma's doing it, Ann is doing it, Valerie is doing it, Valeria is doing it. Let me go do it, too. So I rush off to do it. We get arrested. We don't necessarily go to jail because McKi- McKissick cleans it up, and we are back in school the next day. Story_ID: 545226 Speaker 1: But we're in the middle of the sit-in movement in, in that time, and I begin to join the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. And that philosophy shapes my life. Speaker 2: Tell me how so. Speaker 1: I begin to question the fact that I did come from a ghetto. I didn't see a ghetto when I grew up in Louisburg [North Carolina]. It was a loving, supportive environment. I didn't realize that I was discriminated against. Remember, my father [Burnell Hayes] didn't let me go to the movie that much. I would sneak into the movie because my boyfriend was there, and it was a social outlet for me, and it didn't resonate in my mind as something that was bad. Only when I became to see that I couldn't eat at the drugstore counter, that my father had to buy Coca-Colas from the back door at the supermarket because they didn't sell Coke to black people in Louisburg in 1954, and then I began to think, well, even though I thought was (air quotes) privileged--or, or, you could look back and say, well, she think she's privileged because in that day and time, her father would buy lamp chops and steak. And the other kids were eating pig feet, but I didn't know what the other kids were eating, so I didn't see myself as, as privileged. I thought it was what everybody did. And so, it was only during that time--that, that year where I'm, I'm back in school [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. I'm coming back to school, rather. I, you know, I've had a child [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges], I'm coming back to school, and all of that, I'm working hard. I'm, I'm seeing the world through a different, from a different point of view. And that drives me to work harder, you know. I got to graduate. I got to make good grades. I got to get another degree. I've got to be at the top of my class. If I'm going to achieve and succeed, I've got to be better than the rest. When I meet Maynard [Maynard Jackson], I'm full of this philosophy. He's full of that philosophy. He grew up with a different set of values as, as a child. He grew up with, with a father [Maynard Jackson, Sr.] who ran for office, the school board. He, he grew up with, with a grandfather [John Wesley Dobbs] who was the--called the mayor of Auburn Avenue. So, I think it was my growing philosophy, and his philosophy, that caused us to come together 'cause we talked about stuff like that. And so, when we planned our future, we planned for him to come to Atlanta [Georgia] to be a lawyer, and to fight for justice. That's what he was going to do. What is this lawyer's name in, in Boston [Massachusetts]? You would think that I would remember that 'cause I've told the story so many, so many times that Maynard would say, "I want to be just like him." He could see himself in a court arguing for justice. He wanted to be like Donald Hollowell [Donald L. Hollowell], and that's, that's his future. That was what I bought into. That's what we were going to do. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It didn't turn out quite that way (laughter) but, but I don't think we ever lost sight of that vision in our own way. Story_ID: 545227 Speaker 1: So, it's 1963. Do you remember the March on Washington? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Now, let me see. When was--what was my--when, when was my child born? I have, I have to think about when my children were born. I hope you edit this. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Actually, we don't, but your daughter [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges] was born in 1959. Speaker 2: Okay, my oldest daughter. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And then my other child [Brooke Jackson Edmond] was born when (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Let's see-- Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]-- Speaker 1: --sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: --sixty-eight [1968], okay. So, 1963 was the March on Washington. I remember the March on Washington when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] made the speech. I remember watching it on television. I was not there. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were still in, in North Carolina, or had you moved (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was still, I was in North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And Maynard [Maynard Jackson] had already left to go to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: I don't remember-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when he specifically came back. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963]-- Speaker 1: --'cause until '64 [1964], you were still, you were still in North Carolina working as a research assistant? Speaker 2: Yes, for the North Carolina Fund. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, Maynard might have still been in North Carolina, or just coming to Atlanta to study for the bar. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when was it that you moved to Atlanta? Speaker 2: I moved to Atlanta--let's see, you got all those facts and figures about me. I moved to Atlanta in '64 [1964]. We got married in '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you began working for EOA [Economic Opportunity Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about that. Tell me about your move from North Carolina to Atlanta. Speaker 2: Well, you know, we--Maynard and I had decided that I would move to Atlanta once he had taken the bar which is what we did. We--I had a little Volkswagen, a little Karmann Ghia. I never will forget--Maynard squeezing himself into that--do you know what a Karmann Ghia looks like? And we, and we hired a van to move my things here. And my daughter is still living in Louisburg [North Carolina] with my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] and father [Burnell Hayes]. We, we moved to Atlanta. I moved into an apartment. Story_ID: 545228 Speaker 1: And I remember--this is an interesting story. I was living in an apartment. [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond was canvassing the neighborhood to run for the state house of representatives. We were in a car. I was in the back seat with Alice Bond [Alice Clopton Bond], Julian's first wife. I don't remember who was driving, Maynard [Maynard Jackson] or Julian, but they were in the front seat. And I remember Julian saying to Maynard, "I'm going to run for the state house." And Maynard said something like, "Do you sure you know what you're--are you sure you know what you're doing?" And he said, "Yeah, I got this organization working with me." This was SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] canvassing. I think it was SNCC or SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. It--you know, it's amazing that my memory won't distinguish between the two of them, but back in that day, it, it really won't. But I, but the story I'm trying to say is, tell you, is that, that conversation took place in that car. We were looking for a Chinese restaurant to eat at. We couldn't find one that was not, that was seg- that was not segregated. Now, it had to be in '64 [1964] because Maynard and I were not married. Julian and Alice were married. I can remember the house they were living in. I relay that story to Julian. He said, "If you say it happened, it happened," but I imagine he was, you know, he was, he--that, that's a definite conversation that I remember between Maynard and Julian in the front seat of an automobile-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: --driving down, what, what it was then, Gordon Road [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive]. Speaker 2: How did you meet Julian and Alice Bond? Were they friends of Maynard's, or how did you meet them? Speaker 1: They were family friends. Speaker 2: Of your family? Speaker 1: I, I met them--no, Maynard's family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I don't, I didn't have any family here. I still don't. All of my family here are my children and Maynard's family. Story_ID: 545229 Speaker 1: So you get an apartment, and you begin working for EOA? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The first job I had was with Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I come here to work for Clark. I worked for Clark College for a short period of time, and then I get the job with EOA. Speaker 1: All right, and tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: I work for EOA. Maynard [Maynard Jackson] and I date for a while, while I work at EOA, and then we get married. I am the--I worked for, I worked for, and I, I am the administrative assistant for the director of the neighborhood planning department. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's that time where the Economic Opportunity Act [Economic Opportunity Act of 1964] has been passed, and economic opportunity agencies are opening across the country, and there was one in Atlanta [Georgia]. It was a federal agency, and they fund organizations and they funded EOA, Economic Opportunity Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia]. And that agency had, had a division called neighborhood planning units and that's where I worked. Story_ID: 545230 Speaker 1: You were going to tell me about the planning (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I worked for the neighborhood planning units. And the, the planning units--I mean the neighborhood planning, the neighborhood centers-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the neighborhood center units. The neighborhood centers was the first attempt to build centers in various neighborhoods that were in--that needed assistance. Indigent persons who lived in various communities came together. We had a community relations department at EOA [Economic Opportunity Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] that supported the neighborhood centers. There was an education department at EOA. There was a planning department at EOA. There was a legal affairs, and any particular area that you would think poor people needed assistance, there was a department, and then, there was a neighborhood center system, and each department had a counselor in each center, and each center had a director. And there must have been about six or seven. The goal was to get twelve neighborhood centers around the city. And the planning department was, was led by a man named John Calhoun. And Mr. Calhoun's job was to go around the city, and organize the city into blocks, so he organized blocks. Blocks came together as units, and then the units elected a representative to the board. It was called community organization. We were organizing community to help themselves. I'm working for the neighborhood centers, so I'm tied to the neighborhood centers. I was the administrative assistant to the, to the head of the neighborhood center units. Now, my philosophy was to be the best that I could be and to make myself indispensable, which is another favorite phrase: make yourself--in a job situation--make yourself indispensable. Find something that you can do better than anybody else. Well, I discovered that I was very organized, and I could organize things to a T. And if anybody could find anything, it would be me. So, people would come to me for everything, "Where's this and where's--?" I knew where it was. So, I begin to get promotions. And when my boss would get a request to do something, I would do it, and instead of giving him the request to do it, I would say, "Well, the director of the agency wants you to do this report, and here is the report." I would have done it for him, so I begin to get little raises. Pretty soon, I became the director of planning at EOA. Story_ID: 545231 Speaker 1: Okay so you were talking about how you got promoted to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you're now the director? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I left out the contract specialist and all of that. Do you want me to go back and talk about that? Speaker 1: Sure, sure. Speaker 2: I think I do because when I was, when I was promoted from the neighborhood planning unit, I keep calling it neighborhood--when I was promoted from the neighborhood center unit-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to the planning department, I was, I was contract specialist. I had to write contracts for EOA [Economic Opportunity Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia]. Just to put things in perspective for, for my brain-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the neighborhood, the neighborhood centers was a part of EOA, and there were other departments. The planning unit was a part of EOA. I got promoted to the planning unit, and I begin to write proposals and contracts. When we--I need to go back to the planning department. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When Mr. Calhoun [John Calhoun] would go to the communities to organize the block, to get block captains to come together, to select block captains to sit on their, their advisory board, in the planning department, I would have to go with Mr. Calhoun because as the communities would, would be organized, would organize themselves, it was our job to pull out of them, the persons in the community, what it was they wanted. So, if they said, "Well, we need legal help," or, "We want a community center with a swimming pool," or, "We want a job center." Then it was my job to interpret, and to interpret what they wanted into what we could get funded because I begin to assimilate the knowledge as to what grants were available. So, if I heard a community say, "Well, we want a, a swimming pool," and they want a recreation center, and I know that, based on the knowledge passing through my desk, I can get a legal aid center, then it was my job to try to, to show them how. "Well, let's apply for a legal aid center, but in this legal aid center, let's have a basketball court." In other words, I had to help identify their needs with what was available. And also remember that back in this day, we were training people to be community leaders. And community leaders were so sensitive that people would lie to them, or lead them to believe that they were going to get A and try to sell them B, that it became a challenge. It was almost like what--look we have created. Now, we have to convince the people we have created, that we can really deliver for them, even though they're saying, "We want a swimming pool. This is--we want the swimming pool for our kids." I had to say to them, "But Ms. LaBor, if I write a grant for a swimming pool, it may take us two years to get it, but if I write a grant for a health center, we will get it, and then, a health center--there can be a swimming pool." So, it was a meeting of the minds, quite a challenge, but it taught me a lot. It taught me how to communicate. It taught me how to speak two or three different languages in terms of our Ebonics, as you might want to--we call it now. But it also helped with, it helped me in my job right now. So, I wrote contracts, you know, the contract thing came into being because when we got the grants, we had to contract the service out. So instead of reinventing the wheel and, and coming up with a health center, we would contract with somebody already doing one. Instead of reinventing the field for a legal aid center, there was such a thing as a legal aid society. We would contract with them so I had, I was writing proposals, and doing contracts, contracting out the services that we would get grants for. Story_ID: 545232 Speaker 1: And so, now-- Speaker 2: Then I get promoted to director of planning (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) promoted to director of planning. And what was planning about? Speaker 2: Then I get married-- Speaker 1: Okay, to Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson]? Speaker 2: --to Maynard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, you have to help me out here because I think I am still working when Maynard gets elected vice mayor. Remember, Maynard spent four years as vice mayor before he was mayor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And during his period as vice mayor, I was working at EOA [Economic Opportunity Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. When do you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and there's another phase that we've left out of here. When Maynard and I first get married, Maynard is working for the National Labor Relations Board, and I'm working at EOA. He's a traveling attorney. He's working on labor cases, trying labor cases. When he leaves that job, he goes to work for the Emory University legal center [Emory Community Legal Services Center, Atlanta, Georgia], and he stays there for a while. And then he decides to open his own law firm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was called Jackson, Patterson, and Parks [Atlanta, Georgia]. And it's opened on Peach--on Marietta Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was during that particular period that he runs for vice mayor. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Now, let, let me go back. When, when Brooke [Brooke Jackson Edmond] was born, the girl, the child that was born in 1968 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: --we were living in DeKalb County [Georgia], active with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Maynard had a group of people who were urging him to run for the House of Representatives [Georgia House of Representatives]. And he was toying with the idea of I'm going to stay at the Legal Services Center, or I'm going to open my own law firm, or I'm going to run for the House of Representatives, or I'm not. Nineteen sixty-eight [1968], Brooke is born. Beth [Jackson-Ransom's daughter, Elizabeth Jackson Hodges] is still living with my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] and father [Burnell Hayes] in Louisburg [North Carolina]. We--he makes a decision that he's not going to run for office. He's going to run, he's going to open his law firm. We go to North Carolina to show my six month old baby to my mother and father, and his mother [Irene Dobbs Jackson], who lives in Durham [North Carolina]. We go to Louisburg, we spent a couple of nights in Louisburg, then we come to Durham. And he decides--well, I need to go back to, to, to Durham--I mean, I need to go back to Atlanta [Georgia]-- Speaker 1: To Atlanta. Speaker 2: --to tell James Dean and these other people who want him to run for the House that I'm not going to run. I made that decision. I'm going to do my law firm. Well, during that trip home, Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was shot to death, and Maynard decides that he's going to run for the U.S. Senate. He--his--this motivation is, is, is eating at him because the day Brooke was born is the day they buried King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. So he leaves my hospital bed and goes to this march. Brooke was born on April 8, 1968. There was a, there was a march, either, either, the 9th or the 10th, or somewhere around that period. I don't know what's going on. I'm out of it. I'm having a baby. I'm in the hospital. I'm concerned about things like breastfeeding, and diaper rash and, and I'm, and I'm, I'm consumed--never had, never, you know, this, this child is here. And my other child is still in North Carolina. So, I'm dealing with that, trying to get them here. My father is still alive. And I'm really skipping around. Story_ID: 545233 Speaker 1: But anyway, let me go back to this big decision. Brooke [Jackson-Ransom's daughter, Brooke Jackson Edmond] is born. We take her to North Carolina. Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] decides he's not going to run; he's going to stay with his dream, open his law firm. He comes back to Atlanta [Georgia] to tell everybody that Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] gets shot to death. And he's overcome with: if nobody does it, it should be you. If, if who--you. Okay. So, he quits his job at the law firm--I mean, at the legal aid society, the Emory University Legal Services Center [Emory Community Legal Services Center, Atlanta, Georgia], he quits that job. He borrows two or three thousand dollars, I forget which from a friend, Leila Harris Ogden. He qualifies to run for the U.S. Senate against Herman Talmadge in Georgia. He calls me up and say, "Bunnie [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom], I'm running for the U.S. Senate." I say, "Have you lost your mind? What are we going to live on? I'm on maternity leave. We've just bought a house. We don't have a savings account. You know, what's going to happen?" And I burst into tears. Oh, my god, you know, what, what can I do? My father [Burnell Hayes] and my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes], again, to the rescue. That's why I always say that my, my mother and my father are unsung heroes in this whole scheme of things. My mother moves to Atlanta to help me take care of the baby, so I can go back to work, so we can pay the house note that we just bought--spent seventeen thousand dollars on a house, seventeen thousand dollars on a house in (laughter), in DeKalb County [Georgia]. We have one car. I take the bus to work. Maynard is running for Senate. Can you, can you imagine what my attitude is? I don't need to explain that. We--but we'll talk about that later because it, it sets the stage for probably the divorce. But I go back to work. Mom takes care of the kid. My--the good thing is my youngest daughter, my oldest daughter [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges], comes, too. My father is now driving up and down the road between Louisburg [North Carolina] and Atlanta, doing the same thing he did when he was driving up and down the road between Louisburg and Durham [North Carolina]. I now have two kids. The difference is I have a husband who is taking leave of his senses, and is not earning a living, but who has a law degree, and who has opened a law firm, and who is supporting the fact that he's running for Senate. Well, he hadn't opened a law firm yet, okay, so he's--that, that comes next. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. He's running, okay. You know, I'm in love with the man. I want him to win, but, you know, him winning Senate seat in Georgia is like a snowball in hell, but nonetheless, the whole community, the whole City of Atlanta, the, the--gets, gets caught up in the fact that we have discovered Maynard Jackson. He's articulate, he's bright, he's got a squeaky clean background. He comes from this wonderful family. Let's get behind this man and support him, and they do, and he carries the City of Atlanta against Herman Talmadge. Story_ID: 545234 Speaker 1: Before the dust settles, he [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] runs for vice mayor. I'm still working. I'm still footing the bills. My mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] is still living in Atlanta [Georgia] with us. My father [Burnell Hayes] is still driving back and forth. My father visited, visits us during Thanksgiving and dies. My mother--I say to myself, if my father can die like that, and we didn't even know he was sick, then we need to have mama checked out. We send mother to Emory [Emory University Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia]. They keep her. They say, "Your heartbeat has--it, it's so weak that we would expected you to have passed before your husband." She gets a pacemaker. I don't let her go back to Louisburg [North Carolina] because I know that I can't run up and down the road. So, she moves to Atlanta to live with us. We move her lock, stock, and barrel from Louisburg to Atlanta. And she becomes the, the wind beneath our sails because she's there to keep Brooke [Brooke Jackson Edmond] and Beth [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges]. And we can campaign, we're now campaigning for vice mayor which he wins. But even though he's vice mayor, for black people, he's the mayor. Now, I, I, I am totally immersed in the civil rights mentality, remember. So I insist that we leave our, our phone listed, you know, we got to stay grounded. I don't want my kids to think they're something special. You know, they got to shop at Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.]. And, you know, we got to stay with the people. Even though you're Mr. Vice Mayor, I'm, I'm staying grounded. And so, he serves four years as vice mayor. And then he runs--he doesn't run again for vice mayor, he runs for mayor. That is one of the most trying times. He did open his law firm [Jackson, Patterson, and Parks, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: And what year was that? Speaker 1: All of these years have gotten totally lost in our conversation (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Story_ID: 545235 Speaker 1: You go back to work after Brooke [Jackson-Ransom's daughter, Brooke Jackson Edmond] is born? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Still working for EOA [Economic Opportunity Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) EOA. Speaker 1: And you become the director of planning? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And now, you go back to school in Durham [North Carolina] to get your M.S. degree? Speaker 2: No, I just, I'm, I'm--remember, I've done my course work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did my course work before we-- Speaker 1: Before you left? Speaker 2: --before I left North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just have to finish writing my thesis-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which I never wrote because I had started it. It just needed to be tweaked. That's a new word. I needed to--I changed thesis advisors, and I wrote my thesis, and I got my master's [degree]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was just that--I have to go back to school to that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just had to sit down in the kitchen table and write my thesis, finish my thesis, rewrite it, and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when do you take sensitivity training at NYU [New York University, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I do that when I become involved with my sorority. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. My sorority is Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. I get appointed, the national program--what, what is my title--national, national, chair of the national programs committee. Jeanne Noble [Jeanne L. Noble] is the president. And she sends all of her chairs to this program, and that's when I get there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not working during this time. I'm a housewife. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'm a volunteer, a super volunteer. Speaker 1: All right. So, this has to be after 1970 because you worked for the advisory committee for planning for EOA until '70 [1970]. Does that sound right? Speaker 2: No, it doesn't sound right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Advisory-- Speaker 1: Was this be- because was this before, or after your father [Burnell Hayes] passes away? Speaker 2: After my father passes away. Speaker 1: Okay. And he passed away in '70 [1970]. Is that right? Speaker 2: I, I need to look. I have to go check. Days like that, I have to check. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, this is after-- Speaker 2: But I can, luckily (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right. So, 1970 is when Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] starts to cam- campaign, or he's already vice mayor in '70 [1970]. Is that right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, you said you're not working and you're, you're becoming a super volunteer? Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Now, your son [Maynard Jackson, III] is born in '71 [1971]? Speaker 2: In '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is during that time? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Maynard, Maynard, Maynard is mayor in '71 [1971], isn't he? Speaker 1: I thought he becomes-- Speaker 2: I'm going to get something the next time we have a break. I'm going to get some paperwork, so I can get these dates straight. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 545236 Speaker 1: So, let's go back. In 1969, let's correct the date that your, your father [Burnell Hayes] passed away. Speaker 2: Do you want me to just put them down? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Your father passed away in 1969-- Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969], right. Speaker 1: --not '70 [1970], okay? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And during this time, you had stopped working for EOA [Economic Opportunity Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia], and you told us that you were volunteering your services? Speaker 2: Yeah. So-- Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: All right. So, you were volunteering? Speaker 2: Yeah. I did a lot of volunteer work. I was, after all, in politics, and it was expected of me, and I was trying to be--to fulfill the role. I volunteered for the Speech School [Atlanta Speech School, Atlanta, Georgia]. I volunteered for the--I started a, a chapter of the League of Women Voters in my neighborhood, because I was going across town to the meetings. It was called the Cascade Heights section [Atlanta, Georgia]. I think they were called sections. I've always been a volunteer for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], so I continued that. I, I volunteered for so much stuff, I don't even remember half of it-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Job Corps. Speaker 1: So, your son was born-- Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 1: Okay. What, do you remember the date? Speaker 2: Yeah, April, the--I'm sorry, January 9th--or 10th (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: I have a daughter born January 9th, and a son born January 10th-- Speaker 1: On the 10th-- Speaker 2: --or vice versa (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me his name. Speaker 2: His name is Maynard Jackson, III, Maynard Holbrook Jackson, III. We call him Buzzy. Story_ID: 545237 Speaker 1: Now, you go back to work in 1972 for Mark Battle [Mark Battle Associates, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yes, and that was a contract. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got a contract to do some research, I believe, at--I didn't sort of go back to work. I worked at home, and I, I did that contract. This is leading up to me opening my business, firstClass, Incorporated [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. I did that contract with him. I did a contract with Dance Atlanta, some other things that kept me available to be the first lady, so to speak, but also allowed me to work. Speaker 1: Now, you said Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] is the vice mayor. Who is the mayor at the time? Speaker 2: Sam Massell. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And so, what happens, what happens next? Speaker 2: He, he decides to run for mayor, he runs for mayor. He doesn't run a second term as vice mayor, so he comes up against Sam Massell. Sam runs for his second term, and Maynard is his opposition. And I remember one of the mistakes that people say that Sam does is say that, "Remember Atlanta [Georgia] is a city that's--," let me see--it was a play on the city too busy to hate theme. And it implied racism, and it came back to haunt Sam Massell. And I don't remember what the theme was, but as the conversation goes along, I'm hoping it'll come back out of my feeble mind and I can tell you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And so, what was it like campaigning for mayor? Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was undescribable since I'm obviously searching for a word. It was undescribable, because it was something that within, it was within the reach--it was a durable thing. It could happen. The city just turned out. It was--never been as mobilized as it, as it was then. The city was well organized. People were motivated. It was, "Let's do it." It was--he had--Maynard had a thing. His colors were red and yellow, I remember that. And that was--what was it--let's--I did it, I can do it, let's do it right, or something like that. That'll, that'll come, too. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: But it was, it--you, you wanted to know what was it like? It was, for me, it was a challenge because I find my, found myself being torn between being looked up to, and put in a position of, you are special, and my determination to be among the people. That was a challenge to me, so I was always trying to stay grounded. It was almost like a, a passion. I, I've got to stay grounded. I can't let myself think that I'm above anyone else. And I was always telling my kids that, you know, you, you have to walk to school, for example. Brooke [Brooke Jackson Edmond], my daughter, was in a, a meeting a couple of days ago, and she was talking about how she worked, she walked to the bus stop. That was because mommy said, "I walked to the bus stop. Why can't you walk to the bus stop, you know?" I didn't have to get in my car, and drive her to the bus stop. Other mothers were doing it, but I didn't want to. I thought that was spoiling the kids, and they were made to feel super special kids anyway by the people in the community. And I wanted them to, to feel like, you know, you put your pants on, one leg at a time, like everybody else. So I worked straight through the campaign. I didn't stop the little volunteer chores that I were doing, or--that I was doing, and the contracts that I had that, you know, put a little change in my pocket, I kept doing that. But, nevertheless, I was expected to pour tea at the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]. And I was expected to be visible at the League of Women Voters. And I was expected to be as visible on the north side of town, which was white, as the south side of town. And so, it was a challenge to be visible in both communities because we were not as integrated then, as we were now. I had a lot of evening gowns, then I went to a lot of banquets, and I did a lot of stuff like that. Story_ID: 545238 Speaker 1: And you said you continued your volunteer work. Tell me about the program, the women's ex-offender project. Speaker 2: That was a sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] project. I was very involved with my sorority at that, at that time. We received women who came from prison, and we helped them bridge that, bridge the gap back into the community. There was one particular woman. Her name was Gene Jones spelled G-E-N-E Jones, and she arrived at the bus stop. We went to the bus stop; we picked her up; we helped her find a job; we helped her daughter get a scholarship. Her daughter stayed in touch with us. Her daughter graduated from college, and Gene came into my home, and there were other Genes. I just remember Gene because she was a small woman, but she preferred to be called Gene Jones, not J-E-A-N Jones (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 545239 Speaker 1: We were speaking about the prison program. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The prison project, as I recall it now, the national sorority, remember, I'm on the national, I'm chair of the national programs committee for my sorority under Lillian Benbow [Lillian Pierce Benbow] who was the president of the sorority at that time. The--there was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] who got a grant from the [U.S.] Department of Justice, and it was through that grant that chapters across the country were--did programs like that, that, that tied them to prison projects. Atlanta [Georgia] was one of those chapters. So, it was a national project that was implemented in Atlanta and other chapters. I'm in the Atlanta chapter. I might have even been president of the chapter at that time; I don't. I don't recall, but I do know that was one of the major projects that we did. Gene Jones was not the only person that we met at the bus stop, got them off of the bus, helped them get a room to stay in, helped them connect with their children, which they had probably lost while in prison, helped their children, you know, to overcome the stigma of, of having a mother who was in prison. And it was because of that project that I remained active with prison projects through the years. I kept going back to prisons and, and the women in prison for projects. Story_ID: 545240 Speaker 1: You said that you continued to work on different projects and contract, and contracts, and consulting work. Tell me about a contract, or the private consulting services that you began. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had been writing proposals for the past decade almost with EOA [Economic Opportunity Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia], so I knew how to write proposals. I was good at it 'cause a lot of them got funded. And one of the proposals I wrote was for my gynecologist, who was Nelson McGhee [Nelson McGhee, Jr.], and his partner, Delutha King [HistoryMaker Dr. Delutha King]. I just noticed that Delutha King was one of your-- Speaker 1: HistoryMakers (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) HistoryMakers. Anyway, they had a passion for sickle cell, and I wrote a proposal for them for a sickle cell grant, went with them to Washington [D.C.] to pitch it. They got the grant. All I remember was writing the proposal. It took some time, but I'm fresh out of the EOA, know how to write proposals, familiar with the guidelines, and so writing proposals was, was easy. Speaker 1: What were some of the other projects that you worked on? Speaker 2: At that point, I had to call myself something, so I started to call myself Image Promotions [ph.]. And near the time that Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] was going to run for mayor, I'm involved with the symphony orchestra. I'm involved with Dance Atlanta. I'm trying to bring black people to, to the symphony. And I'm on the board of the symphony as--the High Museum [High Museum of Art, Atlanta, Georgia] and the symphony. As a matter of fact, I'm on the board with Shirley Franklin for one of those things, either the symphony orchestra or the High Museum. But one of the things that I did--Ernie Barnes and I went to college together. Ernie is an artist, and a football player by the way, and Ernie was the artist that painted the pictures that J.J. [James Evans, Jr.] in 'Good Times,' painted as a, as a television personality. Ernie was the artist behind J.J. So, Ernie came up with this idea called 'The Beauty of the Ghetto' and he did a portfolio of 'The Beauty of the Ghetto.' He made prints of certain pictures that he had painted, paintings that he had done. And he took his portfolio and brought it to Atlanta [Georgia]. And I went to the High Museum. Gudmund Vigtel, or Vigtel Gudmund, was the director, and tried to convince him to let Ernie Barnes have an exhibit at the High Museum. This was before black people were hanging exhibits in the High Museum. So, Vigtel did not give me permission to hang the exhibit in the museum; he gave me permission to hang the exhibit in the galleria portion of the art center [Woodruff Arts Center, Atlanta, Georgia]. Now, the galleria portion is the lobby that was in front of symphony hall and the theatre. He did me a favor, unbeknownst to him, because where we hung Ernie's paintings, everybody who went to the symphony got to see them, and everybody who went to the Mu- to the Alliance Theatre [Atlanta, Georgia] got to see them. They didn't have to go back into the little cubicle where the museum was to see the paintings; they were there. But Ernie and I--Ernie mostly, because it was his exhibit--had to crate his art, insure it, and send it to Atlanta. The High Museum did not do that. We had to do our own catalog of the paintings that he hung. The High Museum didn't do that. And we had to promote his exhibit. The High Museum didn't do that. Thus, the beginning of my PR [public relations] days, so I have to thank the High Museum (laughter) for challenging me, but it turned out to be a, a very successful exhibit. I sold a painting to the president [J. Paul Austin] of Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], took the painting to the gentleman, showed him Ernie's exhibit. Now, I got sense enough to know that it didn't hurt that I was the may- I was Maynard Jackson's wife, and that didn't hurt it all. That was the reason why I got the appointment with the chairman of the board or the president of Coca-Cola. If I had been Joe Blow starting a PR company, I wouldn't have got that--the appointment. I know that, but I got the appointment. I went to see the president of the company, and sold him an Ernie Barnes' painting. Not only did I sell him the painting, but he, he financed several of the portfolios that we--he purchased in the name of Coca-Cola that we donated to the Metropolitan Atlanta Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of Metro Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia]. So, we made a gift of those portfolios, which made the newspaper, which interested the newspaper in the whole Ernie Barnes' series. And then, we got a colored cover with Ernie's paintings in the lifes- in the Sunday section. So, that's when I knew I had a knack for PR (laughter). Story_ID: 545241 Speaker 1: So you changed the name of the company in, in '75 [1975]. Is that right? Speaker 2: T- yes, to firstClass [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: firstClass started out with three women and me--really, two women and me, Anne Allison, Linda Gulley, and me. And we said, "We don't know what we're going to do, but whatever it is, it's going to be first class," and that's how the name started. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, there was a company called Tour Gals [Atlanta Arrangements, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. And Tour Gals was running up and down the street showing homes in the black community. It was a touring company and they did tours of the city. And one of their tours was a black heritage tour, and so they came into the black community with a tour bus. They hired women who were housekeepers, black women, to be hostesses on the tour bus, and they toured our community. And so, I would see the tour bus on my street with people stopping in front of my house, which was where the mayor lived, and my children running out to the street to say hi to the people on the tour bus. It got so, so common that my son [Maynard Jackson, III] and my daughter wanted to sell lemonade. You know, they had seen the little lemonade stands in the, in the magazine, so they were going to sell lemonade to the people on the tour bus when they came up and down the street. So, I was talking to Anne and Linda one day, and we said, "You know, if anybody can show our company, we can." And I'm getting anxious. I have a master's degree [from North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and, and I want to do something, you know. This, this housewife thing is about played out to me, taking my kids to the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] every day for swimming lessons, and it's, it's getting a little old, and I'm getting anxious. So, I said I'm, I'm going to start, really start a company. And I start to look out, to look for things that I could do and it, it, and the tour seems to be logical. I can do it when I want to. So, we went and recruited [HistoryMaker] Billye Aaron 'cause we said there are two houses that people want to see when they come to the west side--[HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron's house, and Maynard Jackson's house. So, we're going to tour up, and we're going to say this is Maynard's house, and this is Hank's house, and we can do it better. So, we begin to get little contracts from tours that this convention came to town, we did a tour. There, there was a group of Chinamen, a group of Asian--Asian society came to Atlanta [Georgia], and they hired us to do a tour. And we took a lot of Asians to Stone Mountain [Georgia]--Billye and me and Linda and Anne. Well, we did that for maybe a year, maybe six months. I, I don't recall. Story_ID: 545242 Speaker 1: My marriage is strained, maybe because the company started, maybe because I'm just getting anxious, and I want to be more than the first lady. I'm not saying that, that I was correct, and I'm certainly not saying that I was wrong. What I am saying is that I had a thirst to do something. I had an ego, which was--which I felt, at that time, was being totally trampled on. And I have come to the point where if someone says, "You're the first lady," I, I would say something like, "No, I'm not the first lady, you are your husband's first lady. I just happen to be married to a man who is the mayor." Not necessarily trying to be a put down, but, but I, I hope I'm getting this, this thing through. I see you're doing like that so (laughter). So, my marriage gets, gets more and more strained, and my business is requiring more and more time. And Maynard [Maynard Jackson] and I separate and eventually divorce. Anne [Anne Allison] and her husband separate, and eventually divorce. Linda [Linda Gulley] and Billye [HistoryMaker Billye Aaron] said, "There must be something in the water at firstClass [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], so we're going to take a backseat so, so our marriage can stay intact." They don't literally say that-- Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: --but I begin to feel that, that's what's going on. Anne takes a job, and it soon becomes my company. I'm living on what I make in the company. Maynard and I divorce. I then have alimony and child support. So, at that point, I say, "Okay, I can live on alimony and child support and everything that the company makes. I can put into the company, and I can make this work." I'm going to have to make firstClass work, or I'm going to have to go get a job because I don't want to move from the house I'm living in. I don't want my children to feel any pains of this divorce by changing lifestyle, so I'm going to make firstClass work. And that was the challenge and that--now firstClass is thirty-two years old, and it has worked. Story_ID: 545243 Speaker 1: Do you remember who your first client was? Speaker 2: Yes. John Gilliam was my first client. John Gilliam was a football player, played for the Minnesota Vikings, and wanted to come to Atlanta [Georgia] to play with the Falcons [Atlanta Falcons]. He also owned a store called Catini [ph.], which was in the Omni complex where the Omni Hotel [Omni Atlanta Hotel] is, and CNN Center [Atlanta, Georgia]. It was all called the Omni, and there was a skating rink there. And John had this store that where he sold Italian made shoes. John paid me a fee. I was to keep him in the news so that the, the Falcons would take notice of him while he was negotiating his contract, so he could come to Atlanta and play for the Falcons, which is what, what happened. Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell me what happens next in your business. How does it develop? Speaker 2: It develops because it, it--I had a friend--Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] and I had a friend named--he, he owned a McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation]. What's his name? It's horrible that I'm having trouble remembering, remembering people's names--Mack Wilbourn. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mack Wilbourn owned a McDonald's. And Mack and I began to talk, and Mack said, "I think I can get you an account with McDonald's. There is an organization called Black McDonald's owners [National Black McDonald's Operators Association], and we're going to see if we can get you a McDonald's account." At the same time, I had a friend at Coca-Cola, whose name was Chuck Morrison. And Chuck and Coca-Cola had a division called Coca-Cola, Coca-Cola Enterprises? Yes, Coca-Cola was, The Coca-Cola Company [Atlanta, Georgia], and Coca-Cola Enterprises. Well, Chuck worked for the latter; he didn't work for Coca-Cola Company. Chuck had a little more flexibility in his ability to retain someone to help him with PR [public relations]. And the PR that came out of Coca-Cola had to go through the chain of command. And Chuck wanted a little more visibility for the projects, the promotional activities that he was doing, so Chuck gave me a contract. My contract with Coca-Cola lasted about seven years. My contract with McDonald came a little later--that lasted a little longer. But I was working for Coca-Cola and McDonald's at firstClass [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. Story_ID: 545244 Speaker 1: In the meantime, because of my name recognition, or whatever it is, I attracted artists, movie stars, and recording artists, and musician. And Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] always called me a little bitty bop because I liked dancing in the street with (laughter) Martha and The Vandellas (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Martha and The Vandellas. Speaker 1: And I remember one time, there was a club in Atlanta [Georgia] called the Pink Pussycat. It was during the days when they had the Playboy Club. Everybody was coming up with bunnies and pussycat and mice, and there was a Mouse Trap [Atlanta, Georgia] and so forth, and Martha and The Vandellas were playing there, and I just had to go. So, Maynard took me to see [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves and The Vandellas. I was in heaven. But, anyway, so I began to attract artists, and I began to represent artists. I represented Yusef Lateef who was a saxophonist. I represented Donald Byrd and The Blackbyrds. I represented a group called Brick. I represented Peabo Bryson. I remember I did a Peabo doll, and I did a fan club for Peabo, so I would get all of his fan mail, and I would answer all of his fan mail. David Franklin, Shirley Franklin's husband, was David, was Peabo Bryson's manager. David gave me that account. David also managed Brick. I had that account before David started, but Brick's another story which I will tell you in a minute. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I did a tour with The Jacksons. I was hired by Rowe Productions. Rowe, Leonard Rowe, was a tour promoter. He signed The Jacksons to a concert tour, but he wanted a PR [public relations] person to follow the tour. So, I followed the tour in every city where they went. I got a key to the city from the mayor for Michael Jackson and The Jacksons on the Jackson tour. And every now and then, I would go to the city where the tour was, and I would do a press conference, and I would have the mayor present the city--the key to the city, to The Jacksons at that time. I did a tour with Lena Horne. My sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] got Lena Horne to go on a tour, and I did the tour. This was a volunteer project by the way. I went around with the tour and did the tour. There's a picture there on the wall--Lena Horne singing. Romare Bearden did that painting. I solicited Romare Bearden, went to his studio, and said, "Mr. Bearden, my sorority is getting ready to do a tour with Lena Horne, and we want the tour jacket to be something special. Would you consider doing a painting to support the tour?" He said, "Yes." Didn't charge us a nickel, and then I talked him out of the (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) The original? Speaker 1: --of the original for the tour jacket. That's what that is. That's how I developed my relationship with, with Romare Bearden. So, I was at a level where I could get celebrities on the phone, primarily because I was Mrs. Maynard Jackson. And I did. Donald Byrd and I became good friends and I, I did, I did PR for him after he left The Blackbyrds. So, I'm doing two sets of PR. I'm doing PR for musicians, and I'm doing corporate PR for McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] and Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I'm also beginning to do PR for politicians. Marvin Arrington [HistoryMaker Marvin S. Arrington, Sr.] is president of the city council [Atlanta City Council]--hires me to do his PR, so I'm working for him, too. And I'm beginning to do PR for individuals, in addition to corporate and, and musicians. As a result of doing the musicians, I get a couple of contracts from some, some, some movies that are being made in the city. I want to say 'Bingo Long and the Travelling All-Stars' [sic. 'The Bingo Long Traveling All-Stars and Motor Kings'] but, once again, memory fails me. But I remember [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond had a part in it, and Maynard had a part in it. I got Maynard a part in it. Story_ID: 545245 Speaker 1: Now, Maynard [Maynard Jackson] and I, after divorce, were never enemies. The divorce never blew up in the media, if, if I can say that. I realize I'm skipping about, but, you know. Speaker 2: That's okay. Speaker 1: You have to do that, you know, when things hit you, they hit you-- Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: --when the spirit hits you. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We never argued in public. It never was a public issue. He always took care of his kids. He didn't have too much time for them, which I regretted, which was a part of the separation anyway. Speaker 2: But you said that he adopted your first daughter? Speaker 1: He adopted my first daughter, yes. When my father [Burnell Hayes] passed and my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] came to live with us, and Beth [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges] was here, Maynard adopted Beth at that time. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We approached her father [Donald Burke]. Her father said yes. Her grandmother, on her father's side, didn't want it to happen, but her father, for whatever reasons he said he had, agreed for Maynard to adopt her, and Maynard adopted, adopted her. So, Maynard was the only father Beth ever knew. She didn't know her birth father. She only knew Maynard. He was a, he was a--probably more of a father to Beth than he was to Brooke [Brooke Jackson Edmond] and Buzzy [Maynard Jackson, III] because he was around more with her than he was with Brooke and Buzzy. Remember, he was the vice mayor when Brooke was born, and he was the mayor when Buzzy was born, so they always knew their father as a mayor. They didn't knew average dad- they didn't know average daddy who goes to work, and comes home, and goes to the grocery store every now and then. They knew daddy that had a policeman following him around. Now, I totally lost my place (laughter), in what I was talking about. Story_ID: 545246 Speaker 1: You were talking about, that the fact that you got Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] and Julian [HistoryMaker Julian Bond] parts in the movie (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, in the movie, in the movie, so I'm doing PR [public relations] for entertainers, and with entertainers, with musicians, come movies because musicians are in movies. So, I did two movies, did the PR for two movies that came to Atlanta [Georgia]. It was easy for people to say, "Well, there's a woman in Atlanta who does PR. I think she's Maynard's wife." So I was easy to find, and so, that's, that's when I did those two movies. But I, I guess the, the, the economy begins to change. And the musicians begin to not pay their bills very well, and I lean more toward corporate PR than I do toward entertainment PR. But entertainment PR took up a lot of time. It's at that time that I am having a conversation with a neighbor, who lives on the street in my, my area, whose son is in a group called Brick. And he says, Dr. Irons [HistoryMaker Edward D. Irons], says, "I want you to come and talk to my son and his group, and see what you can do for them." And I said, "Well, okay, let's see what I can do for them." I meet Ray Ransom who plays bass for Brick. Speaker 1: And this is Dr. Irons' son? Speaker 2: This is Dr. Irons' son-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who is Eddie Irons, who plays drums for Brick. Ray Ransom plays bass for Brick. I begin to represent Brick just locally, getting them in this paper, and finding things for them to do. And I end up marrying Ray Ransom, and that's where the [HistoryMaker] Bunnie Jackson-Ransom comes from. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: Ray and I get married, and we have a daughter [Rae Ransom Coleman] who was born in 1981. I remember that because Buzzy [Jackson-Ransom's son, Maynard Jackson, III] was born in 1971 (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, and-- Speaker 2: Ray and I get married in 1979. Speaker 1: You get married in '70 [1970]. Speaker 2: No, no, that's not right, that's not right. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's the same year that your mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] passes away. Speaker 2: Yes, it is, so we get married in 1979. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. So, tell me about the marriage to, to Ray (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To Ray. Totally, 100 percent different than the marriage to, to Maynard. I've got two books in my head, which I'm going to get out one of these days. You know, there's the first lady book, and then there's the music business book. People who know me from the music business call me Bunnie Ransom. They don't know about Maynard Jackson. People in the other form of my life called me Bunnie Jackson. It's interesting how people call me Bunnie Ransom-Jackson, Bunnie Jackson-Ransom, Bunnie Ransom, Bunnie Jackson. I answer by all of those names. I just say, "Make sure you call me because when you call me, it helps my PR business." Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Story_ID: 545247 Speaker 1: But Ray [Ray Ransom] has a--Ray is, is one of the principals in the band. The band comes out with a song called "Dazz" which is a, a chart topper. "Dazz" is a million seller. Back in those days, people didn't sell 2 and 3 million copies a record. If they sold a million, they were doing really well. And then, behind that album ['Good High'], he had an album called, called 'Dusic' [sic. 'Brick'] and the song was "Dusic," and another song called, "Ain't Gonna Hurt Nobody." And I become immersed in the music business. And for about ten years, I am Bunnie Ransom [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom], music business person. I hire Zee Bradford to take the corporate part of firstClass [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], which I never get rid of--thank God was blessing me, and watching over me when that happened. So, Zee comes to firstClass, and works with McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] and Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia]. And by that time, I'd pick up another client called CH2M Hill, which is an engineering company. And people used to say, "Well, what band are they?" (Laughter) But, of course, that was a corporate client, and Zee was handling the corporate side of the business. And I was doing the music business. The music business was very lucrative. S.O.S had two or three hit albums. I meet Larry Blackmon, who is the leader with Cameo. Larry asked me if I would do public relations for him, and pretty soon within a year, probably less than six months, I was his manager slash business manager. I never really had the same role with Cameo in terms of management as I did with The S.O.S. Band, because Larry was the writer/producer, and basically managed himself. He just needed someone to handle the paperwork, to keep the organization organized, to handle the, the publishing, to, to work with the organization in terms of administrative role, which is what I did. I met, I got with Cameo when they were doing an album called 'She's Strange.' The album was a hit. Right after that, there was an album called, called 'Candy' [sic. 'Single Life'], I believe. That album was a hit. The next album was 'Word Up!' That was a supermongous hit. And that's when I had, had it with the music business. I--it was 24/7. Every day, I had a live-in person living with me to, to help me take care of my children. I was always gone. I was living in New York [New York] Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday; back home [Atlanta, Georgia], Thursday, Friday, Saturday; in New York on Sunday, Monday; back home, Tuesday, Wednesday; back to New York on Thursday, Friday; back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] on Saturday and Sunday. It was, it was a whirlwind, it really was a whirlwind. Story_ID: 545248 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We haven't talked about the business [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] yet. Speaker 2: Right, okay, okay. So, we were telling me about the whirlwind of activity-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: --and you've had enough. Speaker 1: --yeah. You know, there was The S.O.S. Band. That took a few years. And then there was Cameo, rolled over to Cameo. But even before The S.O.S. Band, like the same time The S.O.S. was happening, I was also developing a relationship and marrying Ray [Ray Ransom], who was ten years younger than me. Anybody I would have married would have been different because I'm coming away from a marriage to the mayor of the city [Atlanta, Georgia], and starting a business at the same time. But the fact that I move into the entertainment PR [public relations] business was a blessing in dis- in disguise because the PR business had a two edged sword at that time. There were people who were saying, "I can't give you my business because if I do, Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] will be angry with me. I don't want to fight city hall." But the music business didn't care who I had been married to. It was a different world. So I probably was attracted to the music business, because I was earning my money from the music business. And it was at that time that, that I--when I married Maynard, I was earning enough money not to need his help, which he was very happy to, to give me back, for me to say, here, take the, take the- Speaker 2: Alimony. Speaker 1: --alimony. I don't need it anymore, which is what I promised him that I would do anyway. I said, "If I just, if I can get on my feet, and earn my own money, you can have your alimony. I won't need it. I--the, the goal in this whole divorce and separation is for me to be self-sustaining, self-sufficient, and to recognize my value as a black woman. What can I contribute to society? If I have a contribution, what is it going to be? Being Mrs. Maynard Jackson is wonderful, but I also want to be Bunnie Jackson [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom]. Where, where can I go as, as an individual?" So, when I married Ray, there were no restrictions on where I could go. He came from a different era. He understood my working undescribable hours. He was in the studio himself, so if I were, were up writing a proposal, or trying to get something done at two o'clock, it didn't matter with him. And then, I had someone living with the kids, who was getting them up, and taken to school so I was out there trying to build my business. And it was the era where black women--I mean, where women--it was the feminist movement too, remember, where, where women were saying, well, if men can marry women who are ten years younger than them, so can women. Also, it was in that era when nobody my age was asking me to even date. They were dating younger women, so the only men who were asking me to date were younger men. So, after a while, you stopped fighting it. You just say, okay, let me see what this is all about. Well, Ray and I fell in love. We got married. He was very good with my children. He didn't have any children. So, I said, okay, let me have one more baby at forty years old, so that he will have a child, and as he gets older, he won't resent the fact that, well, I didn't have any babies, and it was your fault. So, we had Rae Yvonne Ransom [Rae Ransom Coleman], who was born in 1981, who kept her mother young. Story_ID: 545249 Speaker 1: At this point, let, let's talk about your kids. We've named them all, I, I believe. But let's just go over them and, and tell me what they, they do today. Speaker 2: There's Elizabeth Jackson Hodges, who lives in Falls Church, Virginia, married to Clem Howie Hodges [Clemmon H. Hodges, II]. She worked in the past for department of protocol. As a result of doing that, she has remained in that vein. She does projects of her own. She is drifting toward doing some of the same things that I did. She's doing, she's representing some entertainers now. She's not a booking agency. See, she, but she is an entertainment scheduler, for lack of a better term, and she does fundraising projects for people who retain her services. She's been a housewife all of her life. Her husband, Howie, whom we call, is adorable. Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] and I used to say, if we could pick out a son-in-law for anybody, it would be Howie. He, he still calls Beth his princess, and they've been married for fifteen plus years. They have no children. And that's Beth and Howie. And then, there's Brooke [Brooke Jackson Edmond]. Brooke is married to another adorable husband. His name is Rod Edmond. Rod is a doctor, lawyer type. When he married Brooke, he was a practicing doctor, but realized that he could not keep my daughter in the means to which she wanted to become accustomed to, so he started to practice law. He has a firm called Edmond and Jones [Edmond and Jones, LLP, Atlanta, Georgia], and they live in the city in the Highlands--I'm sorry, in the, yeah, the Highland neighborhood [Atlanta, Georgia]. They have five children: two children that are Rod's, and three children that are Rod's and Brooke's, but they all live together. One of the things that I am most proud of my daughter about, Brooke, is the fact that she calls them all her children. These are, "How many children do you have, Brooke?" "I have five." I am positive that, that's because of the way she grew up. She understands that it's important not to make a difference between children that happen to be living with you and, and come into your life. But I have grandchildren. I have Holman [Holman Edmond], whom we call Manny [ph.]. He's a student at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I have Clark [Clark Edmond] who's a student at a private school. I can't remember the name of it--Woodworth, Woodworth Academy [sic. Woodward Academy, College Park, Georgia]. Then, we have Hayes, whose first name is my maiden name, Hayes Jackson Edmond [Hayes Edmond]. And Maynard used to say, "His name sounds like a law firm," and I would say, "So?" And then we have Brooke Lee Edmond. Brooke [sic.] said he wanted two Brookes, so he named his daughter, Brooke. Lee comes from his mother. And then, there's Cassandra Elizabeth [Cassandra Elizabeth Edmond] named after Cassandra, Rod's sister, and Elizabeth after my mom [Elizabeth Day Hayes]. Those are Brooke's children. And then, my son, Maynard, III [Maynard Jackson, III], whom we call Buzzy, has two children, Isabella Daisy Jackson [Isabella Jackson], who's downstairs entertaining my secretary (laughter), and Luke [Luke Jackson]. Luke is five. Isabella is eight. Hayes is five and a half. Brooke Lee is four. Cassie is two. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, for the family. Story_ID: 545250 Speaker 1: Let me see, where, where did we leave off? We were talking about why you were glad that you totally got away from politics and in- into the music (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, into music, because it gave me a fresh look on life. It gave me an opportunity to do my thing, if I can use a worn out phrase. Nobody helped me get there. Nobody helped me stay there. It was my own tenacity, and stick-to-it-iveness, and persistence that helped me to push the bands that I represented forward. Speaker 1: And, and this was all in the '80s [1980s]. Tell me about the awards that you got for your work in the, the music industry. Speaker 2: Well, I can't say that I got them. The band's got them-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I helped. Speaker 1: You helped, okay. Speaker 2: They--'Word Up!' for example, was a platinum record in the United, in the United States, and the United Kingdom. I don't remember all the awards that I got. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: I, I got a lot of them. They're, they're around here on the walls and things like that. But, but all the while, I kept firstClass [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. And all the while, I remembered the community relations, the community development lessons that I'd learned when I went from community to community to help indigent people come up with programs to help themselves. And as I begin to work with corporations, that philosophy kept ringing in my ears. And so, I would bring the bands back to do, to do public service type projects for, for organizations and, and, and groups. And it still is, is a way that I run firstClass. And I guess if I can use that to bridge into firstClass, firstClass has a specialty of media relations and community affairs. We say public relations to people. A lot of people don't know what that means. I'm not even sure I know what it means. I always say that it means a relationship with the public. If you don't have a relationship with the public, you can't do PR, so to speak. And you use that relationship for your clients. No longer can you be an ex-football player and do public relations. They teach it in colleges and universities. When I was growing up and going to college, they didn't teach it. But I soon discovered that, as my clients would ask me to get them publicity, to get them in the newspaper, they had taken a job, they were now the president of XYZ company. And I would say things, "Well, that's one press release, that's one news story. What are you going to be doing next month for me to put you in the news?" And so, I begin to marry community relations with public relations and media relations, so I would go on into the community and discover, or look for a project that my clients could get involved with, or provide funding for that would benefit the community, and get them news. I had a saying, once again. My favorite saying is: the project has to touch a leader. It has to have street appeal, and it has to have sizzle. I got the word sizzle from Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] because he used to say, "Don't sell the steak, sell the sizzle." So, here's an example. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I'm a volunteer for the NAACP, has a project, or wants to start a project where they will teach students how to take the SAT test. Burger King is a client, so I said to Burger King, I have a project that I'd like Burger King to fund. So Burger King provides corporate sponsorship to the NAACP of about ten, twelve thousand dollars a year. And the NAACP funds the SAT courses, and they bring students in to take the SAT test, uh, course, and, and, and upgrade their, their score. So, that's a win, win for Burger King. That's a win, win for the NAACP, and everybody wins. That's what I meant by community relations (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Relations, okay. Speaker 2: Now--and I was doing that thirty-one years ago. Now, people call community relations, cause-related marketing. They even call it guerilla marketing, meaning that you go to the street with a little piece of paper, and you hand that little piece of paper to the people coming out of the NAACP meeting, or coming out of Cisco's [ph.], or a club like Cisco's, and that little piece of paper may say, buy Nikes. It's still going to the community with a, with a cause, or product, or service, rather than putting an ad in a paper, or on a billboard, or putting a press release in a newspaper. It's a different form of marketing, a different form of community relations. Story_ID: 545251 Speaker 1: Tell me about other organizations that you were involved with (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Let me tell you about, let me tell you about Dance Atlanta because this is a little known history fact. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Alvin Ailey, Alvin Ailey Dance Theater [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] had stopped coming to Atlanta [Georgia], wasn't coming anymore. For some reason or another, I don't know, but I started work with a company called Dance Atlanta. They wanted to get Alvin Ailey back to the city. I love Alvin Ailey's Dance Theater. I became acquainted with them through my association with my sorority. Jeanne Noble [Jeanne L. Noble], very interested in Alvin Ailey, on the board of Alvin Ailey, and I had seen them dance. And so, I reached out to the Alvin Ailey Company, and said come back to Atlanta, and he did. Alvin Ailey has been coming to Atlanta ever since. There, there's a picture somewhere of me and Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] sitting down with Alvin Ailey talking about, you need to come back to Atlanta. So, that happened. The other thing I was going to talk about was-- Speaker 1: The Atlanta Coalition of 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women, Inc. - Metropolitan Atlanta Chapter, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yeah. I served for about four years as president of the Atlanta Chapter of 100 Black Women. I served as president of my sorority, Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], and I served as president of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] during the time my children were, were young, and members of Jack and Jill. I believe in coalition building. I thoroughly believed that we can't do things by ourselves. And I believe in, in coalitions of, of women, and coalitions of men, and coalitions of underprivileged, and, and together, we can make a difference. And so, I found myself joining, and becoming very active with organizations like 100 Black Women. 100 Black Women reached across the boundaries of sororities, and The Links [The Links, Incorporated]. I'm a member of The Links, very active with my Links chapter. But 100 Black Women said, you can join us, no matter who you are, no matter what your station in life is. You don't have to have a college degree to be a member of 100 Black Women. You don't have to be married to a physician to be 100--a member of this organization. You don't have to be anything other than a black woman who can pay your dues, and your dues aren't that much. And so, I spent a couple of, about four years being involved with that, and trying to build coalitions of women across the city, and across the state. Speaker 1: It's very interesting that you would talk about the fact that anyone, or any woman could be a part of 100 Black Women. But would you talk about the, about The Links, and about Jack and Jill, and about the organizations that exclude some people because of class (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're going to surely get me in trouble because I belong to all of those women, all those organizations, but I'll, I'll share my opinions. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My sorority requires that you have a degree. You have to go to college to join that, that organization. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's in its charter. That's in its bylaws. That's what it is. It is what it is. I don't criticize it for being that way, and it also says you have to have a B plus mind (background noise). Story_ID: 545252 Speaker 1: So we were talking about sororities, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, my life has always been an open book. There's not too much I don't--I won't answer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]. Back in the day, black kids couldn't go to the Marriott to have dinner. There were no restaurants for them to go to, for their children to learn how to eat in public. There were no concerts that they could go to, to hear anything other than what you could hear on the jukebox if you happen to be driving by a juke joint. Well, my parents [Elizabeth Day Hayes and Burnell Hayes] were not exclusive but my--'cause my parents were poor. But my parents did exclude me from certain things in life. They didn't want me to drop out, and have babies before I were marr- I was married. They wanted me to go to college. They wanted me to, to associate myself with people who would motivate me. They believed that birds of a feather flock together, and they were right. So I joined Jack and Jill, because I wanted my children to have certain experiences that the lay of the land could not give them back in that day. As I told you before, there was no Chinese restaurant that we could go to. So Jack and Jill provided opportunities, opportunities for us to sit our children down, and show them how to use a napkin, where your knives and forks go, how to speak properly. Yes, we don't want you to speak Ebonics. We want you to speak the English language. We don't want you to be ashamed of the fact that you make A's and Bs. That's what we expect of you. We expect you to go to college. I went to college [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. My mother and my father, and their fath- and their chil- their fathers before them suffered. So, my mother--I'm sorry, my father and my aunt [Geolia Hayes] could go to college. Why wouldn't I want my children to go to college? In other words, I want to be better, not status quo. I think that lesson has gotten lost somewhere with this generation but, nonetheless, The Links [The Links, Incorporated]. That was my last stumbling block. I was, I was invited to join The Links, and I said no because I believed in the stereotype. I'd, I had bought into the fact that they were exclusive and saddity. Then I discovered one day that all of my friends were Links. And I was having a great time with my friends. We identified, we, we had bonded. We had children who did the same thing. We, we shopped in the same stores. We liked the same food. We liked the same movie. We were friends. And The Links is about friendship and service. It's a bond of friendship. So, you know, the old saying that says, don't knock it, 'til you try--absolutely true. I got involved in The Links. I understand that it is--you have to be invited to become a Link. And people tend to invite people whom they know, but there is nothing in the bylaws that says you have to have college degree to be a Link. It just says you have to be invited. The service that The Links render is probably greater than the service than any other organization I've ever belonged to renders. There is a requirement that we must deliver a certain number of, of service hours per year, or else you're no longer a Link. So, there's a time and a place for everything. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 545253 Speaker 1: So tell me what happens next, or what organizations or involvement (laughter) you've become involved in because you stay so very busy. Speaker 2: I think--my church. Speaker 1: Okay. And what church, what's the name of your church? Speaker 2: I, I belong to Cascade United Methodist Church [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: And who's the pastor? Speaker 2: Marvin A. Moss is the, is the current pastor. He's been there a year. I work for my church, literally work for my church. I was doing a lot of volunteer work for my church. And, finally, I said to the pastor, who was then the Pastor, Walter Kimbrough [Walter M. Kimbrough], and his wife, Marge [Marjorie L. Kimbrough], who are very dear friends. I said, you know, I have a, a section in my computer for Cascade United Methodist Church, just like I do for the Burger King Corporation [Burger King], and Waste Management [Waste Management of Georgia, Inc.], and, and Capitol City Bank [Capitol City Bank and Trust Company, Atlanta, Georgia], and Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia]. I treat you all like a client. I said, but in actuality, you're not getting the best of me because I can't afford to do that. So, he said, why don't we just hire you? So, they hired me, so now my church is a client, and I represent my church, and I am energized and enthusiastic about representing my church. And I give them way beyond what they pay for because it's, it's such a, it's a challenge. Churches need PR [public relations], so to speak, too. My--one of my favorite sayings is, when I'm talking to people about public relations is that Our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, could come to this Earth again, and if no one knew He was here, based on today's standards, no one would come. So, we have to market the church. The church has to be out there, so that people will know it's there, so that people will go for salvation. And so, I work for my church. Story_ID: 545254 Speaker 1: And the Interdenominational Theological Center [Atlanta, Georgia] associates with, with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I served on that, on that board of-- Speaker 1: On a board? Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know whether they call it board of visitors or friends for a while. I'm not that active now-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I worked with them for a while, for the same reason. Speaker 1: Reason. Speaker 2: Every organization I belong to, when they learn that I do PR [public relations], that I can get you in the newspaper, that's my role. Now, for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] for my chapter, the Atlanta Branch [NAACP Atlanta Branch, Atlanta, Georgia], I send out their press releases and, and get them in the news. I do that for--oh, gosh, PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] here in Atlanta [Georgia]. The director of PUSH will call, and say we got a press release we need for you to get out. Will you do it? And I will send it out, and that's what I do. That's my contribution. I guess that's my ministry in a, in a way. Speaker 1: And it is--it truly is a ministry. Now, the Georgia human relations committee [Georgia Council on Human Relations], you were the vice chair and the chair? Speaker 2: I was the vice chair and, and then I became the chair, and that's no longer-- Speaker 1: But what was it, what was it? Speaker 2: It was an organization. It was statewide. People on it were appointed by the governor. I was appointed by Governor Roy Barnes when he was the governor, and it was an organization that build, build, or built, relationships between the different races in the, in the state there and, and different religions. There were people who were of the Jewish faith, Muslim faith, obviously Baptist, Presbyterian, people who came from Haiti, people who came from Africa, people who came from Isr- Israel, and Italy, and all over, representatives of various groups that sat on this. And it, it existed to, to maintain peace. If there were a certain segment of people that felt that they were, were not getting treated right by the state, or it came before the human relations commission. And we investigated it. We taught people how to get along with one another. We taught Baptists how to appreciate Jews. We taught Jews how to appreciate Muslims. We taught Catholics how to appreciate United Methodists and, and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And that actually was for four years, huh? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 545255 Speaker 1: So now tell me what you haven't told me that you would like to tell me. Speaker 2: What haven't I told you? My retirement. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: First of all, I don't ever intend to retire. I have the kind of job that I can do until they put me in a box, and roll me out. My retirement is, is in place. It's, it's on schedule. The first thing I did was shut down my office downtown [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], and move it to the basement of my home. I scaled down the number of persons I had on staff. At one point, I had about five or six people, depending upon the period of time, seven people on staff. Now, there's just two: me and Zachary [ph.], but I have a place for a project person. So if I'm working on a project, and I need someone to come in, I have an office downstairs for that person to come and work for a short period of time. But I came home because I was the rainmaker. All I did was go out and get the clients, and bring in the money. I didn't have too much time to actually do the work. But now, you know, if somebody says, "Well, I want a story in Jet," then I have to write the story. I have to pitch it so that it's of interest to the powers that be of Jet, at Jet, for them to get it in there. So, I'm literally doing the work or, or I want to be on the front page of the AJC [Atlanta Journal-Constitution], or what can I do to get them there? So, I'm, I'm working for my clients. Also, I didn't want to work 24/7 anymore. I wanted to be able to take a day off, and give an interview with somebody who's interested. I wanted to be able to plant some flowers in the backyard, which I can do now. Story_ID: 545256 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and this is a continuation of an interview begun March 16, 2007 [sic. March 27, 2007]. Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: Burnella Jackson-Ransom. That's B-U-R-N-E-L-L-A, Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N with a hyphen R-A-N-S-O-M [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom]. Speaker 1: Okay. And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: It's at 450 Hickory Glen Lane Southwest, Atlanta, Georgia 30311. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is--what's today-- Speaker 1: July 13th. Speaker 2: --July 13th, 2010. Speaker 1: Okay. And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a public relations consultant. And I own a company called firstClass Incorporated [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] which is a public relations and marketing agency. Story_ID: 545257 Speaker 1: Now, because this, this is a continuation, we're actually going to go back, and talk about some of the things that you mentioned earlier just to give us more detail and clarification. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: So, let's go back to the civil rights era. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you talked about the fact that you were involved in sit-ins, and that you had met Je- Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. Talk to me more about that time period. Speaker 2: All right. Those are actually two different time periods, but in the same general area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to North Carolina Central University, which was then North Carolina College [North Carolina College at Durham, Durham, North Carolina], in 1957. We heard about the sit-ins in 1957 because there had been some in North Carolina--I mean, in Durham [North Carolina], specifically, but they hadn't been popular. I was a freshman in '57 [1957]. And then in 1960, the, the sit-ins that we all know about occurred in Greensboro [North Carolina]. Now, during that period of time--well, I was sixteen when I came to North Carolina College--I had grown up quite a bit. I had married, moved to Pennsylvania, had a baby, Beth [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges] was my child, and then, I had moved back to Durham, enrolled at North Carolina Central and was trying to get my head on right and graduate. But in the--so that was the beginning of my sophomore year, or really the second half of my sophomore year, but it was in 1960. So the sit-ins popped in Greensboro, as you no doubt know, as you know--I think, around February 1960. And within a week or two, certainly not a month, we knew what was going on in Durham, North Carolina. So Floyd McKissick, who was involved with the sit-ins in, in North Carolina, was very much a part of what was going on. So, he came to North Carolina College. It was then called North Carolina College. I'll probably go back and forth. But he galvanized some students, me included, and we went to sit-in at, at the lunch counters, same as they did in, in-- Speaker 1: Durham? Speaker 2: --in Greensboro. Speaker 1: Greensboro. Speaker 2: We're in Durham. Now, I remember, before I was trying to tell you why I got involved in the sit-ins. And I went on with some time in trying to excuse myself, but to explain that I was a young mother. And it was the--I got caught up in the, in the movement, not necessarily in the Civil Rights Movement, but in what was happening with the students, and where we were all running off to on a particular evening. So, we went off, and we got arrested, but we were never sent to jail. Floyd McKissick stepped in, and cleaned up the situation, and we all came back to school on the same day before our mothers and fathers found out. So, that was, that was the extent of that. But what happened was, it, it stimulated my interest in the Civil Rights Movement. So, I became even more active with the NAAC- NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], not CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]. I'm, I'm not too sure whether it was CORE or SNNC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. I believe it was CORE that McKissick was involved with. But anyway, he was the catalyst that encouraged us to sit-in. We were, were anxious to be there because all of the boys and girls in our classes were there. And so, we got caught up in the movement, went in, and sat in, and then we had something to talk about for the rest of the year. Now, Jesse Jackson, I met Jesse-- Speaker 1: Well, let, let me ask you this, before you go on to Jesse Jackson. What store, do you remember what stores or that you sat in? Do you remember where they were in Durham? Speaker 2: It was downstairs--I mean, downtown. Speaker 1: Durham? Speaker 2: Downtown Durham. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Gosh, I don't remember the name of street it was on, but it was a dime store. It was a Woolsworth [sic. F.W. Woolworth Company]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --downtown Durham. There were two, two major streets in Durham. Story_ID: 545258 Speaker 1: Well, what happened during the sit-in, when you went in to sit-in, tell me what ha- what transpired while you were there. Speaker 2: We were coached on why we were going, and we were coached on what not to do, you know. Speaker 1: What were some of the things you were taught, or told to do or not do (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were told not to get angry. We were told not to talk back. We were told to just sit-in, be calm, be quiet primarily, and be pleasant, not to be rude, and to behave (laughter). And so, we did that. Now, you know, there were a lot of us, so we were, we were typical eighteen year olds, seventeen year olds. I was seventeen at the time, and I think I was just as concerned about who I was sitting next to, as I was about why I was sitting there, because that was what was on our minds. And they took Mr. McKissick [Floyd McKissick], and somebody whose name was--he was president of our student body, and his name will come to me, but he was also a, a student leader who galvanized us together and, and sent us there. Speaker 1: When you say a lot of students, was it a hundred? Speaker 2: Fifty. Speaker 1: Fifty? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And the police came in. Tell me what happened after the sit-in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The police came in, and herded us all out, and we were told to, to move, and we were told, oh, we were told to, to be still when we were asked to move. We knew that we were going to be asked to leave. And we were told to just sit there. So we sat there, and then we were told that we were going to be arrested if we didn't leave. And we continued to sit, and so we were, we were all asked to leave, and we walked outside of the store. And then, there was the vehicle there to put us in the back of a van, and take us to the jail. Well, that never happened. That's when the negotiations must have happened because we were all told to go back to the campus. Speaker 1: And the outcome of the sit-in? Did they do any good? Speaker 2: Oh, well ob- yes, it (laughter), it, it did, but at that point, we didn't go--I did not go back to sit-in again. Once again, I, I had a child [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges]. My oldest daughter was born, and so I had some different responsibilities that led me to go to class, and I had jobs and so forth. So, I didn't never go back to sit-in. My experience was that one time. Speaker 1: Okay. So, and tell me what year your daughter was born. Speaker 2: She was born in '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: All right. So, the next-- Speaker 2: This was in February, February or March of '60 [1960] when we were sitting in. Story_ID: 545259 Speaker 1: And now, Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. Speaker 2: When I came back to school, to NCC [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], to finish my degree-- Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: This was, this was in '60 [1960], '59 [1959] she was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or '59 [1959], this is the same, same year? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the same year. Speaker 1: Okay, same year, okay. Speaker 2: I came back to school in '60 [1960]. She [Jackson-Ransom's daughter, Elizabeth Jackson Hodges] was born in '59 [1959]. I came back and, and she was born in, in July of '59 [1959]. So, that following September, I enrolled in school. So, and it was February of '60 [1960] when the sit-ins occurred. So, after I finished my undergraduate work, I stayed in Durham [North Carolina] to do grad- to do work on a graduate degree, and that was in '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: When did you meet Jesse Jackson? Speaker 2: In '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962] was when I left NCC, and went to Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] to teach. He was a student at A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. I was a teacher at Bennett, but I was a very young teacher at Bennett because I came out of NCC before finishing my master's [degree] coursework to fill in for someone who had left Bennett. So, I stayed at Bennett for a year, and then went back to NCC to finish off my degree, so that was in '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me about your meeting with Jesse Jackson. Speaker 2: I, I was just one of many. You know, he was a big man on campus. And I was--he thought, I guess he thought I was a student from Bennett. So, it was kind of, like Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. The men from A and T would come over to Bennett, where the Bennett Belles were, but I wasn't a Belle, I was an instructor of Belles. But I guess I stood out because I was a little older, not a little older, but really, I was the same age 'cause there were some students in my class who were somewhat older than me. I was a young--I was admitted to college when I was sixteen so, you know, you can see how I pro- progressed. What did he say to me? I don't think he really said anything. I said, "Hey, Jesse Jackson," you know, "who are you, what are you doing? Can I have your autograph?" Or something like that. I was really fiery and feisty, and got to meet him then. So he recognized me, said hi to me. And then later, as we came to know each other as adults, I reminded him of that situation. He pretended that he knew, but I know he didn't (laughter). Story_ID: 545260 Speaker 1: So now, let's go on and talk more about your meeting of--Maynard Jackson. Speaker 2: I met Maynard--let's see, I am--it's probably '63 [1963] when I come back to Durham [North Carolina], after I've taught at Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina]. I'm back in Durham. It's '63 [1963]. We meet. I am in graduate school [at North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina State University, Durham, North Carolina]. He's in law school. I explained how we met. We met at College Inn [Durham, North Carolina]; I was impressed by his voice, et cetera. And then, a friend of his, Ralph Fraser [ph.], told him how he could meet me, so Ralph brought him over to my apartment. I was living in an apartment, knocked on my door, and he came in, and asked me for a glass of Hennessy, cognac. Well, you know, what college student even knows what Hennessy is? Well, he asked for cognac. I asked, "What would you like to drink?" He said, "Oh, how about some cognac?" He was being smart. And so, it just so happened that I had been on a flight. I don't even remember why I was on the airplane, but remember they used to give away little bottles of liquor on a plane? And I had taken a bottle of cognac home with me, a little bottle, and so when he asked for a drink of cognac, I had some (laughter). So, I served him cognac in a little brandy sniffer that I had probably bought in a dime store (laughter). But it impressed him very much, so he went back, and told his mother [Irene Dobbs Jackson], "I met this young woman who actually knows what cognac is." And so, that's how we met. Speaker 1: All right. Now, you were married, previous to this, and then you get divorced? Speaker 2: Yeah, we married. We--after he graduated from-- Speaker 1: Who was he? Speaker 2: Maynard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When Maynard graduated from North Carolina College's School of Law [North Carolina College at Durham School of Law; North Carolina Central University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina], I had, I was working part-time at a place called the North Carolina Fund. It was a predecessor to the poverty programs, but it was funded by the Ford Foundation [New York, New York]. I was in Durham working on that. Don't ask me the year 'cause I would never be able to pull that out of my mind. But I was working there and fin- finishing up my course work at the same time. So, we met during that particular period of time. He studied for the bar. He moved back to Atlanta [Georgia] to study for the bar. I came back with him after he passed the bar, and then, we lived here for about six months before we married. We married in Atlanta. Speaker 1: And what was the date? Speaker 2: When did we marry? We got married--I had to make some notes on this for you--Maynard and I got married in December of 1965. So, I moved, must have moved to Atlanta in, in the spring of, or during '64 [1964], while he was studying for the bar, and had taken the bar, and called to say that he had passed the bar, and then, that was my, my, my cue to move. Story_ID: 545261 Speaker 1: So now, tell me about life after you marry. Speaker 2: Well, you know, life was a whirlwind. I, I know I went into a great deal of this on the other, other, during the other interview, so I don't want to repeat myself. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell me about when your children are born. Speaker 2: My children, my children, you know, I had, I had Beth [Elizabeth Jackson Hodges] from a previous marriage [to Donald Burke], the marriage from college. When we moved to Atlanta [Georgia], we lived in an apartment on, what is then Gordon Road, which is now Martin Luther King Drive [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], I believe. Speaker 1: Or Abernathy [sic.]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Lowery Boulevard [Joseph E. Lowery Boulevard], isn't it? Speaker 2: It's Martin Luther King Drive-- Speaker 1: It [sic.] used to be Gordon Street [Gordon Street; Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard]? Speaker 2: --right, comes, comes right down by the funeral, by the cemetery. That's, that's Martin Luther King, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Anyway, we moved in an apartment there for a while, and then we bought a house in DeKalb County [Georgia]. We were--my daughter was still with my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes] and my father [Burnell Hayes], Beth was still with my mother and father. We were getting settled in Atlanta. I'm working for Economic Opportunity Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia]. I've gotten a job there with the help of Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], and Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] is working for the National Labor Relations Board. We're talking about him being a trial lawyer and, and, you know, I'm working, and we're contemplating my getting pregnant and having a child. So, let's see, he changes jobs, and goes to the Emory Legal Services Center [Emory Community Legal Services Center, Atlanta, Georgia]. It's called Emory Neighborhood Law Center [sic.]. He directs that law center with a partner named Jack Handler [ph.]. And I get pregnant, I'm having a baby. That baby is going to be Brooke [Brooke Jackson Edmond], our first child. Brooke is born. We go to North Carolina for his mother [Irene Dobbs Jackson], who lives in Durham [North Carolina], and my mother who lives in Louisburg [North Carolina] and my father to see our child. Now, before we leave to go on this trip, Maynard is having conversations with the neighborhood about politics. He's beginning to be interested in politics. And there's a group of people--James Dean is one of them--who's encouraging him to run for the Georgia House of Representatives. So, he decides, I'm not going to run for the Georgia House of Representatives. I'm going to spend my time developing my law firm. That's what I really want to be. That's what our plans are; that's what we're going to do. So, we go to North Carolina with that decision in our heads. He has to come back from North Carolina, tell these people, "No, I'm not going to run for any office. I'm going to stick to my law practice," or, "I'm going to follow my dream, and open my law practice." Remember, he's working for the labor, the Emory law center (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Emory-- Speaker 2: So, while I'm Louisburg, Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], I think, was killed. Speaker 1: So, this was in 1968-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and this is the same year that your--Brooke is born. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. What date was she born? Speaker 2: She was born April 8th, all right. Now, I, I may be off a little bit on, on, on the time here, but let me get through the story, and then maybe we can piece the timing together. We just had Brooke. Now, remember, before that, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was just buried because, because if I remember correctly, while I'm in the hospital having Brooke, Maynard is going from the hospital bed, from his child being born, to walk in the parade for King's funeral. So, that's around April 9th or the 8th, 1968 when King died, right? So, King has just died. That's paramount in Maynard's mind. Then we have this child. We go to North Carolina to introduce the child, to show, show the child off. And then Bobby Kennedy is killed. So Maynard decides that he's going to do something about it. He, he--it, it's too much. So, he quits his job at the law firm and borrows two or three thousand, and runs for U.S. Senate against Herman Talmadge. And then, he calls me and say, "Well, I decided I'm not going to run for the House. I'm going to run for the U.S. Senate." And so, I, I think I remember saying--you--telling you this before. It just--I just said, "Okay, what have you done? Yeah. This can't be happening to me. I have no job. I'm on maternity leave. We have just bought a house. We have a house note. We don't have a savings account. We used that to buy the house with. And, and now, you don't have a job. Oh, my god, what can I do?" So, I've often talked about how my mother and father were always so, so wonderful. So, my mother moves to Atlanta with me, so that I can go back to work, so that Maynard can run for office. So, and that's what happened. So, my mother becomes our babysitter. Beth, my oldest child, comes back with us and, and that's, and she ends up staying with us. Story_ID: 545262 Speaker 1: Now, tell me a little bit about Talmadge [Herman Talmadge], and--'cause Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] ran against him? Speaker 2: He ran against Talmadge. Speaker 1: Tell me something about him. Speaker 2: Well, first of all, Talmadge ignored Maynard for the longest time. You know, who is this little young whippersnapper, black man? I think he was like twenty-eight years old. I don't remember the, you know, it was 1968. He was born in '38 [1938], so he was like, how old is that-- Speaker 1: Thirty. Speaker 2: --thirty years old. So, who is this young whippersnapper who's, who's running against me? So, he ignored Maynard for a while, but he kept on making his speeches. And he was very articulate, and people loved him, and the whole city rallied around him. He possessed all of the credentials that anyone needed to run for office. He came from a great family with, with a historic background that were involved in the Civil Rights Movement themselves, his father was. He was squeaky clean; he had a law degree [from North Carolina College at Durham School of Law; North Carolina Central University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina]; he was articulate, and he was handsome. So, who better to run? So, he, he ran for mayor after that--I mean, ran for vice mayor after that, and was elected. That's, that's how he got into politics. I continued to work. Speaker 1: Did you know anything about the Talmadge family before Maynard ran against him? Speaker 2: No more than what the average person knew. And that was Herman Talmadge was--his, his, his statue is on the state capitol [Georgia State Capitol, Atlanta, Georgia] so, you know, he was a, a taskmaster. He was, he had a reputation of not being that kind to black people. His father had been governor. He had been governor. I believe my history is right. So, that's all I knew. He had a farm in Lovejoy, Georgia. And we had been, or later, we visited his farm, met his wife [Betty Shingler Talmadge], and had some of his ham (laughter). You know, Talmadge hams were very popular in Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. And you talk about Maynard's family. Tell me some of his family tree. Speaker 2: His father, Maynard Jackson, Sr., was a minister. Maynard was born in Dallas [Texas]. His father was a minister in Dallas. While there, his father was very active with the, with his people, and ran for office. I think he ran for the school board, and so that was Maynard's introduction to politics. And I don't think the community, or the white community, took kindly to Reverend Jackson making that move because I remember Maynard's mother [Irene Dobbs Jackson] and his family talking about some threats that happened against their family, or toward their family when Reverend Jackson was running for the school board. But, you know, that was on his father's side. And then, on his mother's side, Maynard's mother came from the Dobbs family, a very prominent and, and valued family in Atlanta, Georgia. His grandfather, John Wesley Dobbs, was known as the--let me see--mayor of Auburn Avenue, very involved in, in the political scene in Atlanta. I think he was grandmaster of the Masons, which gave him a platform from which to speak from. But, so Maynard grew up with a conscience that said, do something about it--not--don't just accept the status quo, but leave things better than you found them. Speaker 1: So, he wins the election? Speaker 2: He wins the election for vice mayor, yes, he does. Speaker 1: The, the [U.S.] Senate, 'cause he was running against Talmadge-- Speaker 2: He ran against Talmadge. Obviously, he didn't win that. We didn't expect him to, but, you know, it was nice while it lasted. But, immediately after that election--well, during that election, it was obvious that Maynard had carried the City of Atlanta. Here's this young black man who no one had ever heard of before, who actually gets more votes in the City of Atlanta, than Talmadge does. So, what does that say? It says that he has a future in politics in Atlanta, so he runs for the next office which is vice mayor, and he wins. Story_ID: 545263 Speaker 1: Tell me what the vice mayor's job was. Is that still a position today? Speaker 2: It, it's changed. During that time, it was a time when the city charter had just been changed. Prior to Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] running for vice mayor, the vice mayor's position was president of the board of aldermen. So all the city council people were then called aldermen, and he was the president of the aldermanic board, but he was the vice mayor, and that was his title. But at that time, they changed the city charter, so that the--and I, I may not have all these facts straight, but when they changed city charter, they gave the vice--no, I'm sorry, I'm ahead of myself. That was when they were--mayor, when he ran for mayor. So, let's, let's go back. He actually ran for the position of vice mayor, and the people who served with him were alderman. They didn't change the charter until he ran for mayor. So the--his job on the board of aldermen was to, you know--it's like, the head of the senate. You know, he presided over the board of aldermen. He cast the, the vote that broke the tie, should there have been one with the aldermen. He appointed committees, so he appointed the chair of the finance committee and the, and the legislative committee. That was the role of the vice mayor. But because he was the first vice mayor, and he was black, in the eyes of a lot of black people, he was their mayor. So, even though he was vice mayor, he was really--his, his profile was our mayor. Speaker 1: Who was the mayor at the time? Speaker 2: Sam Massell. Speaker 1: And did they work well together? Speaker 2: For a little while, and then, the--what do they call, the holiday--or the, the, that was over. And, and then, they began to pull apart because Maynard ran against him. Maynard did not run a second term as vice mayor. He ran for mayor which meant that he ran against Sam Massell. Speaker 1: Now, what year, do you know what year he ran for vice mayor? Speaker 2: He ran for vice mayor in--well, he took the office of vice mayor in 1970. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was when he was, he was sworn in. And he was vice mayor from '70 [1970] to '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: And so in '74 [1974], when that term was over, that's when he ran for mayor? Speaker 2: Well, he ran, he started running in '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 2: And then he was sworn in as mayor in '74 [1974]. He served from '74 [1974] to '82 [1982], two terms back to back, and we divorced during his--when did we divorce? We divorced in '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: So he was--okay, so he was still mayor at the time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah. Speaker 1: So, tell me about that campaign. Speaker 2: The mayor's campaign? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Extremely hectic. Raising money was a challenge; me working was a challenge. I don't think we, I don't think we really ever stopped campaigning. You know, it's, it's all muckety-muck in my head. You know, the, the campaign from the [U.S.] Senate to the campaign for the vice mayor, to the campaign for the mayor. We were always front and center. He was, he was the mayor--remember, during vice mayor, so we were always at banquets and, and suppers. And I'm raising kids, and working--trying to anyway. Speaker 1: When do you have your next daughter? Speaker 2: My, my next child after Brooke [Brooke Jackson Edmond] was a boy. Speaker 1: Boy, okay. Speaker 2: That was Maynard, III [Maynard Jackson, III]. He was born in 1971. That was while Maynard was, was--was he running? In 1971, Buzzy was born. He was, he was-- Speaker 1: He was running-- Speaker 2: --running for mayor. He was vice mayor. Speaker 1: Vice mayor, right. Speaker 2: He was not running, but he was certainly contemplating it. Speaker 1: Right. But he was vice mayor during that time? Speaker 2: Right. He was vice mayor when Buzzy was born. Speaker 1: In 19- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We call him Buzzy, but his name is Maynard, III. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 545264 Speaker 1: Let's see, so you divorce and--while you were married, did he open a law firm? Speaker 2: He opened a law firm, yes, while we were married. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: His law--he, he opened a law firm while he was vice mayor. Speaker 1: Okay. Where, where was it in-- Speaker 2: It was downtown Atlanta [Georgia], beautiful building. It was Jackson, Patterson, and Parks [Atlanta, Georgia]--Jackson, Maynard Jackson, Andy Patterson [P. Andrew Patterson], and Bernard Parks. And that's where he was going to stay. Speaker 1: What type of law did they practice? Speaker 2: Whatever they could get (laughter). I don't think they specialized in, in that day. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you have one more child [Rae Ransom Coleman], but that's after you're married again, right? Speaker 2: Right. After Maynard and I divorced, I married Ray Ransom, and I had another child. Story_ID: 545265 Speaker 1: Okay, so you divorced, and tell me where you were working and, and did you change jobs at that time. Speaker 2: Okay. When I opened, I opened firstClass [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] in 1975, okay. That was just as Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] was becoming mayor. That was when we, we--I talked about earlier my, my need to, to do something, to fulfill some of my, my internal goals, those, those things that I wanted to do for me, for Bunnie [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom], to have a legacy, or to fulfill my need. So, I opened a firm called firstClass in 1975. Now, Maynard became mayor in 1974. We divorced in 1976 so, obviously, the momentum of my business impacted the divorce, impacted the reason for the divorce. I'm going in one direction; he's going in another, another direction. We were both very young and very determined to do things our way. Once we divorced, my business moves toward the entertainment world, probably because of my celebrity, I am the mayor's ex-wife. And people began to come to me for various kinds of projects. I did two projects with two movie companies. I did projects with a lot of entertainers. I also did a project with--I did a--I had a client, Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and, and McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation]. The Coca-Cola client came from a relationship I had with a gentleman named Chuck Morrison. I mean, we were, we were business associates, and Chuck Morrison knew of my abilities in the area of public relations, and the, the McDonald's account came because of a friend of Maynard's and mine who recognized that I could do the work and who--Mack Wilbourn--who suggested that the black McDonald's owners [National Black McDonald's Operators Association] get--hire me and they did. So, I had two corporate accounts, Coke and McDonald's, and then I began to represent people, like Yusef Lateef, who was an instrumentalist, played the saxophone, Donald Byrd and The Blackbyrds. And I think I mentioned earlier that I did a tour with The Jacksons, and did a tour with Lena, Lena Horne. Speaker 1: Yeah, we (unclear) more about that. Speaker 2: So, while I'm doing this, I had met, I was working for a group called Brick. And I met the bass player of Brick, whose name was Ray Ransom. I started representing their group, and I ended up marrying Ray Ransom. And a year after we were married, maybe two years after we were married, I had Rae Yvonne Ransom [Rae Ransom Coleman]. Ray, Ray and I were married in 1979, and Rae Yvonne, our daughter, was born in '81 [1981]. So, I don't remember the year we did the tour--I did the tour for The Jacksons, but there was a gentleman whose name was Leonard Rowe who was a promoter. He promoted concerts, and he had a relationship with the--Mr. Jackson [Joe Jackson], the father of The Jacksons, and he parlayed that into a tour. And they toured the United States, and Leonard Rowe hired me to handle the media and the public relations for the tour. Now, I didn't go on the road with them everywhere they went, but every now and then, I would pop into a city. And one of the things that Rowe wanted me to do was to get keys to the city for every city that The Jacksons played in. So, I got a key to every single city they went into. I contacted the mayor's office. I could easily get to the mayor's office, and got them a key to the city. And in some instances, the mayor would come to the concert hall and give the city--give The Jacksons the key. Sometimes, we would just pick the key up, and deliver it ourselves, but that was really interesting (laughter). Michael [Michael Jackson] was very soft spoken, seemingly to me, somewhat bashful. I only saw them when they were, you know, doing some of the things that I was asking them to do, but I, I only went to one of the concerts, and that was the one in Atlanta [Georgia] because my role didn't, didn't require that I go to concerts. I was just doing the PR [public relations] for the concerts, so if anybody wanted an interview, I would try to make that happen. That was awfully difficult because nobody wanted to do an interview. So even though I was out there saying, "Would you please interview The Jacksons?" Getting responses, I couldn't get anybody to do the interview. Challenge, but that's the challenge of a PR person. We--all of us know that. But it was interesting that I did get keys to every city that they played in. Story_ID: 545266 Speaker 1: What did you think about--I'm sure you watched Michael's [Michael Jackson] career go, you know, just take off throughout the years. But when he died last year, what were your thoughts? Speaker 2: Well, my daughter, Rae Yvonne [Rae Ransom Coleman], literally cried. I mean, she called up crying. "What's wrong?" "Well, Michael Jackson just died. Did you hear about it?" And so, she was the one who told me. You'd have to be from another planet not to recognize the young man's talent. He was extremely talent, but as a mother, I could, I could imagine that he was somewhere troubled, so I watched his career from afar. It was, it's, it's--I think he--there'll never be another Michael Jackson. He was just phenomenal, but he's been that all his life. He grew up singing. He knew nothing, I suppose, other than to sing, and he did that well. Story_ID: 545267 Speaker 1: Any other, (clears throat) excuse me, other promotions? You, you mentioned Lena Horne. Speaker 2: I did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's another one that just passed away. Speaker 2: --yes, that was-- Speaker 1: Passed away. Speaker 2: --that was, that was--I, I became friends, you know, to a limited degree. She knew me. She knew my name. I knew her obviously. But I was very involved with my sorority. We talked about that in my other interview and Lillian Benbow [Lillian Pierce Benbow] was president as we-- Speaker 1: Those are the Deltas? Speaker 2: Delta, yeah, Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. And we did a tour with Lena Horne. We put Lena Horne on tour. We were raising money for the arts commission, and Lena Horne did several cities. I don't remember, remember all of them, but I remember one city in particular, Detroit [Michigan]. We got snowed in, in Detroit with Lena Horne during a, during her concert. And I remember specifically going into the room where we were going to have a press conference with Lena Horne, putting out some material on, on the table, on the desk for the media. And I noticed a lot of the hotel workers were peeping into the room. And I went, went to ask them, "Well, what are you, you know, can I help you? Why are you peeping into the room?" They said, "Oh, we're, we're sorry, Ms. Horne, we didn't want to bother you." I said, "No, I'm not Ms. Horne, but thank you for the, for the honor." And I'm just here doing my job but, you know, she was wonderful, she was just wonderful. You know, I, I told you before about my going to Romare Bearden, Romare Bearden, the artist, and asking him to do the program, which he did for us. But it was a successful tour, and I did get to see Lena Horne. And when she wrote her, when she wrote a book, I asked her to autograph it to me, and she did. So, that's another one of my trinkets. Story_ID: 545268 Speaker 1: Are there any other memorable tours or celebrities that you worked with? Speaker 2: If, if there are, they'll come up in the conversation. I thought Yusef Lateef was wonderful. Even though he's probably--he's not as well known as Michael Jackson, but he actually invented instruments. So, he played the saxophone, but he invented a, an instrument that he--that's why we called him an instrumentalist. He used to call me Sister Bunnie [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom], very nice humble man. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let's go back a little bit and, and talk about Ray Ransom. You just talked about how you met him (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --but, yeah. Speaker 2: Ray Ransom was the bass player at Brick. And I had been introduced to Brick through one of the parents of one of the other Brick members, Eddie Irons' father, Dr. Edward Irons [HistoryMaker Edward D. Irons], who taught at Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], dean of the graduate school of business, said, "Come over, and help my son and his band." And I said, "Okay, Dr. Irons," and went over, and met the band, and worked with them for a while, you know, getting them a local--getting them in the news, and getting them local visibility. One of the things that's interesting about Brick that was just, just recalled to me, was the time when David Franklin, who managed them for a while, took, booked them on 'Saturday Night Live.' Now, David is a friend of Maynard's [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson]. At some point, David has even joined Maynard's law firm. So Maynard and I are not arguing, we are divorced, but we are fairly decent friends. At that time, we are good friends because he's not paying alimony anymore. I'm, I'm off making my own money, doing my own thing. So, Julian books--I'm sorry, David books [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond on 'Saturday Night Live.' I'm handling the PR [public relations] for Brick, so I'm talking to, to David about, "Well, book Brick," you know. He said, well, what if, you know, I'll try. So, anyway, he did. He books Brick, he books Julian. Off we go to New York [New York] to do 'Saturday Night Live.' And so, while the band is playing on 'Saturday Night Live,' Julian is the host for that particular episode. And so, they decide that they want to do a nightclub scene while the band is playing. So, they put me at a table with Julian. So, I'm sitting at a table with Julian with a glass of iced tea that looks like liquor while the band is playing. Now, just recently, Julian's brother found a picture of me and Julian sitting at a table, and sent it to me. Well, it brought back lots of memories, but that was another unique, unique situation, travelling with Brick. But I married Ray. Ray and I have a child, Rae Yvonne [Rae Ransom Coleman]. During that period of time, I back away from the public relations of Brick because I'm then Ray's wife. And other members of the band think I'm giving Ray a little more exposure, and I probably am. After all, he's my husband and the mother [sic. father] of my child. Well, you know, Rae Yvonne, my child, my, my daughter becomes--she's a daddy's girl, you know, he's at home. I'm in an office, so when she falls down, and scratches her knee, she runs to daddy. So, Ray and I married for about five years, and then my, my business [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], which seems to get most of my attention, takes over, and Rae Yvonne--and Ray and I divorce. Story_ID: 545269 Speaker 1: At that same time, just before we divorced, I have gotten totally involved in the music business because there is a band called Santa Monica [ph.]. They invite me to come and hear them. I like what I hear. I call up a friend, Avant, Avant, [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant, who, who later becomes the president of CBS Records. But at that time, Clarence is, is a friend of the music business whom I know. So, I say, "Clarence, I got this band. I think they sound pretty good." He said, "Well, put them in the studio, and send me a tape." They go to the studio. We sent them a tape. He likes them. He sends a producer down here, Sigidi [Sigidi Abdallah]. We write a song. Sigidi writes a song called "Take Your Time (Do It Right)" in the basement of my home. The song is a monster hit, and I am now managing a band. So, at that point, I hire someone [Zee Bradford] to take over the corporate part of firstClass [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], and then I go off and manage The S.O.S. Band. Ray [Ray Ransom] and I are divorced. And, and I'm, you know, got two feet into the management of bands. I then meet Larry Blackmon, who is the producer, lead singer for Cameo, and he asks me to manage him, so I'm now managing Cameo and The S.O.S. Band. The management of Cameo, however, is a little different because Larry is the producer, and I'm basically their business manager, rather than the, you know, the, the typical manager. But for, for The S.O.S. Band, I am managing them. And so, I do that for about seven years, maybe ten years until it just totally wears me out, can't do it anymore, got to come home. I'm cussing like a sailor, because I'm on the road and, and this, this is not me, so I back away from the management of bands, and go back to full time firstClass. Speaker 2: Which is public relations? Speaker 1: Public relations and marketing. Story_ID: 545270 Speaker 1: What did you enjoy most--I mean, the management part of it tended to take you away from home. How are you balancing that with, with your children, because now you have three children? Speaker 2: Right. Now, I have three children--no, now I have four. Speaker 1: Four. Speaker 2: I have four children. Well, I have a housekeeper, I have a homemaker who lives with me. And I'm going back and forth and, and not, not sitting-- it's not sitting very well with me because I realize that I am not at home. But, you know, once you get this tiger by the tail, you can't just let it go. You have to kind of back away from it. So, you know, I have convinced myself that I need to give my children the best that I can. And the only way I know how to do that is to work very hard. So I worked extremely hard, managed these bands and, and it's a very lucrative, like I said before, business. But I'm, I'm just losing sight of what it's like to be home in the afternoons and, you know, I'm working until ten, eleven o'clock at night. And, and I have an office downtown, and I have an office in New York [New York]. We buy a loft, and it's just--it got to be too much. I recognize that it was too much; I backed away; I came home. Luckily, I didn't back away totally from firstClass [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. It was still here. I think I still had the McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] account, so it had carried me for ten years. We had one account. I still had another account called CH2M Hill, so it, we had three accounts that could support me--not like I was supported when I was managing bands, but I'm maturing more, and I want different things out of life. And, at that point, I was saying, well, you know, I really need to come home, calm down, and quit being a little ditty bop, like Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] used to say I was, and do normal kinds of things, which is what I did (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, what year is this that you decide to back off from the band management-- Speaker 2: Oh, well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you come back to firstClass? Speaker 2: That's a good, that's, that's, it--let me see. I started managing the bands in the late '70s [1970s], so it was in the '80s [1980s]. Story_ID: 545271 Speaker 1: So now, what do you do with your business to, to bring up more business because you had these, these accounts but, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right I had to, I had to make hay. I just got bogged, I, I bogged down, you know, and started putting my nose to the grindstone, and finally, and started looking for corporate accounts. It was obvious that the corporate PR [public relations] world was more lucrative than the entertainment PR world. It, it was the entertainment PR world that led me into the management of bands. So, I'm still working for Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], off and on, and McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation], and then I begin to get short-term projects, like Eastern Air Lines. Remember Eastern Air Lines? I had a short-term project with them. And Coca-Cola would give me projects to do. I would do the project. The contract would be over. We'd do another project. Speaker 1: Projects, when you say projects, what are you-- Speaker 2: A short-term project like, for example, they might have a Share the Dream contest, where everybody wrote an essay. So, you wrote--you, you packaged the project, implement it, based on their guidelines, and the project is over, you move on to another project. But it was during this time, where I begin to do public relations for politicians. And I did public relations for Marvin Arrington [HistoryMaker Marvin S. Arrington, Sr.], who was the president of the city council [Atlanta City Council], and Marvin begin to refer people to me who would help me with my business. One of the referrals that Marvin gave me was a man named Oliver Lee who was another attorney. Oliver Lee referred me to Burger King. Burger King hired me. I worked for Burger King for almost fifteen years. Another client that Marvin referred to me was Waste Management [Waste Management of Georgia, Inc.]. They had been his--he was their attorney. But they were asking him to do things that were not attorney-like. I mean, they were--they needed community affairs. Marvin is an attorney. He's not one who goes out in the community and, and speaks in your behalf because he, that's not his role. So, he says, "Here's a PR firm that you might want to con- consult with, to see if they can service your need." So, I started working for Waste Management. I worked for Waste, for Waste Management almost eighteen years. So, I had these two very good clients that sustains, sustained firstClass [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. At the same time, I would pick up a short-term project with an Eastern Air Lines, or I think, Atlanta Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia] became a client. Capitol City Bank [Capitol City Bank and Trust Company, Atlanta, Georgia] became a client. Citizens Trust Bank [Atlanta, Georgia], before Capitol City, became a client. I don't have the list of clients in front of me, but I had over two thousand clients during that particular phase of my, of my life. Story_ID: 545272 Speaker 1: And what additions did you do to the business (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To the company? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I hired someone who, who did the, the events because we did event planning. We did event planning for the clients we hired, and then I hired someone to be a, a writer. So, at that point, I had about five people on staff--a writer, an event planner, me, and two clerical people, and an office was down- was downtown [Atlanta, Georgia], and I was the rainmaker. I just got clients, got clients, and when I'd lose another client, I'd have to hurry up, and get another client. I worked for doctors. I did something for Southwest community hospital [Southwest Atlanta Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia]. I worked for anybody who hire me within the limits of the law. I didn't do anything that was not appropriate. One client that Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] referred to me was a client out of Florida called Fluttie Enterprises. Fluttie Enterprises had an idea to put bus shelters on the street, and to put advertisement on the bus shelter. Okay? So, Fluttie hired me to lobby the city council [Atlanta City Council] for that purpose. Prior to that, Fluttie and I recognized that we had to go to MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority], for permission to put bus shelters on bus, at bus stops. Well, lo and behold, when Fluttie came to me and we were researching this material, I went to MARTA to find out the possibilities of this. Sam Massell is on the MARTA board, and he's chair of the marketing committee. You see how life is? So, I know Sam Massell very well. I know his wife, Doris Massell, and all of his children. So, I call Sam. He returns my call, and I talk to him about the project. And he said, "Bunnie [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom], you, your timing is perfect. We're getting ready to put out a, a, a RFP [request for proposal] on advertising in bus, in buses and, you know, keep your nose, your ear to the ground, and submit a proposal." So, I do--we submit a proposal. It's a bid proposal. We bid. Fluttie Enterprises and firstClass [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] has a joint venture. We win the bid. Now mind you, I don't go tell the mayor I'm bidding. I'm bidding to MARTA. The mayor really has nothing to do with it, so I make the bid, I win the bid. I get a call from Maynard, "Why didn't you tell me you were going to bid?" "Well, I didn't know I had to." But, nonetheless, we won the bid. Now, we've got the bid to put up bus shelters, and to put advertising on them for MARTA. And then, we discover that we don't have the right to put the bus shelters on the city streets. MARTA didn't tell us that. I don't know whether MARTA even recognized that was another problem in the project. So, then, I have to go and lobby city hall for a year to get the laws changed, so that we can put bus shelters on the city streets. And then, we discover that there are state highways and federal highways, so we have to go to a man named Charlie Welt- Weltner [Charles L. Weltner], who was our congressman, to get him to help us get the laws modified, so that we could put this bus shelters on federal highways, and the same thing with state highways. It took us about a year and a half, maybe two years, to get all the laws changed, and everything ready to put the bus shelters up. When we finally get the laws changed to put the bus shelters up, half of our contract with MARTA is up. So then, we have to go back to MARTA to rebid, or to ask for permission to extend our contract. Anyway, bottom line is we finally get the project up and running, and all the bus shelters you see on the street with the advertising on them is a result of my hard work. I don't own the company anymore. I sold my interest in the company, so I could educate my child. But nonetheless, that was a, that was a, such a--it required so much energy but it was, it was an accomplishment that I could say, whew, done, done deal. Speaker 1: So, you said--I, I thought firstClass was partners with Flutie? Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you sold firstClass? Speaker 2: No, I sold my contract with Flutie. Speaker 1: Okay. I see. Wow (laughter), that's something. Speaker 2: That was, that was, that, that was (simultaneous). Story_ID: 545273 Speaker 1: And before I forget this, before Ray [Ray Ransom] and I divorce, before Ray and I divorce, while I'm pregnant with Rae Yvonne [Rae Ransom Coleman], my good friend, T.M. Alexander [T.M. Alexander, Jr.], and his wife, Janis Alexander, call me up one day and say, "Bunnie [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom], we have an idea that we'd like to discuss with you." So, we live right around the corner from each other. I run over to the house, and T.M. says, "How about you and Janis and Tollie Hartsfield [Tollie Bedenbaugh Tolan Hartsfield] going into business to, to run a game room?" Now, this was when they were shutting down the old Atlanta terminal and building the new Atlanta terminal, which is old now, but nonetheless, they were shutting down the old airport, building a new airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia]. So, Janis and I meet with Tollie Hartsfield, Mayor Hartsfield's [William B. Hartsfield] widow. And we start a company called BJT, which means Bunnie, Janis, and Tollie, and we bid on the game room at the Atlanta Airport. Now, the Atlanta Airport was put together with a prime contractor. So, we had to bid to those persons, those companies that were bidding to be the prime contractor, and there were several. One was Paschal [Dobbs-Paschal Midfield Corporation], one was Marriott [Marriot Corporation], and one was some others--I don't remember. But we put in a bid with each one of these people or companies that were bidding to be the prime contractor. And we were selected. We were the only company, female owned company, predominantly black, who had a game room business in the United States, Janis, Bunnie, and Tollie. So, that made us uniquely qualified to bid on airports' game rooms all across the country. And we did that, and we won about three, but (laughter), as life would have it, technology zapped game rooms. And people didn't have to go into the game room to play pinball. They could walk around with these little gadgets and play pinball. But for a while, about three or four years, and I'm not sure of the timeline here, and so, don't ask me what year it was (laughter). I do know that I was pregnant with Rae Yvonne. If she was born in 1981, it had to be around '80 [1980], '79 [1979], '80 [1980], that we, that we do that. So we have these game rooms. We had a very lucrative game room in Atlanta Airport where they had pinball machines and Pac-Man and, and Janis and I would run around, and take out the quarters from the game room machine and, and lug these quarters all through the airport, put them in the bank. Tollie was much older than us, and so, rarely did she do that because it was strenuous for her. But that was my other experience (laughter) that I neglected to tell you about the first time. Speaker 2: Right. And, and two ex-wives of mayors? Speaker 1: Right (laughter), Bunnie and Janie and Tollie. Now, Janis' husband was a Republican. There and another mix to, to the deal. But T.M. was our money guy. He would get us loans from the bank, because Tollie and I did not know how to do that. And so, he would finance it, so Janis brought the financial exper- expertise to the team. Janis, Janis brought that. Tollie brought the history of running a game room, and I'll explain that. The game room in the original airport was owned by Tollie. I don't know how she got it, but since she was Mrs. Hartsfield, it, it's kind of obvious. She owned that game room. And so, with her experience in owning game rooms, Janis' contri- contribution of getting the finances, and my business background because I had run businesses for several years, we were able to qualify for whatever we applied for. So, no one was giving us anything that we weren't qualified to do. This is something else that Maynard [Jackson-Ransom's second husband, Maynard Jackson] called me up and said, "Well, why didn't you tell me you were going to bid on the game room?" And I said, "I bid, I didn't know I would win the bid, but I did. So now, I can take care of your children," (laughter). So we used to have jokes about the things that I would get into, but things were going well. The DJT game room was, was earlier than the airport, I mean, sorry, the, the bus-- Speaker 2: The bus shelters, right. Speaker 1: --the bus shelters. That came later. I think the game room--we had done that, and we had lost some money, and we had patched that up before I got into the shelters. Story_ID: 545274 Speaker 1: The last time you talked about your other three children-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --but you didn't talk about Rae Yvonne [Rae Ransom Coleman] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) about Rae Yvonne. Rae Yvonne is my, my forty year old child. I was forty when I had Rae Yvonne and she kept me young. She was a dancer, she is a dancer. Rae Yvonne danced her way up and down the grocery aisles, and so, I knew I had to put this child in somebody's dance class. So, she enrolled in dance at, at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] when she was five, when she was four years old, maybe even three. When she was learning to walk, she was learning to dance. She's been a dancer all that time. She took dance with the Alvin Ailey, she had earned a scholarship to the Alvin Ailey Dance Theater [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] one summer, and went there and danced. I went with her because I didn't want my child to be in New York [New York] by herself. So, I went there and spent two or three weeks in New York in a hotel, and while she was dancing. I told her, "Rae Yvonne, I spent enough money on you to have gone to Europe twice while we were in New York." But she, but she learned a lot from, from them. She took lessons here with the Atlanta School of Ballet [Atlanta, Georgia]. She, eventually, when she graduated from Spelman with a degree in dance and drama, she went to teach at Spelman. So, she taught dance at Spelman for a long time. She then danced with the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] for a while, and then wanted to try her luck in New York City, went to dance with the New York Nets [Brooklyn Nets], and then called me one day and said, "Mama, if I'm going to be broke, I'd like to be broke at home, so I'm coming back home." So she came back home and she--her goal is to open her own dance theater. She's not done that yet, but she's teaching dance at Westlake High School [Atlanta, Georgia] for Fulton County Dance--I mean for the Fulton County School System. And she's got a job with benefits, and mama is happy, but that's Rae Yvonne. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what school did you say she graduated from? Speaker 2: Spelman. Speaker 1: Spelman, okay, all right. And I think we covered all your other children (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we did (simultaneous). Story_ID: 545275 Speaker 1: Did we talk about your grandchildren? Speaker 2: No, but let's talk about my grandchildren. I have five. I have seven really. My son [Maynard Jackson, III] has two, Isabella Daisy Jackson [Isabella Jackson] and Luke Benjamin Jackson [Luke Jackson]. My daughter has five. Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: My daughter, my middle daughter, Brooke [Brooke Jackson Edmond]. There is Cassie or Cassandra Elizabeth [Cassandra Elizabeth Edmond] named after both her aunts and my mother [Elizabeth Day Hayes]. There is Brooke Lee Edmond who's named after her mother and after her other grandmother. Lee comes from her other grandmother. And then, there's Hayes Jackson Edmond [Hayes Edmond]. Hayes is my oldest grandson. He's named after my side of the family. Hayes told me a couple of days ago he wanted to be a baseball player and a doctor/lawyer. I told him he could do anything he wanted to do, and I hope he believes that. And then, I have two other grandchildren, Clark [Clark Edmond] and Manny/Holman [Holman Edmond], who are my, my son-in-law's [Rod Edmond] children from a previous marriage, but who are involved in my life. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Story_ID: 545276 Speaker 1: Now, bring, bring us up to today. What-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --what are you doing now, and what do you hope to do 'cause I think the last time I asked you, "What do you hope to do," you said, "I hope to write a book." Speaker 2: Right. And I've written it. Well, about ten years ago, eleven years ago, I decided that I needed to stop working 24/7, and I wanted to come home. I mean, I wanted to have more time to plant a garden. I just wanted to back off. I wanted to spend some time with my grandchildren, and so I moved my business [firstClass, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] to my home. I had enough space in my home to set up space down in the basement for a secretary, me, and another project person, if I'm doing another project. So I moved the business home and slowed down, tried to close the office on Monday, just work Tuesday through Friday, but that doesn't always work. But I wrote a book. I began to do a lot of volunteer work for churches, public relations for churches. You know, because I do what I do, when I'm in a, a group, they would say to me, "Bunnie [HistoryMaker Bunnie Jackson-Ransom], can you help us get the word out about our banquet or whatever it is we're doing?" So, I was doing this for my church as a volunteer. Walter Kimbrough [Walter M. Kimbrough] was the pastor. And I said to him one day that, I said, you know, "Reverend Kimbrough, I have a place on my computer for Cascade [Cascade United Methodist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] just like I do all the rest of my clients. And I don't think you're getting the absolute best of me because, you know, I, I can't give you 100 percent 'cause I have to hire someone to be your account executive." But he said, "Well, why don't we just hire you?" So, he hired me. So I then began to work for Cascade. I worked for Cascade as their PR [public relations] person for about three years. And Reverend Kimbrough retired, and I came out of that position. But during that time, I wrote so many plans, and so many projects, and so many tools for how to get the word out. And then, I had done some work for a couple of other churches in the neighborhood or in, in the city about how to get the word out, so I wrote a book for marketing ministry. And what did I call the book? 'Getting the Word Out: How to Market Your Ministry' [Bunnie Jackson-Ransom]. It was published by the ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia]. It's been out for almost a year now. It was published in Sep- November of 2009, so I'm, I'm in my second printing of the book. I've been doing lectures for church ministries and denominations. The A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church has hired me on several occasions to give a workshop or talk. And United Methodist, my denomination, has hired me. And I'm just trying to wiggle my way into the Baptists and the Presbyterian. I'm doing that now, and, hopefully, I can move away from hands on public relations, and just do some marketing for churches, which is, I believe, my personal ministry. Story_ID: 545277 Speaker 1: So, now is--what is your, your new goal? Speaker 2: My new goal is to slow down (laughter). Just, you know, to contin- to continue working with the book ['Getting the Word Out: How to Market Your Ministry,' Bunnie Jackson-Ransom]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I want to do more workshops, because the workshops have gotten great reviews. I did one in Jacksonville, Florida for the black United Methodists, standing room only. We couldn't get any more people in the room, so I'm very pleased with, with the workshops. I just want to do more of those, and help people get the word out about the word of God and, and do, do more for churches in that area. Speaker 1: Okay, great. I think that we have covered everything. Is there anything that you can think of? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think we have really covered the waterfront, so to speak. Story_ID: 545278 Speaker 1: I don't remember whether I asked you the last time. Do you--did I ask you what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know whether you did or not. But my legacy. My legacy is obviously community based. I've always worked with the communities. I've put them into my scope of service when I was doing basically p- PR and marketing. I would look for projects within the community to, to enhance with my corporate sponsorships. And so, now that, that I'm still working with community just from, from a church point of view, so I think my legacy--I want my legacy to be, I want to leave--I, I want to show people how to use what's there, you know, how to work with what they haven't had, how to build coalitions with groups of, of people, how not to, to judge, how not to judge, and how not to be set aside with what the Methodists can do that the, that the Baptists cannot do. So, so that's why I'm working with 'Getting the Word Out' ['Getting the Word Out: How to Market Your Ministry,' Bunnie Jackson-Ransom]. You know, we, we all do the same thing. The more we do it together, the better we can, can do it. So, I guess my legacy is, you know, building a better world together with, with people. And, of course, I'm concerned about my race and my, my children, and I want to leave my children with, with a legacy that they can be proud of. I want them to, to recognize their grandmother's contributions to, you know, to the public relations world. Obviously, my legacy is PR. I've done it for thirty-five, thirty-six years. And so, the book that I wrote, maybe I'll write another one that will talk about how to get the word out for your law firm, or how to get the word out for your small business because the skills are the same. You just have to tweak it a little bit. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, I want to thank you for letting us come back again. Speaker 2: You're welcome. Thank you for coming back again. Speaker 1: All right, no problem. Speaker 2: I hope things haven't changed that much. You know, I--my, my hair's a little whiter, and I don't remember as much as I did before, but I'm still climbing as, as Langston Hughes said, you know, "Life ain't been no crystal stair" ['Mother to Son'] (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Thank you so much. Speaker 2: You're welcome. Story_ID: 545279 Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Brooklyn Eagles in 1935, and that's my father on the front row on the left end. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: He was a pitcher. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next one. Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture of, of Maynard Jackson, Rosa Parks, and me. And we don't know who the other lady is on the, on the end (laughter). But this was when I first met Rosa Parks, and we were getting her autograph. She later autographed that picture. I don't know whether you can see the autograph, but it's right in the middle on her white blouse. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Can you see the autograph? Speaker 2: Um-hm, I can see. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay. Who is that? Who is that man? That's--he was running for president. Oh, what is his name, 'cause if I can't remember his name, you don't need to put him up there. Can you make that writing out? Let's don't use that one. No, here it is. No, it still doesn't say. Let's don't use that. That's McCloskey [Pete McCloskey] or-- Speaker 1: I can't (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, let's don't use that one. He was running for president. That's what was happening that time. Oh, that has the year on it, great. That's me in 1965. I had just, I had, I was married to Maynard, and we had just had Brooke-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next one. Speaker 2: --I think. She was born--what year did I say she was born in? Brooke was born in--did I say '65 [1965]? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, that picture is '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Sixty- yeah, the picture is '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Okay, and doesn't have a date on it. That is when I was working with Dance Atlanta, and I was trying to convince Alvin Ailey to bring the Ailey dance troupe [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] back to Atlanta [Georgia] to perform. He graciously, graciously consented, and that's us meeting. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Who, who is everybody? Speaker 1: Oh. That's Maynard, Alvin Ailey between Maynard and me, and the other lady is the commissioner of the arts for the City of Atlanta, and I don't recall her name. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Is it on the back of the picture? Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, goodness. Speaker 2: Just say who-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then the picture (unclear). Speaker 1: That is a photograph of, left to right, Bill Allison [William Allison], Maynard Jackson, and I don't know the gentleman's name, but the lady is Susie LaBord, who was a very well known black leader in the community, who taught me a lot about community relations when I was working at EOA [Economic Opportunity Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia], and how to go into community and talk to people. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next one. Speaker 1: That is a picture of my granddaughter who's downstairs. That's a picture of Maynard, III [Maynard Jackson, III], Maynard, Jr. who we call Maynard Jackson. He dropped the Jr. That's Isabella [Isabella Jackson], and that's Kelley Jackson. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Does it have the year on the back? Can you see the year at all? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay (unclear). Speaker 1: That's me (laughter). That's, that's Bunnie dressed up in a black dress that was a couture dress. I remember that particular occasion. I'd gone to a, a boutique, and they were selling me that dress (laughter). They took pictures and used it as a display. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That is a picture of me at my senior prom. That was 1957, and that was Walter Garland Harris [Walter Harris (ph.)] and, and me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That is a photograph of me at North Carolina College [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. I don't know what year it was. I thought it was my freshman year, but it could have been any one of those years. I look a little too sophisticated to be a freshman, so maybe I'm like a, a junior. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's me in college, too. I was a freshman that year. I can tell by the hairstyle. Okay. Oh, I didn't know you had all those pictures (laughter). Okay. That is--are you ready for me? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And what's (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That is my mother, that's a photograph of my mother standing in, in front of one of my father's Ford Motor [Ford Motor Company] automobiles in Louisburg, North Carolina. I was probably ten years old at the time. That was probably 1950. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture of the band, Brick, and me. Left to right, there's Reggie Hargis [Reginald J. Hargis], that's Eddie Irons, that's little Brooke Jackson, that's Ray Ransom, [HistoryMaker] Bunnie Jackson-Ransom, that's Buzzy Jackson standing in front of me, Donald Nevins, and Jimmy Brown [Jimmy "Lord" Brown]. That's when they received a platinum record for 'Dazz.' Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That is my grandfather. His name was George Washington Hayes [George Hayes]. He was a carpenter born in Franklin County, North Carolina, and he's standing on the steps of his house which he built. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's his wife, George Washington Hayes' wife, in the middle, Nannie Morton Hayes. And on her right is Ethna Morton [ph.], and on her left is Carol Morton [ph.], her brothers. That picture was made in Brooklyn, New York one summer. I must have been two. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That is a photograph of Maynard and me at a friend's wedding. I was in the--we were both in the wedding party. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Oh, that's a great picture. That is a picture of my daughter, Brooke Jackson Edmond, on her wedding day with her stepdad, Ray Ransom, who was my husband. He's a musician and he was playing at her wedding. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That is a very old picture of Rhody Morton [ph.]--I'm sorry, Yodie Morton [ph.], started with a Y, Yodie Morton. Yodie Morton was the mother of York Morton, York Morton, Sr. York Morton, Sr. had York Morton, Jr., and York Morton, Jr. had Nannie Morton, who was my grandmother, so that makes her my great-great-great-grandmother. She was a slave. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's amazing. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Who are these? Speaker 1: That's a great picture of my mother and father. Speaker 2: Just tell me their names. Speaker 1: That is Burnell James Hayes [Burnell Hayes] and Elizabeth Day Hayes. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is my family portrait, the latest, latest one that we've had. And we'll probably do another one, but let me tell you who these people are. Starting on the left, there is Rae Yvonne Ransom [Rae Ransom Coleman]. Next to Rae Yvonne is Isabella Daisy Jackson who's now eleven. Next to Isabella, or holding Isabella, is her mother, Kelley Jackson. Behind, or next to Kelly, is me, Bunnie Jackson-Ransom. Next to me is Brooke Jackson Edmond. And next to Brooke is Elizabeth Jackson Hodges. Now, going to the back row, right behind Kelley, is Howie Hodges, Clemmon Howie Hodges [Clemmon H. Hodges, II], who is Elizabeth Hodges' husband. Next to Howie is Ray Ransom, my ex-husband. Right in front of Ray is Maynard Jackson, III. And then, to the right of Buzzy, Maynard, III, is Rod Edmond, Brooke's husband. That was taken before the other grandchildren were made. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And this is the last one. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And this is a composite photo that my girlfriend, Ruth Thomas [ph.], decided to do in jest. The picture on the left is a recent picture of me. And the picture on the right is a picture that was taken on the day we graduated from college. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Is that it? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: She calls it Alpha and Omega (laughter)...