 Story_ID: 321690 Speaker 1: This morning we are going to do an interview with John Johnson [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson], who is director of programs for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I'll ask him for his title, the rest of his title later, for the national NAACP. The videographer is Scott Stearns. I'm [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock and there are no observers. So we'll begin by asking Mr. Johnson if he could give us his full name, including the middle name, and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Okay, it's John J. Johnson, J-O-H-N just the initial J and J-O-H-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and let me ask you where are we doing this interview this morning? Speaker 2: Well, this is our home in Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date? Speaker 2: What is today's date? Speaker 1: Everybody has trouble with this question. Speaker 2: I don't know what today's date is (laughter). This Wednesday the 21st of September, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 321691 Speaker 1: I'm gonna begin just to loosen both of us up I, I should say, with a few simple questions. Speaker 2: Certainly. Speaker 1: They can be answered in one or two words. First of all, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, things that I should not have pasta; I love hamburgers, things that I shouldn't eat are all my favorite foods probably (laughter). Speaker 1: All right and what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue, actually, is my favorite color. Speaker 1: Okay and your favorite season, time of year? Speaker 2: Oh, I think the fall of the year, it's not too hot, not too cold. The leaves are beautiful especially in the part of the country that I come from. You can drive down the interstate, it's, it's a beautiful season. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation spot? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, we don't take as many vacations as we would like to. My wife [Courtrina Patterson Johnson] has forced me to go down to Virginia for the last few years. Off and on and we've gone to Williamsburg [Virginia] and really kind of enjoy that as a getaway for a few days. It's quite peaceful there and we enjoy that area. Speaker 1: Okay and finally your favorite expression, phrase, saying? Speaker 2: Well, there are many of them, I often think there's a piece of scripture that says, "They who wait on the Lord will renew their strength--" Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "--and mount up the wings as eagles" {Isaiah 40:31], and I enjoy that, that piece of scripture. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 321692 Speaker 1: But first I'm going to get your place of birth and your date of birth. Speaker 2: Well, I was born in Louisville, Kentucky on February the 10th in 1945. Speaker 1: Okay, and Louisville, Kentucky? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 321693 Speaker 1: Let's get your mother's name, full name? Speaker 2: Evelyn, E-V-E-L-Y-N. Speaker 1: E-V-- Speaker 2: --E-L-Y-N, Elizabeth Johnson. Speaker 1: Okay and where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in a little place called Crab Orchard, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay, is that, one word or two words? Speaker 2: Two words. Speaker 1: Two words, Crab-- Speaker 2: Orchard, like a crab tree, a crab orchard. Speaker 1: Okay, Kentucky and her date of birth? Speaker 2: I don't have that. Speaker 1: Or approximate? Speaker 2: I do have it-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but I don't know right now. Speaker 1: Okay, good enough. Now how far back do you have knowledge of relatives, maternal relatives, on your mother's [Evelyn Johnson] side, how far back can you go or do you know of? Speaker 2: Not as, not as far as I would like to. I would really hope to, at some point, do more research into family history. I can go back to my great grandparents. Speaker 1: Okay, let's start with your great-grandparents, your great-grandfather? Speaker 2: His name was Felix Martin [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his wife was named Penelope [Penelope Martin (ph.)]. Speaker 1: P-E-N-E-L-O-P-E? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, was there a middle name there? Speaker 2: I can't recall, I do have it written down somewhere, I should have prepared for that. Speaker 1: Not a problem. Okay and how much do you remember, not remember, but do--how much knowledge do you have of them? How they met, where they were born, and so forth? Speaker 2: Not a whole lot. I know they were strongly religious people. They lived in Franklin, Kentucky. They were part of the backbone of that community, if you will. Their cousins were quite active in leadership roles, and my grandmother's cousin [John Purdue] was a slave at one point and then helped--organized the first school for colored children in that area many years back. Story_ID: 321694 Speaker 1: The cousin that was a slave. Do you remember a name? Speaker 2: That was John Purdue, P-U-R-D-U-E. As a matter-of-fact they helped organize a school there [Franklin, Kentucky]. The building still stands, some parts of it. There is a home that they, they lived in has now been turned into a community center there a--an African American Heritage Center [Franklin, Kentucky] it's called. He eventually moved from Franklin [Kentucky] and moved to Louisville [Kentucky] and they organized what and what was then Emmanuel Baptist Church [Louisville, Kentucky]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Emmanuel eventually--the church moved onto Broadway, which is a fairly sizeable congregation there. When white people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Broadway in Louisville? Speaker 2: In Louisville, yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They purchased a white church there and the congregation had moved out into the suburbs and it's a very nice facility. His son Melvin-- Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: Purdue, this is. Speaker 1: Okay, Melvin Purdue [ph.]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Ended up being the second pastor of the church and Melvin Purdue headed the Congress for Racial Equality [Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)] in Kentucky for some years prior to his death. As a matter-of-fact in 1963 he--his last public appearance he introduced Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when King addressed a rally in Louisville. Martin King had a brother in Louisville, A.D. King [Alfred Daniel Williams King], and so he visited the city often. But Melvin Purdue was the person who introduced him and as a matter of fact for the '63 [1963] March on Washington, the--his [Melvin Purdue] obituary reads just about two weeks before his death he couldn't go because he was in ailing health and he had helped raise money and had gone to help see the Kentucky delegation off to the '63 [1963] March on Washington and came back and two weeks later passed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But had a--not enough has been told and I commend you for the work that you are doing to try to record history because so many people who have gone on before said stories have never been told and certainly. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Melvin Purdue should've been one person whose story needs to be told at some point. Speaker 1: Right and Melvin Purdue was the son of-- Speaker 2: John Purdue. Speaker 1: Of John Purdue. Let's go back to John Purdue for a second and ask, he was a slave and was he emancipated? He was emancipated? Speaker 2: Yes, and actually there's some, I have some materials on his life but they--he had pastored at several churches in Southern Kentucky and small communities there in Drakesboro [Kentucky], Franklin, I can't tell you all the little cities, and had organized this little school house there and he and about five or six other people in the community became the first teachers and so forth in the school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And beyond that I don't know a whole lot about his history, but. Speaker 1: Do you have any knowledge of his death, date and so forth? Speaker 2: Yes, I do and I can get that for you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just don't have it here. As a matter-of-fact I have a copy of his obituary. Story_ID: 321695 Speaker 1: Any information on Felix Martin [ph.] and Penelope Martin [ph.], your great-grandfather and great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Not for real. There are pictures that I will show you, a very distinguished gentlemen, a strong churchmen. Both he and his wife were leaders in the church there. We attended for years Alpha Baptist Church in Franklin [Kentucky], and it's interesting now, for years it was on Hale Street. A few years back they renamed Hale Street, John J. Johnson Avenue, and so I'm quite honored to have that little distinction-- Speaker 1: Absolutely! Speaker 2: --that the church sits on a street named after me. Speaker 1: Well, I'm sure Felix and Penelope are very proud. Speaker 2: I would, would hope they would be. The--but the--I actually was born in Louisville [Kentucky] in 1945. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And was moved immediately, my mother [Evelyn Johnson] was invalid at the time and went back to Crab Orchard [Kentucky] where she was living with her uncle, my great uncle, Frank Johnson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his wife was named Bertha [Bertha Johnson]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Uncle Frank and Aunt Bertha looked out for my mother for some years. She--Uncle Frank was the only black teacher in Lincoln County, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Named after Abe Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] as a matter-of-fact to, was born in Kentucky [Hodgenville, Kentucky], but he had a little one-room school house, a picture I can show you of the school where he taught all the black children from all of Lincoln County [Kentucky] for many years there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so even-- Speaker 1: What's a major city in Lincoln [Kentucky]? Speaker 2: Well, Stanford, Kentucky is the county seat. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's not a large county it's a small rural area about forty miles from Lexington-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --forty or fifty miles from Lexington, Kentucky, but again I'm not suggesting to you that my family was unique, but there were people all over the country with the little one-room school houses where black children would go to school and usually there might be one or two teachers there. And it fell up to Frank's lot to be the teacher for the black students in that area. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I run into many of them from time to time now in Louisville and about. As a matter of fact I was talking with someone at Kentucky State [Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] just a few weeks back and said, oh, Frank Johnson was my teacher years ago (laughter). And, but he's well respected. Uncle Frank passed now about, oh, maybe eight or ten years ago now. Story_ID: 321696 Speaker 1: Let's go to your mother's [Evelyn Johnson] family--grandmother and grandfather. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And how much do you know about them? Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother died from childbirth. My grandfather was a farmer there in Lincoln County [Kentucky]. He passed again about, he's been dead now about twelve years I guess, but he was a very--all very strong religious family. He didn't believe in television; he thought it was sinful to listen to the radio (laughter), just that period of time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But very strict, very religious people read the Bible every day, that was his outlet, his--and somehow they grubbed out a living and did better sometimes I think that we do today who have regular incomes just on what he raised. He would raise his food, I remember he would dig a hole and put it in the ground to keep it from perishing, the--kind of like an underground refrigerator, I guess, if you will. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he had an icebox for years and finally I got him--redid his kitchen one time. He just, almost stubborn about even wanting modern-day conveniences, felt like it was, almost--everything was sinful you--but over a period of time he, he came into (laughter) into some modernization, yes. Speaker 1: Right, right. Let's, let's go to your mother growing up and let's start with your mother's siblings? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother as I said was raised by my great uncle [Frank Johnson] and his wife [Bertha Johnson]. They lived beside my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they owned three houses there right beside the church [Alpha Baptist Church, Franklin, Kentucky] and they looked out for her. She was not able to care for herself, and so they always looked out for her and the--she had three or two, two sisters and one brother and she has now one sister still alive in Louisville [Kentucky]. They've all passed in recent years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And one of her brothers for years was the pastor of First Baptist Church in Paris, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Again about ten miles outside of Lexington [Kentucky]. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Reverend Edmund Johnson, and her other sister Edwina Griffin-Hayes [Edwina Johnson Griffin-Hayes (ph.)] was a school teacher in Indianapolis [Indiana] for a period of time and then became ill and finally passed. Speaker 1: Okay, let's put them in some order. Who was the oldest child of the four? Speaker 2: My mother was the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then she had a sister, Barbara [Barbara Johnson (ph.)], who still resides in Louisville and the Reverend Edmund Johnson, her brother, I think was the next, and then Edwina. Speaker 1: Okay, he was the third child? Speaker 2: Uh-huh and Edwina was the youngest one. Speaker 1: Okay, now where does that leave Uncle Frank? Speaker 2: Well, now that's her sisters and brothers. Uncle Frank was their uncle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he's my great uncle, he was their uncle. Speaker 1: Great uncle, that's what I have to keep remembering. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay and there was. Speaker 2: Uncle, Uncle Frank had--were there three brothers. My grandfather Edmund Johnson, Sr. [ph.] and then Frank Johnson and Henry Johnson [ph.]. He had other brothers that I don't really know, they died prior to my birth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They moved around even to the time that they passed. After retirement, they loved to sing gospel music and will you one article I can show you that someone wrote in Stanford [Kentucky]. They would go to the little nursing homes on Sunday afternoon and provide entertainment. Speaker 1: For the? Speaker 2: To the people who were shut in. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Even in their very old age after retirement. It gave them something to do after Church on Sunday and so they would go over, and sing and people really enjoyed it. Speaker 1: So your family really has a long-standing history of giving back to the community. Speaker 2: Oh, oh I think so, much more so that I do (laughter). Speaker 1: Well we're going to get, get into that. Now your--the grandmother, your grandmother died in child birth. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Giving childbirth to a child after I guess after the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After Edwina. Speaker 1: After Edwina? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 321697 Speaker 1: Your mother [Evelyn Johnson] was taken care, care of most of the time? Speaker 2: Yes, what happened was after I was born my mother was unable to care for me and there was some thought that perhaps I would be better to be placed in an orphanage and a great aunt [Hagar Benjamin (ph.)] on my mother's side, a great aunt who lived in Detroit [Michigan] said, "No, bring him to me and bring his mother as well, and I will keep them both," and so we were moved to Detroit, Michigan in--that would've been in the middle or latter part of '45 [1945] and lived there until I was three years old. My great aunt Hagar Benjamin, I called mama because that's the way I learned her, and her husband, Morris Benjamin, I called him daddy. He was the caretaker for the building we lived in. His job was to keep the furnace and the heat going and the buildings up and he cleaned a couple of other buildings in downtown Detroit and I lived with them 'til I was three years old, very caring and nurturing people. When I was three my great aunt, Hagar, had a stroke and the doctor said she would not live six months. As the Lord would have it, she lived forty years afterwards, but she called her sister [Frederick Harris (ph.)] in Kentucky, in Franklin, Kentucky and said, "The doctor said I have to give John [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson] up, so would you come and get him," and so her sister's husband, Uncle Lenny [Lenny Harris (ph.)] came to Detroit. He worked for the L&N Railroad [Louisville and Nashville Railroad] and he came to Detroit [Michigan] on the train and got me. I still can recall, I feel like I cried all the way from Detroit to Franklin, but they took me in. As a matter of fact Aunt Hagar lived with my wife [Courtrina Patterson Johnson] and I some years back, forty years afterwards went and got her and brought her to Kentucky to live with us, and she did eventually pass but she lived all of that period, she, she (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So she was a very stout woman. Speaker 2: She stopped smoking, she did smoke. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She stopped--did just what the doctor said, ate the proper foods and lived forty more years-- Story_ID: 321698 Speaker 1: I then was moved to Kentucky and separated from my mother [Evelyn Johnson]. My mother went back to Crab Orchard [Kentucky] to stay with her Uncle Frank [Frank Johnson] and Aunt Bertha [Bertha Johnson], and I was then raised by Aunt Fred [Frederick Harris (ph.)] and Lenny Harris [ph.] was my great uncle's name who worked for the L&N Railroad [Louisville and Nashville Railroad] there, and Fred, Fredrick Harris, Aunt Fred we called her, was his wife. She worked for the mayor's brother, actually there doing domestic work, and he worked for the railroad and they had an income probably better than most people in the black community at that time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: It never occurred to us it was nothing by the standards of the larger community, but had a respectable income for black citizens of that day. I would go with Uncle Lenny to the train station. He had a heart condition and had a heart attack on at least three occasions I recall and I would just, there's nothing to do but just to scream and ask for help. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he came through them each time, but he rode a bicycle, and delivered telegrams and so forth for the--telegrams use to come into the railroads and I would go with him to the job, periodically. He would unload the mail from the train, he would clean the service stations and of course then you had black and white bath facilities, and sometimes we would use the white facility just for the--just because we could, because it was no one else there (laughter). Speaker 2: 'Cause no one was looking (laughter). Speaker 1: But I was and I always found it interesting to see the white people there working. I use to know Morse code, they get the telegram and dot, dash, dot, dash and I would just watch them work that Morse code thing and the young boy whose father actually was the--in charge of the depot there, his son ended up being in charge of the electric plant board in Franklin, but he would go and I would be there and watch him. Of course I couldn't go back behind the desk but it would always amaze me to sit there. I said, "I can sit behind that desk and do what those guys are doing," and, but black people didn't have many desk jobs in those days. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And--but found it quite interesting. Story_ID: 321699 Speaker 1: Wanted to just briefly, 'cause people will be wondering, your mother [Evelyn Johnson] was mentally impaired-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --and so therefore she needed help from the family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, certainly yes. Speaker 1: Okay, let's go back to where Aunt, Aunt Hagar [Hagar Benjamin (ph.)] has been informed that she only has a little while to live and Uncle Fred [sic.] comes up to Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Uncle Lenny [Lenny Harris (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Uncle Lenny, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Uncle Lenny yes, it's Aunt Fred [Frederick Harris (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Comes up to Detroit. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: To pick you up to take you back? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Um. Speaker 2: Well, I should say to you that. Speaker 1: Yeah, three years old. Speaker 2: Yes, and still interestingly enough can recall some of that period because they were very caring people and oh I got in trouble from time to time and they would--I saw a few days ago an insurance policy they use to pay, it was at a nickel a week or something on the insurance policy and sometimes they wouldn't have the money and (laughter), the--I got in trouble once. I remember the only whipping I ever recall getting was when the white man came to the door to collect for the insurance and I came back and said something about that, "White man is out there" and they would talk about that white man being out there, but obviously didn't say it in front of his face (laughter) you know. Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: And they were so embarrassed but at any rate I got a scolding for that, but when Uncle Lenny came to get me he was just as nice as he could be, but he and Uncle Morris [Morris Benjamin (ph.)] went to the train station. Aunt Hagar wasn't able to go to the train station and I remember as we--the train took off I could still see Uncle Morris standing on the platform waving, and, with his eyes full of tears. He was not a skilled person, a maintenance gentlemen but the heart full of love and so it really bothered me, and I went to Franklin [Kentucky] and a gentlemen picked up us and Uncle Lenny didn't have a car, he had a bicycle but Mr. Morrow [ph.] lived behind us had come to the train station to pick us up with my little luggage. Had an old green T-Model Ford in that day but that's what we came home in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And over the years, it--Uncle Lenny would--was the secretary of the church and strong again, a strong church family, Fred was president of the missionary society. Story_ID: 321700 Speaker 1: We're gonna set a timeline because you're three years old and Uncle Lenny [Lenny Harris (ph.)] has come up to pick you up. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you're crying like a baby, but you're only three years old (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Right, yeah. Speaker 1: 1948, and I'm sure you don't remember a lot of the scene there but you were going back to Kentucky? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: To live with Uncle Lenny? Speaker 2: And Aunt Fred [Frederick Harris (ph.)]. Speaker 1: And Aunt Fred. Speaker 2: Yes, and once we got off the train I think I told you the gentlemen came to pick us up, Mr. Morrow [ph.], in a T-Model Ford and--made the adjustment there. Uncle Lenny was and Aunt Fred were extremely active in the church [Alpha Baptist Church, Franklin, Kentucky]. He was the secretary of the--and kept the church records. He was president of the missionary society there, and my only outlet pretty much was going to church, man I know--the Baptist Training Unit we used to call it BTU something called the Royal Ambassadors, this was young men, Royal Ambassadors, young men in the church, ambassadors for Christ. You know the usher board, the choir, the, the BTU the business meeting, the prayer meeting, (laughter) every night there was something going on in the church. Reverend Beverly, James Sterling Beverly was our pastor and was a strong role model as were most ministers in that day in small communities and Reverend Beverly would kind of look out after us as well, and but church every day of the week man for something, and it's--I just kind of grew up in the church. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The--and would stay with Uncle Lenny unless he moved, sometimes Aunt Fred would get into her little fussing bouts and we'd go off somewhere, we'd go and come back. She's still fussing, she never we had left the house, but he passed when I was thirteen years old. Speaker 1: Uncle Lenny? Speaker 2: Uncle Lenny did. Speaker 1: Okay before we get there, did we establish Aunt Fred, was she a housewife? Speaker 2: Yes, she was but she also worked, did domestic work for actually the mayor's brother there in the little town [Franklin, Kentucky] and made a decent little bit of change. Speaker 1: Change on the side. Speaker 2: She worked like three hours a day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then would come home. Story_ID: 321701 Speaker 1: She [Frederick Harris (ph.)] had three brothers, one by the name of Prince Martin [ph.], Felix Martin [ph.] and Booker Martin [ph.]. Uncle Booker lived in Chicago [Illinois]. And over a period of time had bought a yellow cab franchise, I think he owned three or four yellow cabs at the time, and did reasonably well. Uncle Felix lived in Franklin [Kentucky] and worked for the Franklin Favorite, which was the local newspaper. As a matter of fact the people that bought the paper he kind of came with it, and he knew how to set the press and to run the paper, he could, he could everything that needed to be done with the paper. The white people who bought it only had the money to buy it, they didn't know how to run it, but they would depend. Speaker 2: He did the writing also? Speaker 1: He did the writing, he did the layout of the-- Speaker 2: The type? Speaker 1: The type, he ran the presses, did the whole nine yards, and over a period--you know taught them over and again I'm not trying to suggest that our family was unique. In many, many instances black people have taught white people the skills to be successful at what they were doing, but they were free to be successful and we were limited in what we had the right to do. Uncle Prince worked for several clubs in the Louisville [Kentucky] area. Among the better jobs that black people could get at those times were service work. He ended up being a secretary--a steward to the secretary of the [U.S.] Navy, John Forester. He was the head waiter in several clubs and during the Derby [Kentucky Derby] period in the Louisville [Kentucky], he was in great demand because the people who had the wealth in the area all wanted Prince to serve their parties. He had a reputation as being a gentlemen's gentlemen if you will and quite-- Speaker 2: --and appropriately named Prince -- Speaker 1: Yes, yes (laughter) quite skillful at his skill of being a mixologist and being able to make people feel comfortable and that (unclear). Speaker 2: Right, right, let's go back and visit these great uncles. Uncle Booker who was in Chicago and had three cabs, what are your recollections on Uncle Booker, did you? Speaker 1: Well, he was the one I knew least because he lived farthest, you know away. We would go to visit Uncle Prince at once or twice a year, and of course Uncle Felix lived right there in Franklin but when Aunt Fred passed, it was amazing to me that Uncle Booker came to Franklin in a yellow cab, and I tried to figure out how in the world could he afford to have a cab bring him all the way from Chicago to rural Kentucky? Well, that's all he owned, he didn't own private cars, he owned three cabs. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: And so one of his drivers drove him down and it was--he didn't have to pay the (laughter) the mileage Speaker 2: 'Cause it was his cab (laughter). Speaker 1: And so forth it was his cab, but I, I--that was just so impressive--I know it was interesting, it was impressive. I thought how in the world does a black man get a cab (laughter) to come all the way from Chicago? I didn't know what kind of business Uncle Booker was in to be honest to with you at that time up until-- Speaker 2: Well we, you knew he was an entrepreneur. Speaker 1: Yes, right (laughter) and, and, but when he came down then it became obvious what he was doing-- Story_ID: 321702 Speaker 1: Did we skip something because we were in 1948 and '49 [1949] and then? Speaker 2: Yeah, well what happened was during that period of time basically you know I continued in school [Lincoln School; Franklin-Simpson High School, Franklin, Kentucky]. Speaker 1: Right, you started in kindergarten (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I adjusted to-- Speaker 1: You started in kindergarten then? Speaker 2: Well, in, in the first grade. Speaker 1: First grade? Speaker 2: We didn't have kindergarten then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the church [Alpha Baptist Church, Franklin, Kentucky] was the base of support. We--well the family was well respected in the community and I always wanted to play football and basketball and I was never big enough at the time to do much of either. Trying to play some sandlot ball one time, ended up with my head busted, nobody had equipment and one of the heaviest students in my class came down and the heel of his foot hit me right here and my whole head was black. I had to go home and explain to Aunt Fred [Frederick Harris (ph.)] why I had a--'cause she told me not to be playing football, but I loved the game. Couldn't play it worth a lick, too light, but I loved the game, and, and when I came home my whole face was black. I got another whipping when I got home (laughter). Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: I must've been then oh maybe about ten or twelve years old, something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: But she got on me about that and, but and we also took in my first cousin, Clarence [ph.], who lived with us, and so it was my job to kinda keep up with Clarence as when Aunt Fred went to work, and whenever Clarence did wrong and I got on him, he would tell Aunt Fred and I'd get in trouble for that. If I let him go out and get dirty or get into the wrong thing, I got in trouble for that too so (laughter). Speaker 1: Whose child was, was. Speaker 2: Clarence was Edwina's [Edwina Johnson Griffin-Hayes (ph.)] son, Aunt Fred had also raised Edwina, my aunt Edwina and she had gone off to Kentucky State [Kentucky State University, Frankfurt, Kentucky] to go to school and had gotten married and had Clarence, my first cousin, and he's now in the foreign, I mean the diplomatic corps. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: He's been in the service for some years now. Story_ID: 321703 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, let's go back to your earliest memories in the first grade, what was it like? Speaker 2: Well, teachers were very caring, they almost were a part of an extended family at least for me. Mrs. Burris, everybody there, Vergie Burris [ph.] were her name, was our first grade teacher. She was my first grade teacher, my aunt's first grade teacher, my children's first grade teacher (laughter). She also, she and her husband owned the funeral home there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the little town and but she was nurturing and caring and all of the children we all lived in the same community, just would walk to school together every day. The school [Lincoln School; Franklin-Simpson High School, Franklin, Kentucky] was in the--just about three blocks from our home and so it's, it's a very wholesome community. The same children for the most part that you go to church with on Sunday, you also went to school with through the week. Speaker 1: Approximately the population there? Speaker 2: Oh, the whole county [Simpson County, Kentucky] was less than ten thousand people. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think my class I started with in school was maybe about eighteen of us I think, and when I graduated I think it was twelve of us in the class of '63 [1963] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay, the--Mrs. Burris she was your teacher in first grade and? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Usually they carry it over several grades, was that true in? Speaker 2: Well, not in that instance, well she, what happened after the first grade was Ms. Robey [ph.], who taught something like second and third grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then Ms. Stringer taught a part of third and fourth grade, you know there weren't that kind of carryover years. Speaker 1: Okay so Ms. Robey, second and third grade. Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, and then Mrs. Stringer [ph.] was the third and fourth grade, I believe. Story_ID: 321704 Speaker 1: Ms. Stringer [ph.] used to have a weekly radio program when the radios are--first black program on the radio in our little town [Franklin, Kentucky], she would broadcast from the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church every Sunday afternoon. We always found that quite intriguing as young people. How do you use the media and how was she able to use it to talk about--I mean in the work I'm in now we often try to impact the media on various human rights issues. I had found it intriguing earlier in those days to watch how she would try to encourage people to come to the A.M.E. church for various activities or things that was gonna happen--even issues in the community that the church was concerned about, and she was vary tactful on the radio, very precise in her speaking abilities and so forth, and I guess all of those things over a period of years have some impact on how you grow up and what you see and we are products of our environment to some degree (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Story_ID: 321705 Speaker 1: In fact that was going to be my next question, Mrs. Robey [ph.], Mrs. Stringer [ph.], Mrs. Burris [ph.], were they motivational, helpful, they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they were very much I mean they talked to you very basics from ABCs to multiplication to dividing, that sort of thing. The other person who ended up being like my adopted godparents was Mrs. Brooks [Lucille Griffin Brooks] and Mr. Brooks [Matthew Brooks]. Mrs. Brooks was a high school teacher but she was quite active in the community and had started the student council program there and over a period of time I had gotten involved and she had gotten me into the student council. Things about how to prepare agendas, how to deal with parliamentary procedure, how to try to deliver some small presentation, all of these very basic things over the years I found were the basic foundation for everything I've tried to do since. Mrs. Brooks passed now last year, but she, over a period of time, kind of became a godmother. Aunt Fred [Frederick Harris] died in 1960. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I graduated from high school [Lincoln School; Franklin-Simpson High School, Franklin, Kentucky] in '63 [1963] and I was fifteen when she passed. Uncle Lenny [Lenny Harris] passed when I was thirteen years old, Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Her husband and she lived five more years and passed, and so from that time on I pretty much lived by myself. They had a home there and I stayed there in the house. Speaker 1: You stayed there in the home? Speaker 2: Yeah, and eventually bought the house when I was nineteen, and but Mrs. Brooks and Mr. Brooks and other--I say but for the grace of God I could've gone anywhere and for the love of the people in the community, but Mrs. Brooks and Mr. Brooks kind of looked out after--as did other others to try to fuss with me about you know you don't have any business here, you know you're supposed to be here and you're supposed to do that and what have you, but I was, was successful in that regard and but she kept me active in the student council. I remember we went to Georgetown, Kentucky--one year Georgetown College in Georgetown, Kentucky hosted annually the Kentucky Association of Student--Kentucky Student Council Association [sic. Kentucky Association of Student Councils], I think and we--there was one other school, Central High School in Louisville [Kentucky], the largest city in the state had a delegation there. We were the only school, only other black school in the state with a delegation at this particular conference and again found it quite interesting and inspiring and the idea was well you can do some of the same things that some of the white students are doing, and maybe had as skillful ability to deliver a presentation or to chair a meeting as any of the white students had--that we had never been in an integrated setting before but found those experiences quite helpful. I should maybe go on to tell you that Mr. Brooks ended up being the first black city councilperson elected to the city council-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in, in Franklin [Kentucky]. Story_ID: 321706 Speaker 1: But it was the situation with the integration of schools there that kind of struck me and got me into the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The NAACP had been organized in my community and Reverend Grant Coleman who pastored then Alpha Baptist Church [Franklin, Kentucky] was the president of the NAACP. He had been called to pastor a church in Lexington [Kentucky] and I had been involved in the Youth Council of the NAACP and he asked me if I would be interested in being the president of the adult branch. Well I had no thought particularly about being the president of the NAACP and I had just finished high school. They integrated the schools in 1964, I graduated in '63 [1963], it was the order was in what '58 [1958], all right so but the, all deliberate speed didn't mean very speedy in Southern Kentucky, but the--so in--what had happened in '63 [1963] there was a lot of discussion about integration and the school board [Simpson County School Board] had appropriated monies to almost rebuild the black school totally. They opened up another wing and two floors and all the modern equipment. Again, this separate but equal concept, saying,-- Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: --"We've given you all the--why are you pushing to integrate?" but the schools were integrated. For years there was a gentleman by the name of W. H. Story [Walter H. Story] who was our principal. Mr. Story--and I have his obituary I'd like to share with you. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: But Mr. Story was a very strong role model for all the black boys, particularly in the school [Lincoln School; Franklin-Simpson High School, Franklin, Kentucky]. Speaker 2: Could you spell Story for us? Speaker 1: S-T-O-R-Y. Speaker 2: Okay, S-T-O-R-Y okay, no E? Speaker 1: No, and he, he was the principal of our school, a strong role model. When they merged, when they integrated the schools, the principal at Lincoln High School [Franklin, Kentucky] where I had gone to school, where Mr. Story was principal was supposed to become the assistant principal of the integrated system. There was real resistance at that time to black people supervising white people at all. The assistant principal would have had some responsibility for management of the school system. He, in the, the analysis that was finally done, Mr. Story has more formal education than any of the black or white employees in the whole system, but they resisted that. He, his wife was a first grade teacher in that school system at that time. Her brother [Rufus B. Atwood] was the president of Kentucky State University [Frankfort, Kentucky]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: -- Dr. Atwood, so they had a long family history of being involved in education. They'd spent their whole life as a family working in the education system. Story_ID: 321707 Speaker 1: Prior to coming to Franklin [Kentucky], he'd [Walter H. Story] been the principal of the school, the black schools in Hopkinsville [Kentucky], like forty miles down the, down the street, but they accused him. They had a hearing and I attended the hearing and I never will forget Mr. Brooks [Matthew Brooks], who was kind of like my godfather, testified at the hearing, and they put him on the stand to try to get him to speak against Mr. Story, and the charges--and Mr. Brooks would not do it and he finally broke down and cried and then I saw Mr. Story break down and cry and I was setting in the doorway there. Here are the two strongest male role models I knew in that community at that time. Mr., Mr. Brooks had been an assistant basketball coach and he had been the director of our--taught agriculture and all that, taught shop, you know people who you go to for questions and answers and guidance and so forth. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Now here are these strong personalities breaking down crying. What pressures are being brought on them to make them do that, but let me just tell you. Among the things they accused Mr. Story of doing was giving away too many free lunches. Lunches at that time cost twenty-five cents and milk was two cents, and if a student came to school and didn't have food, Mr. Story would give them a lunch ticket and they accused him of giving away too many lunches. Now understand this is a rural, very low income community. Some of those children didn't have food to eat. It was twenty-five cents and I know twenty-five cents was maybe the equivalent of a dollar today or something but my point is if you didn't have anything to eat, he would give it them, and to sit there and to watch those powers that be, all of which happened to be white, the school board members, and everybody knew that the charges--they had never questioned this before. The charges were being brought because he was to become the assistant principal of the integrated system, but rather than to let that happen they had to bring some reason to terminate his employment and they had nothing except something like he'd given away too many two cent milk lunch, tickets and twenty-five cent food tickets so children would have something to eat. One of the other charges is one of the children had gotten into a scuffle on the bus and the--he was not at the school at the time. We lived in a community where twenty miles up the road there was a little town called Bowling Green [Kentucky] and we would go to Bowling Green to buy the musical instruments. He had gone to Bowling Green that afternoon to get some musical instruments for the band (laughter). While he was gone I think there was some rule that he was supposed to be accessible until the children got home and he had gone to pick up these musical instruments. The bus drivers were taking the children home. A couple of kids got into a scuffle at some point on the bus. It was no big to do, but they went and drudged this up as reasons to terminate him, just any little thing they could. Speaker 2: So they were after termination? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Not just denial of a-- Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Job opportunity? Speaker 1: Because in--because of his qualifications and where he found himself in the merged system, he--there was some requirement that he take this other position. They didn't want that to happen, so the only way to keep him from being in that position was to terminate his employment, and his wife after that they were so despondent. His wife died within two years, he opened up a little grocery store and then finally moved to Virginia and, and taught school there for--with, teaching children with physical disabilities and I never will forget when he passed I was a pall bearer at his funeral, but those sorts of things--I don't--just happened right before my eyes and so I agreed to become the president of the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and that's kind of how I got my initial start in the NAACP. Speaker 2: I wanted you to go through it because obviously it--something had been burned into your memory and getting that out I think the audience will appreciate-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --how you felt. Story_ID: 321708 Speaker 1: I wanted to go back a little ways before graduation. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And ask you about what kind of a student do you think you were in those early elementary days and high school days and so forth? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well I probably was not much more than an average student. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think there was anything exceptional about my being a student in school. What I have come to realize in later years the need to try to-- impacting young people's mind the importance of what they're learning and the piece that always was quite attractive to me was the student government, the student council work. I liked the debating, I liked the meetings, I liked the public speaking opportunities and those opportunities I would have never had short of Mrs. Brooks [Lucille Griffin Brooks] exposing me to that sort of thing, and so I think again today and I think teachers who learn more and more how to try to get children interested in the subject matter. At that time you know people taught here's the lesson. You read this and you come back and (laughter) you almost memorize it you know, it was nothing exceptional about my schooling beyond the fact that I did find it interesting that particular area of student government activity. Speaker 1: Any outstanding memories of your classmates during those years? Speaker 2: Well in most instances, yes they were all, as I reflect on them special friends, a small class. You developed, not having any brothers or sisters, the children in school became like extended families to me. The children you played with, the children you commiserated with, you fought with, you fussed with you were closest friends with, so, all of those memories would take more time than we have here to go to into all of that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But certainly, all in all, it was a quite positive experience for me. Story_ID: 321709 Speaker 1: Okay, okay so now you are graduating in 1963, you've been motivated by Mr. Brooks [Matthew Brooks] and several teachers there. If--from this very small town what are your thoughts on going to college or beyond high school? Speaker 2: Well, let me just be honest with you and say that at that point in life in rural Kentucky if you got out of high school there were few opportunities for black people to do much other than to be a teacher, to be the local barber or minister or undertaker. Aside from those three or four jobs, there were not many role models. The factories had limited opportunities but I got offered a job working in the factory in Franklin [Kentucky]. Those jobs as janitors paid more than teachers were making at that time in that community. So I never will forget I got a call and actually the personnel manager had called Mr. Story [Walter H. Story], the principal of the school and another school mate of mine, Joe Barbee was his name and I--they had invited us to come out for an interview. The factory was about a mile and a half to two miles from where we lived and we didn't have any way to get there so we dressed up, not in suit clothing, but got ourselves together and walked out to the factory and went filled out the application. We walked back home, left the application where we were told to leave it. They called back and wanted us to come for an interview. We walked back again that afternoon for the interview, and one of the questions, it kind of sticks in my mind, the personnel manager said "I guess your people in Harristown [Franklin, Kentucky]," the black community they referred to as Harristown, "know that we're interviewing you for that job." Well everybody in town knew that we were getting a chance to get a job in the factory. "Yes sir." "What do they think about it?" "Well, I think it's nice if we can get a job". I just remembered that discussion, nevertheless he said, "Well, you can start this evening, work eleven to seven. Come in at eleven o'clock at night, work 'til seven the next morning." So we walked back, we walked back out there at (laughter) about ten o'clock that night so we would be at work on time. So we're sweeping the floor and doing what we're supposed to do and Joe Billy was going down one side and I another and I said Joe Billy --his name was--referred--everybody in Franklin had two names you know. Speaker 1: What was his full name by the way? Speaker 2: Joe Billy Barbee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I said, Joe Billy do you remember what that gentleman asked us, whether we were proud to be janitors, and we were looking at the machines and the other work. Sure did, and we were thankful to have a job. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Let me--especially one that paid as much as any other black person was making, but we were supposed to be thankful to be janitors. No question about whether we had abilities to do other jobs in the factory, they didn't even consider anything than being a janitor. And so we worked there for a year or two as janitors and at some point they called us in and offered me a job in the stock room and Joe Billy a job on the assembly line and so I worked in that factory for I believe five years. Speaker 1: What was the name of that factory? Speaker 2: It was Potter & Brumfield [Potter & Brumfield, Inc.], it was a division of American Machine and Foundry Company, the people make the bowling alley stuff, and it paid as much money as anybody in the community made. We almost were conditioned to look at your surroundings and not think beyond that and during that period of time I have--my wife [Courtrina Patterson Johnson] and I have seven [children]. Story_ID: 322300 Speaker 1: We're talking about--you had gone to work for Potter & Brumfield [Potter & Brumfield, Inc., American Machine and Foundry Company] and you were working as a janitor, you and Joe Billy [Joe Billy Barbee] there for a year and half. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, finally you got a promotion? Speaker 2: Yes, and I got a promotion in the stock room, Joe Billy had gotten a promotion onto the assembly line and during this period of time, what I failed to mention I had been elected as president of the local branch [Franklin Simpson County Branch] of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and. Speaker 1: Okay, what year was that? Speaker 2: Oh that would've been 1964 or '65 [1965], I'm not really sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have to double check, and I guess at that point (laughter) what often is said I was one of the youngest adult branch residents in the country at the time. Speaker 1: Right, you were--? Speaker 2: I was eighteen or nineteen-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --years old in that age bracket. Story_ID: 322301 Speaker 1: I had learned over a period of time, and I need to go back and I'll come back here to the Potter & Brumfield [Potter & Brumfield, Inc., American Machine and Foundry Company] situation. Aunt Fred [Frederick Harris] and Uncle Lenny [Lenny Harris (ph.)], as other black people in the community had learned how to co-exist with white people and I tell young people particularly at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] that they--things have changed considerably the more they've changed, the more they remain the same to some degree, in terms of economic growth and that sort of thing, but you no longer have to get off the sidewalk just because a white woman has to--happens to be coming down, but I learned how to go into the store and to tip my hat and take my hat off and ask for Ms. Mary [ph.] or Ms. Laura [ph.], the white people who worked in the store, and too you could get pretty much whatever you wanted. I, I should tell you at one time I was interested in going into business with some friends in New York [New York] and I went to the bank in my hometown [Franklin, Kentucky] and the bank had told me, "John [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson], if you wanna come back home", and I'm getting a little ahead of myself, but he said "if wanna come back home we'll loan you money to open a grocery store or something up in Harris Town [Franklin, Kentucky], but I just don't think we ought to loan you money to open up something in New York [New York]. It was like, I mean course it's against the law for them to do that now. It wasn't a question of my credit or my ability to pay or my income, it was a question of what they thought was in my best interest, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Right. Story_ID: 322302 Speaker 1: Nevertheless to go back to say to you in the factory [Potter & Brumfield, Inc., American Machine and Foundry Co.], I was impressed with the work of the Jaycees [United States Junior Chamber] and from time to time I now find myself working with the national Jaycees now on good projects they do around the country and at one point when I lived in Louisville [Kentucky], I was asked to help organize the Jaycees in the western part of the city and I often have to tell them my experience with the Jaycees at a very young age because they did the annual Christmas parade in my hometown and some other neat things. I thought it might be nice to, to join, and so I was working there in the factory and the president of the local Jaycees was also an employee of the factory, he was a foreman on one of the lines. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so I had thinking that we had moved toward an integrated society approached him about joining the NAA--I mean joining the Jaycees, and he seemed to be somewhat surprised and I said "I'll bring you an application". A couple of days passed and so I approached him again, and he said "I'll get it to you". So he a few days later brought it, and that night I got a call at home from another older gentleman who was the foreman of the janitors in the factory and said, "John [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson], Mr. Bob [ph.] asked me to call you, and he said you were interested in joining the Jaycees, said but they're only a few black people," colored people he referred to them then, "in Jaycees in the state of Kentucky, they're all up there in Louisville, the big city, Louisville," and said, "there aren't any Jaycees--black people in the Jaycees, and he thought that everybody likes you down here but they think maybe you're pushing a little too far." Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And I guess I was hurt and taken back a little to say, Lord, we still have not integrated. I mean I thought it would be--I just wanted to be a part of the little group that's putting on the annual Christmas parade, I thought it was a nice thing to do. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But it drove me more into understanding the need to work harder in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] because even to want to even help participate in the Christmas parade was something they found offensive merely because of the color of my skin. I will show you one of the little things in the book here that where they gave me one of these little--Jaycees, after that they took nominations for outstanding citizens and so somebody wrote and put in an application for me, so it forced the Jaycees to even though they weren't going to let me be a member they had to acknowledge that I was one of the outstanding citizens in the little community (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But they--it was, it was again, another tactic that we used. Story_ID: 322303 Speaker 1: I think one of the things that we skipped, we're skipping over is how your stature grew probably before you left high school [Lincoln High School, Franklin, Kentucky] in that community. I mean it just doesn't happen that somebody says well I'm moving on, but I think you should be president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Franklin-Simpson County, Kentucky] and all the people say, "Absolutely, that's the person." Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I, I wanted to ask of you two questions and just so I don't--the first question is going to be, when you went to take, get that job [Potter & Brumfield, Inc., American Machine and Foundry Company] you, your stature was considerable because you were working within your community in various aspects. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Aunt Fred [Frederick Harris (ph.)] and Aunt--Uncle Lenny [Lenny Harris (ph.)] had passed, you were really taking care of yourself and but yet you were doing civic work and church work so that your stature was fairly high, talk about that to us, I know. Speaker 2: Well, I guess (laughter). Speaker 1: I know you don't like to talk about yourself, but go ahead. Speaker 2: (Laughter) to some degree you may be true, it may be true. I, as I said to you earlier just been indoctrinated to be in church every, every waking hour almost, only way out (laughter) and the only out that you had but after Aunt Fred passed and my uncle Edmund Johnson, Reverend Edmund Johnson came and stayed with me oh for several months and so I wasn't totally by myself but then he called to a church in Paris, in Horse Cave, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Actually, first, and Horse Cave which was about sixty miles up the road and so they moved there and then later onto Lexington [Kentucky] a few years later, but they--it kind of left me there by myself and they would call back from time to time and said, "John [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson], you know you're welcome to come" and so forth, but nevertheless the--what happened during that time I got a job, initially working as a short-order cook I guess in a little restaurant or community joint for lack of a better term. Well they didn't sell alcohol or anything but it was a place where kids would hang out and there was a juke box and pool tables and you could come and get something to eat and so forth and so I worked there for years for fifteen--not for years for some while for fifteen dollars a week and finally got up to twenty dollars a week and that was right decent little money. Sometimes you know. Speaker 1: Was this before you graduated? Speaker 2: This was before I graduated from high school. Sometimes you would get there and I wasn't the only child like that. There was something called a Lotta Cola you could get for five cents at that time, and it was a long tall cola and you get something, not a honey bun, but some other little cake. You can eat that and drink that and it would just swell your stomach up and so you were full for the day. Story_ID: 322304 Speaker 1: But those are just some of the experiences you, you went through. We, when we organized, or when I became president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Franklin-Simpson County, Kentucky], well, what'll you do? There were several issues that we wanted to confront but there was real resistance even among some of the black community. You had a core group of people who were willing to address issues but by and large there was a great fear factor in a small town like that of being overly identified with the NAACP. One of the projects we initiated was a little community park, and so we agreed that maybe we can do some things for ourselves, let's start there, and so people gave fifty cents, a dollar, two dollars and we went around and took up some money. We raised six hundred [dollars] or seven hundred dollars and brought some playground equipment. Mrs. Lula Bradley [ph.], a very elderly lady owned a piece of land and I went to ask Ms. Bradley could we use that land. She said well if you want to clean it off. It had grown up in bushes and (unclear), and so several guys James Bailey, O'Neal Torrance--I can't--there are three or four of them. They came over and mowed off the land and leveled it off and we bought some playground equipment and made a little playground in the community. The truth is that playground now was moved, the city ran a street through there and it's become one of the nicer facilities where the city funds it and keeps it operational now, but it was just a small effort but the word got out, the pictures got in the newspaper. I can show you a copy of some of the pictures, and the powers that be thought it was a great thing that the NAACP had organized its playground and so the folk who had--were doing domestic work and talking to the their white employers were--discussed well the NAACP's doing--are you all a part of this (unclear)? And so everybody became wanting to be a part of a success story you know? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 322305 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, a few months after that we [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), Franklin-Simpson County, Kentucky] then filed a complaint to integrate the swimming pool. The second hearing that the Kentucky Commission on Human Rights held. The first one was in Campbellsville, Kentucky to integrate the swimming pool. The second one in the history of the Kentucky commission took place in my little hometown [Franklin, Kentucky]. We found a couple of young men to go to swim and Larry Holder and William Harris were the young men's name, and they agreed to go and try---they had the ability to swim, let's start there, they knew how to swim and it would've been a shame to get them to go in there if they couldn't swim. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But they were agreed to go and their parents agreed that they could go and they went to swim and they were denied, and once denied we then got them to file a complaint with the Kentucky Commission on Human Rights, and to file--and the commission came to town and ruled and integrated the pool. I go there now and, Paul, you'll see black and white children jumping in the pool, thinking nothing about it, I mean but at that time it was a big mess and the people were complaining that it was a private pool, the money had been raised by the Veterans of Foreign Wars [Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States, Inc.] and all this. They went on and on and on and black people would come to argue with me about "John [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson], you're doing the wrong thing, and the white people are upset about what you're doing and you know you shouldn't be doing this" and so forth, but like I said over a period of time now no one thinks twice about it. I mean the kids go up and there and play and you don't even know that the incident ever occurred. This was all during the period around the period of the assassination of Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and then of Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert Francis "Bobby" Kennedy]. I was working in the stockroom as I mentioned to you in the factory [Potter & Brumfield, Inc., American Machine and Foundry Company] and I never will forget and I'll show you a copy of the clipping. One day--in the stockroom my job was to--one of my jobs was to weigh out parts, so you have these scales and get down certain products, you lay them in the scales and weigh out the stuff. For every one you put in here, it's the equivalent of one hundred pieces in the largest scale and so forth, and so I would, was doing that and I came to my scale and kind of a darkened area of this supply company and there was a news clipping about our effort to integrate the swimming pool with Ku Klux Klan, KKK written across it, and the Klan was quite active in that general area of the state. I was not scared to death, but it was not a comfortable feeling, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 322306 Speaker 1: I had not had an experience working with white people that much, growing up in a segregated community--always been subjected to having to do work for white people, and I came to realize that there were some dumb white people on this earth, too working in the factory [Potter & Brumfield, Inc., American Machine and Foundry Company] (laughter) and that I had as much skill as about anybody there. Could do about what anyone, what any of my white co-workers could do and most of them, ninety-nine percent of them were genuinely decent people, let me not mislead you. The day--but I was harassed continuously by a small group of people. There would, they like to joke and pick after you. They would--"There comes Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]" they say after Martin King's death 'cause they knew it would infuriate me and would just to ignore it and they would snigger and talk behind you, loud enough for you to hear, but not loud enough for their supervisors to hear you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so one day it just happened the day after Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert Francis "Bobby" Kennedy] was killed, I was in a part of the stockroom where there's a large fenced-in gate and there they kept the more valuable products in the stockroom, so I was there weighing out some things in the scale and one of these guys came up to the gate and the "cage" they called it, and looked in said, "We got you didn't we"? I said, "What"? He said, "We killed another one them nigger lovers yesterday," said, "I told you" and I said, "Boy, go on and leave me alone." I won't give you his name now. I said, "Leave me alone I don't wanna joke about that." He said, "Look at you in a cage just like a monkey, just like we took you outta Africa". I said, "Look, I told you, you S-O-B. Go on about your business, don't mess with me." I was like most people in the country was shaken by the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --death of Bobby Kennedy [Robert "Bobby" Kennedy] and obviously the death of Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and he said something else to me about looking like in a cage where you belong, and I took my fist and hit at him and I felt just like a crazy man. I knew my fist would not go through that barb wire but it was meshed wire-- Speaker 2: --meshed wire-- Speaker 1: --and I knew my hand, and it cut my hand and I started to bleed. For years that scar was right there on my hand, but, Paul, the--I knew then I'd had to come out of it. That wasn't--I didn't know how I was gonna make a living, well but I couldn't go back to work there. I went home for lunch that day and I called a friend who I had done some work with some--a group called The Kentucky Institute for Community Development, the poverty program had just come into development then and I had met some people and was serving on some of these little advisory committees and so I. Speaker 2: And President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was president at that time? Speaker 1: Yes, yes and initiated the War on Poverty, the Office of Economic Opportunity. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And, so the guy said, "Well, John [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson], come on up to Bowling Green [Kentucky], we'll find a job for you." It's where the office was. So I didn't go back to work that evening, and I called--I went on up for an interview and many of my friends said, "John, it's crazy to leave the factory," the factory was good work for people and you go in to work for one of those government programs where the funding, you don't know from year to year and I often say I thank the Good Lord there hasn't a day since then that I haven't had a job of some sort. The--most of my friends who worked in the factory because they didn't have unions--the factory--they've lost their jobs. The factory's downsized, it's merged and you know they found other employment over a period of time, but our fear that department was leaving a situation which we thought was a safe job situation. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The--but Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock], I left there and went to work for something called the Kentucky Institute for Community Development. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: KICD [Kentucky Institute for Community Development], their job was to work in setting up community action agencies and poverty program activities around the state of Kentucky, and so I spent a lot of time in Eastern Kentucky where there are lot of low income rural white people and helping them organize communities, writing proposals, seeking fundings, developing job training programs, all sorts of things and gave me an enormous amount of experience in community organization, how to build communities, how to help organize communities, how to seek funding for community activities and that sort of thing. Story_ID: 322307 Speaker 1: On the personal side of life I should tell you that my wife, Courtrina [Courtrina Patterson Johnson], and I have been very blessed. We have seven children, all the which are adults and now some fourteen grandchildren, they multiply like rabbits, man (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wow, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: But I--the year after I graduated in 1960-- Speaker 2: Three [1963]? Speaker 1: --Four [1964]. Speaker 2: Oh, '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: In '64 [1964] my first child [Gloria Edmonds] born and so I'm now in my second marriage. I had four children in my first marriage to [Jean Johnson] and my wife had three and so between the two of us we have seven children and they've lived with us part-time, all of them at some point, and so they're all grown and we thank the good Lord doing quite well on their own. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Story_ID: 322308 Speaker 1: I had a question. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And that question goes back to that first promotion, there you are at the factory [Potter & Brumfield, Inc., American Machine and Foundry Company]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You and Joe Billy [Joe Billy Barbee], and Joe Billy was promoted to the assembly line, now were there any other blacks at that time or had, had the factory changed? You went into the stockroom, had there been any other blacks there in the stockroom? Speaker 2: There were no other blacks in the stockroom or on the assembly line at that time in that factory. Now, over-- Speaker 1: And so you and Joe Billy-- Speaker 2: --Were the first (laughter). Speaker 1: --integrated (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes (laughter) that particular factory and the other factories were beginning to employ blacks and after that period and--to do things other than custodial work. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I had--others, others were employed at Potter & Brumfield as time moved on, but it was it a couple of months or so I think before anyone else was employed in the factory to do anything other than custodial work at that time. Speaker 1: Okay and how, how did they, they did not come in, in that year and a half? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no. Speaker 1: They came after that? Speaker 2: After Joe Billy and I kinda got our other jobs then they began to hire other people, and I guess this must've been maybe '65 [1965] the latter part of '64 [1964] or early '65 [1965] something like that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 322309 Speaker 1: Seems to me that your reputation in the community [Franklin, Kentucky] was growing, even before you went to that job at the factory [Potter & Brumfield, Inc., American Machine and Foundry Company], and of course during that period. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, once as you know having worked for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at some other point in your own life, the NAACP affords you a reasonably high-profile role. It doesn't pay you anything (laughter), these people are all volunteers, but people do tend to come to you if they feel themselves the victims of discrimination, and so one of my volunteer jobs in the community was to try to help people deal with their issues. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so aside from trying to work with the playground, there were people who were being discriminated against and we would often try to arrange for them to get counseling from the state human rights commission [Kentucky Commission on Human Rights], or from other entities that were set up to ensure equal opportunity. I had gotten into a position where I was on several committees and boards that related to the poverty programs and the funding coming into communities. As a matter of fact, during that period at one time when the funding for Head Start came to our community, we asked them to withhold Head Start funding unless they would give black teachers an opportunity to get some of the jobs and some of the black teachers were even fearful of applying for these Head Start jobs. It was right decent little money in the summer, but they, they tried to--the powers that be, all of which happen to be white wanted that money in their controlled environment so that they can determine who's gonna get what jobs and do what, and it was only when we challenged and when we went to the federal government and said, wait a minute. This money's supposed to be used in a non-discriminatory manner and they then put on conditions of how many black applicants have you received? Have you interviewed any of them? Have you considered them--and some black people got some jobs. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so over that period of time, yes, the-I guess that was my little responsibility in the community to try to help push those issues (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But even-- Story_ID: 322310 Speaker 1: During that period, a little earlier following Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination the cities were on fire all over the country, following Kennedy [Senator Robert Francis "Bobby" Kennedy]. The Civil Rights Movement was picking up on a daily basis, on television and so forth and yet there in Franklin County [sic. Simpson County, Kentucky] you were pushing whereas several years before you may have been opposed, they were looking for a way for accommodations. So talk to us about your working relationships with the structure there in Franklin County? Speaker 2: Yeah, interesting, there, there's a lot to be said it was Franklin, Kentucky and Simpson County. Speaker 1: Simpson County, right. Speaker 2: Yeah I'm sorry, but our little community was just forty-two miles from Nashville, Tennessee. So we actually got the Nashville [Tennessee] news media that covered--as a matter-of-fact [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond now the chair of our board [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Julian was involved with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] in those days. He was going to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] just forty miles down the road. We were very eager to try to get some of the students to come up to talk to our little community and the NAACP, and oh, this is honest truth. We were warned against bringing people in--they, you wouldn't believe today they was even a part of America, they called 'em outside agitators and if you brought people across the state line from Tennessee to Kentucky they could've been accused of coming in with the purpose of trying to create a riot. Now here's a little ole' town of ten thousand people, but they actually tried to pull that kind of intimidation because they didn't want us to bring speakers in from the community, from other communities. The police at one period of time, again honest truth, would ride through with shotguns in the car in big display. They wanted you to see these big--they'd ride through the black community slowly, just to say, "Y'all act up if you want to". I mean it was that kind of intimidation. And we actually got into these discussions about that with the human rights commissions and again we had to fight to get a human relations commission in our community to even have these discussions about how dare the police ride through people's communities, you know, with this sort of intimidative-type activity. Again, it goes on and on, we, Joe Billy [Joe Billy Barbee] and other friends of mine we would sit and talk about these situations in my home there. We--James Earl Ray who was accused of murdering Dr. King as you will recall ended up going to prison right down there in Nashville. We would often leave Franklin going toward the prison, not knowing what we were gonna do but the thought is if do no more than throw rocks at the prison walls, (laughter) we had to vent our frustration of course, and seriously I think about three times we went off down to Nashville [Tennessee], we got to the prison and realized that there were guards all around and we should not be foolish enough to throw rocks at the guards. But by that time we would find us a couple of beers and drive back (laughter) and--but the--it was just that sort of just need to express yourself to try to do something to help with the movement and, but yes there was quite a bit of--from time-to-time you would get threatening calls. They would not be anything that--ever a great threat, but a note being left on your door and that sort of thing. Story_ID: 321721 Speaker 1: Okay you have now gone to the Kentucky Institute for Community Development, you're learning to write proposals and so forth that will impact the entire state. You're still the local Franklin [Kentucky] NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Franklin-Simpson County, Kentucky] president? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay are you still dealing with problems there in equality, pay and equality and different issues? Speaker 2: Yes, at some point I did give up the presidency because the Kentucky Institute for Community Development eventually, I worked out of an office in Lexington [Kentucky] and still came to Franklin twice the week and the weekends but worked out of Lexington, but for several months I continued as president of the local NAACP. We hosted the state convention there in our hometown and developed a good working relationship with the few branches of the NAACP that existed. There were a core group of maybe ten or fifteen NAACP-ers in the state who were included and Mr. Dotson [William S. Dotson] out of Lexington who had worked for Supreme Life Insurance [Supreme Life Insurance Company of America] for years, a guy by the name of Fermon Knox of Covington [Kentucky] was our state president [Kentucky Conference of the NAACP]. There were a couple of people out of Louisville [Kentucky], a W. J. Hodge who was the director of the NAACP for the City of Louisville and a guy by the name of Curley Brown over in Paducah, Kentucky. Now these were kind of the backbone people for the NAACP in that state during that period, and. Speaker 1: Were any of them ever threatened or was there any loss of life? Speaker 2: Well I don't know. Speaker 1: Through incidents? Speaker 2: Of loss of life they were all confronted with tedious and threatening situations, even myself from time to time. You didn't put a lot of stock in it, but you were confronted with--from time-to-time you would get these calls and people would hang up and say, "We're gonna get you," or "You better watch out", that kind of stuff and you'd wonder, well who in the world is this?, or, do I know this voice?-type of thing. A couple of times there were notes left on your door and that sort of thing (background noise). Story_ID: 321722 Speaker 1: The incident that actually put me in touch with people with the national NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had to do with Lawrence Rainey. I don't know if you--I'm sure you recall when the three civil rights workers were killed in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and Mississippi, and-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: -- Neshoba County [Mississippi], and remember their bodies were buried with a bulldozer and so forth and the [U.S.] Navy and everybody was there finally discovered. If you saw the movie 'Mississippi Burning' you will recall that all of the law enforcement officials there at that time served some time or were under investigation except for the sheriff. The sheriff was named Lawrence Rainey. I'm not sure what happened, there is some rumors that say he had turned state's evidence and so the state allowed him to walk. He married a girl in my little hometown from Franklin, Kentucky of all places. The mayor of our city was from Mississippi originally. We had an opening for a chief of police position. The mayor of my little hometown wanted to make Lawrence Rainey the chief of police, now this is Lawrence who was sheriff in Philadelphia, Mississippi in the Neshoba County. You will recall the sheriffs of the South of that time very brazen people, I can't even recall their names, I used to know them, but Lawrence Rainey was rated among some of the worst racist sheriffs in the country in the South at that time. Here I'm president of the little NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Franklin-Simpson County, Kentucky] and they planned to bring this man here, and so we obviously opposed his being appointed as chief of police in our city, and the mayor persisted and so there was a city council meeting and we called the national office to ask for help and they sent a couple of employees down to work with us and we did research and we put it out all around the community, and the interesting thing, Paul, there used to be something called colored fairs and these were where black people and white people had their fair or county fairs and there was a colored fair that would come to town and in the stories about Sheriff Rainey and Philadelphia--Mississippi is when he would--it come nine thirty or ten o'clock he would come and stand in front of the flood light and cross his arms, and so the flood light would cast a shadow of Sheriff [Lawrence] Rainey and everybody would say, "Here's the sheriff, it's time for us to go," and people would frighten, be frightened and scattered 'cause the sheriff had come, he'd just say. So at any rate when we opposed it, the mayor called me one afternoon. He had a seed store about three blocks from where I lived off the outskirts of the black community and said, "John [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson], would you come over here, I wanna talk to you." The NAACP taught me over the years through their training materials they would send out, that you never go alone. You never go to a meeting by yourself, but not even thinking of what I was doing and that's the honest to goodness truth about dusk, dark I take off and just walk up a few blocks, I had a car at that time, but I didn't drive and I walked up to Hale Street that's now John Johnson Street [John J. Johnson Avenue]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And turned left and that's where his feed store was, walked up a couple of blocks and there were all kind of stories about Lawrence Rainey, one of which I will tell you, it's not a very nice story to tell, but he was known for wearing these cowboy boots, these western boots. Now I enjoy cowboy boots 'cause they reinforce my ankles and so forth. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But I have had this fixation in my mind against--I wear square toe boots, I won't wear pointed-toe boots because the word that Lawrence Rainey use to kick black people and take the toe of that boot and try to stick it up in one's rectum just to damage them physically. Whether these stories are true or not I don't know, but the--that was the image that he had. So I walked into the feed store and down this hallway where the mayor's office was for his business. He was sitting, he was saying "Johnny, is that you"? And I said, "Yeah." "Come on in." As I looked down that hall I saw these cowboy boots, a gentlemen's leg was crossed like that and the kind this boot was stuck out, and it appeared to me, Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock], oh it wasn't twenty feet, but it looked like to be it was a mile walk down there and I said I know that's Lawrence Rainey sitting there in my mind. I'm by myself, when I walk down this thing, how am I gonna deal with this character? So I go down this hallway and walk into the office. "Good afternoon," the mayor said. "Hey, how you doing, I want you to meet Lawrence Rainey." Well this little guy stood up and, Paul, he wasn't as tall as I was. I said I could whip him myself (laughter) you know, the image you had was this great big brazen character, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 321723 Speaker 1: He [Lawrence Rainey] wanted to talk about how his image had been not truthfully told. He wasn't all this bad of a person and so forth and so on. I explained to him whether he was or not I thought he would understand that it just wouldn't make for good race relations in our community and whether he was guilty or not was not place to stand in judgment at point, the courts would make those decisions somehow, but it was not in the best interest of our community at that time that he be the chief of police. The mayor was saying, "Well, John [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson] I'd hoped we could convince you to see things our way," and over a period of time, Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock], I think you, as you know there are oftentimes people are offered all sorts of things. You have to try to stand on principal as best you can. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I told him, no, I could just not see supporting Lawrence Rainey to be our chief of police and we left the conversation with some dignity and in a polite manner and I walked back home. Afterwards there was the city council meeting and they had three or four city council meetings, again with the intent of trying to employ Lawrence Rainey. We had organized and leafleted the community with background on Lawrence Rainey. As a matter-of-fact you will recall Medgar Evers was killed in '63 [1963] and his brother Charles Evers had taken the position as the state field director in Mississippi. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So we called Charles Evers and said there's gonna be a hearing, would you come and join us to oppose the hiring of this sheriff, and he said "I'll do everything I can," said, "He should not be sheriff" and he talked about the experiences they've had with him in Mississippi and so forth, and so we alerted the news media in Nashville [Tennessee] and all around and so about an hour or so before we got a telegram from Charles [Evers] saying he missed his flight, he couldn't come, but we had done what we needed. We got his word out you know that he was gonna be there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So at any rate we were going up the steps, I never will forget, and a friend of mine who worked for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the cameras were all around, so people speaking, but we--let me just stop there and say to you, as we walked downtown it was not intended to be any sort of demonstration. We had asked people to come to the city council meeting, but people came outta their homes, Paul, guess--and as we got downtown [Franklin, Kentucky] the streets were full of people, ministers who had never been outspoken on the issue of the school teachers and people who had never been actively involved, were just coming outta their homes and walking with us. Downtown was only like four or five blocks and so the two guys and I said we'd just leave the house and walk on downtown, and but as we walked other started walking with us and there--the streets just swelled with people, for our little community. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And when we got there, there obviously was not enough room for everybody to get in but it made a statement. The city did not hire Lawrence Rainey needless to say and he worked there for years as an auto mechanic in some place. I saw him on the-- Speaker 2: --oh, okay-- Speaker 1: I don't know, it was one of these morning news shows a year or so back as several, forty years later and I think he's moved away from there now, but he never did become the chief of police. Speaker 2: So you had a successful campaign. Speaker 1: Yes, another success, yes. Speaker 2: Did that increase the membership of the NAACP? Speaker 1: Well it did and the visibility and the respect of the organization I think. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Even the decent white folk in the community did not want him to be chief of police, but there was that segment, the political segment controlled by the mayor who was pushing it very heavily. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We had gotten a couple of the newspapers in Russellville [Kentucky] and other surrounding towns to write editorials, "Why would our neighbors in Franklin even consider that?" Finally, the Franklin paper joined them, but it was only because of pressures from the other papers around the state. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I've always admired the gentleman who was the editor of the paper who now heads Kentucky Public Television [Kentucky Educational Television] in the state of Kentucky, but he then was the editor of the Russellville paper. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they wrote the first editorial, why would our friends and our neighbor in Simpson County [Kentucky] even consider this? and--but we were successful, yes. Story_ID: 321724 Speaker 1: There came a time when you decided you were going to give up the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Franklin-Simpson County, Kentucky] presidency because you needed to concentrate on the Kentucky Institute for Community Development? Speaker 2: Yes, and I at that time I had did a lot of volunteer work for the state NAACP [Kentucky Conference of the NAACP] as well. Fermon Knox was our state president and he would ask me to help get the minutes together, the notices for the meetings and that sort of thing and I was working for the Kentucky Institute for Community Development and we spent a lot of time going around the state helping communities organize and to apply for grants, particularly in the eastern part of the state. Over a year or so. Speaker 1: What year did you leave the NAACP as president, I mean the. Speaker 2: Local branch? Speaker 1: The local branch. Speaker 2: That may have been in 1969. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'll have to double check, '69 [1969] or '70 [1970], and after about a year with the Kentucky Institute I was offered a job as the director of community services for the Southern Kentucky Economic Opportunity Council [Southern Kentucky Economic Opportunity Council, Inc., Bowling Green, Kentucky]. That included six or--seven counties in Southern Kentucky, including my home county [Simpson County, Kentucky] and the director there had asked me, "Rather than running over all the state, John, would you come home and help us?" with the seven counties that they were responsible for and so I did and worked there to organize, to get grants for community centers and daycare programs and senior citizen centers and things like that, that we ran in those seven counties and it was a lot of good work, I felt very positive about it. In the meantime, the friends that I had met, as a matter of fact, two of the gentlemen who had come down to help us on the Lawrence Rainey situation had opened up a marketing research firm in New York [New York] and they had called me about coming to work for them and the idea of going to New York just was totally beyond my scope of imagination. I should tell you before I get to that story though to say to you that when I was directing the Southern Kentucky--director of Southern operations for the Southern Kentucky Economic Opportunity Council, periodically as we looked out in the communities and tried to bring funds into communities, again there was this effort by the power structures in many of those communities to control those funds, to limit it to the white, the controlling class, and I never will forget several times we had to challenge them on what they were wanting to do and say if you want this money and we had to call in reinforcements and help from the Federal government and from time to time people were somewhat reluctant and thought that I was going too far and I never will forget one of the analysts that the Office of Economic Opportunity sent to Bowling Green [Kentucky] to look at our program to see what we were doing and by way of equal opportunity and affirmative action was a person from Florida who had been heavily involved in the NAACP, and so for folk who thought I was doing too much reaching out to the NAACP and other groups, they--it was so interesting because he came and he was strongly supportive but why is the NAACP not more involved (laughter) and did we have enough blacks on the boards? Are there enough blacks being employed? And that sort of thing. And so that was such a reinforcing mechanism. Story_ID: 321725 Speaker 1: One of the experiences at the Kentucky Institute for Community Development that I failed to tell you about, one of the times we went to Eastern Kentucky we went over to a place call Hazard, Kentucky. There is a hotel called the La Citadelle [Hazard, Kentucky] that sits up on a mountain that I understand the last few years they've closed that road but you would go around this winding road, about a mile up this hill and this big, beautiful hotel is up there and we had rented that hotel to do some training for that week, and so we were not using the facility in the evening and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Hazard wanted to have a meeting and we said, "Well, would you like to meet here? We have rented these facilities." And they had never had a meeting up there so they were tickled to death and these people are the salt of the earth. I mean they were just genuinely decent people in the community but they were--and so they came up for the meeting and the person who was the manager, I don't know if he owned the hotel or not approached our director and said, "Look, we rented you this space so you could have some meetings, but not for the NAACP." So we said, "It's just a meeting of a community group, the NAACP's just another community group that we work with," and we were paying for it. And he said, "No we can't allow them to meet here," so I said, "If the NAACP can't meet here, then none of our--and we'll take all of the programs for the rest of the week and meet somewhere else." They would rather lose that money than allow the NAACP--this little group of churchgoing folk (laughter), I mean basically a half a dozen little people who were gonna come to meet, and once we threatened to do that the next day the--somebody came back and said, "Oh, we're sorry we should've have never said that," and so forth, you know, but it was just that sort of thing that you, you were dealing with. Story_ID: 321726 Speaker 1: But to go back to Bowing Green [Kentucky] and the Kentucky--Southern Kentucky Economic Opportunity Council [Southern Kentucky Economic Opportunity Council, Inc.], the fellows that I had met had set up a marketing research firm. They had left the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and that's at the point, this was in 1970 I guess it was. At that the point that we were looking at black pride, that James Brown song, 'I'm Black and I'm Proud' ['Say It Loud - I'm Black and I'm Proud'], and people going through this whole thing of black buying power and so forth, and so these gentlemen had opened up a marketing research firm and among the things they were doing was looking at how to increase black buying power and where blacks were spending their money and all kind of companies were saying, "Wait a minute, now black folk are making money and they're getting equal opportunities, we will need to reach out to them." One of the companies we had--I never will forget was Camel cigarettes. You may recall the ad, Walk a Mile for a Camel, they used to have. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the people [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company] that owned Camel cigarettes were concerned that if you put an ad up in Harlem [New York, New York], a billboard up in Harlem and there is this black guy with a hole in his shoe because the commercial if you will recall was walk--this guy walked a mile for a Camel so he had a hole in his shoe and he was a popular thing, but black people with this black pride thing and you know, we're gonna dress properly, we're gonna act properly and so forth. If you saw an ad with a black guy with a hole in his shoe would that be sending the wrong signal to the black community? So they were quite sensitive to that. So we, I never will forget I took and bought some people down in Atlanta. We did a study in Atlanta [Georgia], Boston [Massachusetts], Los Angeles [California]--I think five cities, and basically they looked through this little View-Master and see this potential and said, "This would you--that make you buy a Camel?" or "Would you not buy a Camel as a result of that?" that sort of thing and what we found out basically was any who smoked Camel was hooked on them anyway. The cigarette was so strong it didn't stop people from buying it (laughter). On the other hand, the--it did not encourage to buy them either. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so it was interesting, but it was that sort of. Speaker 2: But you did go with. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The marketing research firm (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so, so, I moved to New York and not--it was a whole lot of money. It was more money than I'd ever made in my life and lived right there at 10 West 66th Street in a very nice area, right off of Tavern on the Green there in Midtown, Manhattan [New York, New York] and it was a very nice area. I worked there for about a year. Story_ID: 321727 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, at some point your career, after you left high school [Lincoln High School, Franklin, Kentucky] and got this job and you're president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, Franklin-Simpson County, Kentucky]--your home life, you met a young lady and got married and started to have some children, we don't wanna leave that, that. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: Part out. Speaker 2: The--my first wife and I divorced, we have wonderful children (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was her name? Speaker 2: Jean Johnson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And. Speaker 1: You have three you say? Speaker 2: We have four children. Speaker 1: Four children? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. And we were blessed with four wonderful children and they've all been extremely supportive and continue to be to today and-- Speaker 1: Do you think your activities in the NAACP and all of the other things you were getting involved in, in the community played a role in that? Speaker 2: Well, sure I, I know they did. You have some real mixed thoughts of about how much time do you spend at home versus how much you spend on the road and going to meetings and that sort of thing, and so it does have a, an effect. My children have gone with me. Over the years we, Courtrina [Courtrina Patterson Johnson] and I've loaded them up in cars and took them three NAACP national conventions for years, so they've kinda grown up in the NAACP. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They're not that active these days, I think they feel they've paid their dues (laughter) in growing up, but every year the National Convention, all seven of 'em piled in their cars and went with us. I had real problems that's why I ended up leaving New York [New York] and coming back. I just didn't wanna be that far away from my children, and-- Speaker 1: Right, let's establish a timeline. Speaker 2: Yah, um-hum. Speaker 1: Jean Johnson and four children, you got married, what year? Speaker 2: What year did we get married? In I guess it was 1965, '64 [1964] or '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were married for about five years, and. Speaker 1: Okay and then around 1970 you and Courtrina? Speaker 2: No, Courtrina and I got married in--was it '70 [1970]? I don't even know. Don't tell her that I don't know the date (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: In 1970, 1970 you're right, it's '70 [1970] or--1970 we were married. As a matter-of-fact we've been married this year, I think we'll be married twenty-nine years this year. Speaker 1: Okay, and I just wanted to get a--so now going to New York [New York] you're gonna be separated from your family? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: How did Courtrina feel about that? Speaker 2: Well, Courtrina and I were not married then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was before Courtrina and I got married. The--but we--my first wife didn't care much for the idea. We had separated actually, but the--I just didn't want to be that far away from my children. Story_ID: 321728 Speaker 1: And while I was making respectable money, more than I'd ever made, I didn't feel the sense of mission in life. I mean I wasn't involved in community activities; I wasn't involved in the church. For weeks I would just go and look at the buildings and the size of the city and the and you hear people coming from the country and coming and just looking at the tall buildings, literally I would do that and still do it when I'm in New York [New York] often, but it's just amazing to me you know the size of the city and the scope of the city but I got many, many good experiences and training opportunities there and go to meet with the heads of ten meetings where discussions were taken about--talking about major companies in the country and their ability to market their product and so there's nothing like first hands, hands-on experience (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Story_ID: 321729 Speaker 1: And actually, I came back to Kentucky with the intent--I had--arranged to meet with Gloster Current [Gloster B. Current]. Gloster Current was the director of branches for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] for years and I will show you some correspondence Gloster sent me over the years after he retired, but I had talked with him about taking a job as the Region III Youth Director for the NAACP, and he said "Well, John [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson], I know of your work and I know what you did in Kentucky and there in fact what you did your local branch and everything and if you get a haircut I'll give you a job." I had an afro way out here, I'll show you a picture (laughter) of it. Gloster didn't think much of the afro, and so I said "Okay," but I came back to Kentucky to spend a week with my children before going to Ohio and when I came back I got a call from Fermon Knox who then directed the Community Action Agency in Louisville [Kentucky]. Fermon was the president of the state NAACP [Kentucky Conference of the NAACP]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he said, "John, rather than you going to Ohio, would you come up here and run the training department for the Community Action Agency," I mean for--yes the Community Action Agency for Louisville and Jefferson County [Kentucky] and so I said, well, rather than living in Columbus [Ohio] that would put me much closer to my children, I can just be, you know a hundred miles away rather than three hundred miles away. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And see them often, so I did and I took a job there and worked for that agency for several years. First, as the director of training where we provided training, again for people in proposal writing, very basic skills. Speaker 2: What year did you take that job? Speaker 1: I will give you a resume that has all those years on it (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, that's fine. Speaker 1: I just can't, I can't quite think right his moment, that-- Speaker 2: Sure. Story_ID: 321730 Speaker 1: Then there became an opening to be the director of center operations there. There were ten communities in Jefferson County and he [Fermon Knox] asked me if I would take that job being responsible for each of those ten centers. There was a center director in each of those reporting to me for their budgets and their programmatic evaluations and so forth. Speaker 2: Okay, Jefferson County [Kentucky] was in Louisville [Kentucky]? Speaker 1: Louisville is in Jefferson County. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's the largest metropolitan area in the state, and so I did that and again the lowest income area, the largest concentration of low income people was in a section called Park DuValle [Louisville, Kentucky], and while again I appreciated having the opportunity to manage this whole thing for the whole county, I felt like I wanted to be closer to where the action was and so I asked if I could become the director of the Park DuValle neighborhood services center. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they didn't change my salary or anything, it was agreed if that's what I wanted and so I ran the neighborhood services center. The gentleman, who ended up being mayor for Louisville, ran the sister, companion program, which was the neighborhood health center, Harvey Sloan was his name and but he ran the health center and I ran the services center and we looked at community growth and community development there. One of my closest friends was a gentleman by the name of Leo Lesser. Leo was a A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] minister, he and A.D. King [Alfred Daniel Williams King], Martin King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] brother were the closest of friends. Speaker 2: Leo directed the--was the associate director for the Louisville and Jefferson County Human Relations Commission [Louisville Metro Human Relations Commission]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so we worked closely together. You may recall that A.D. King moved back to Atlanta [Georgia] after Martin's death and ended up being killed in a swimming pool, dying in the swimming pool there in his family's swimming pool at home. Leo served as a member of SCLC's [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] national board and coordinated SCLC work as a volunteer in Kentucky. After Leo was found dead in his home, a part of his job was to look at the police department and issues related to police brutality. Story_ID: 322311 Speaker 1: Okay, you're in Louisville [Kentucky] and something happens and you become the associate director? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was telling you about my friend Leo Lesser. Leo was the associate director of the Louisville and Jefferson County Human Relations Commission [Louisville Metro Human Relations Commission] and he--one of his responsibilities was to look at charges of police abuse and he was pushing hard for civilian review boards. Matter of fact, Leo had ran for mayor of Louisville [Kentucky] and we use to laugh about it. That was my second time trying to coordinate a political campaign. I coordinated his campaign for mayor of the city of Louisville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Leo was--he used to say he got more people out of jail than voted for him (laughter), everybody respected him but once he, once he ran for office and he ran against Harvey Sloan [Harvey I. Sloan], who I told you ended up being mayor, Harvey beat him, and but-- Speaker 1: Now did you coordinate Harvey Sloan's (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, I coordinated Leo Lesser's campaign. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: For mayor, this was the black candidate. Harvey was a white medical doctor who ran the neighborhood health center. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: In Park DuValle [Louisville, Kentucky], and I ran the service center so we were friends and co-workers but my allegiance was closer to Leo-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: a black minister who had done some real strong civil rights work over many, many years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A whole struggle for open housing in Louisville and housing desegregation. It's just not time to go into all of that but he had spearheaded much of that in that city. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he ran for mayor and he lost and shortly after that he took--went back to his job at the Human Relations Commission, and Leo was found dead in his home. Supposedly from an overdose of drugs. I had known Leo for several years, I'd never known Leo to use drugs in any way, but the police found him there and I will show you some clippings on Leo's life and his death. After that I was asked to take the job as--that Leo had. It's a very sensitive time in the City of Louisville and so I did, the title was associate director for crisis intervention and community relations, in other words admit you were the black person for when black folks decide to riot you're supposed to out there and be able to stop them and so forth. Story_ID: 322312 Speaker 1: And during that period, and so I took that job and, the--and served there for a year or so. That was during the period of school desegregation of busing in Louisville [Kentucky]. You may recall the city of Boston, Massachusetts and Louise Day Hicks in Boston headed something called Save Our Community Schools [sic. Restore Our Alienated Rights], the same type of activity was going on in Louisville. She would come to Louisville often trying to organize and the nightly news, national news would flash from Louisville to Boston to show the, all of the drama around busing as a tool for integration. At that time I was the associate director of the Human Relations Commission [Louisville and Jefferson County Human Relations Commission; Louisville Metro Human Relations Commission] and spent a lot of time working with teachers and parents, and PTA [Parent Teacher Association]-type groups in terms of trying quell community unrest, trying to deal with programs to deal with race relations, trying to monitor what was happening. I'll never will forget going out into an area called Fairdale, low-income white area of the county [Jefferson County, Kentucky] where black children had been bused and--older white--these were like third, fourth and fifth graders. Older white children out there throwing rocks at the buses and busting the windows and the kids down on their knees trying to keep from getting hit by the rocks that were being thrown through the windows of the buses and I came back and jumped the mayor about it and he got right on top of that. I have to give him credit. I didn't know how he was gonna react because I was obviously overly emotional about what was going on, and, but he was very supportive and did try to do what he could to stop it, but the history books will tell you a lot about what happened in the Louisville and in Boston (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 322313 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you were right in the middle of it? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm afraid so. Speaker 1: And because the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was very active in that you were interacting? Speaker 2: Yes--doubly in there. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I ran into some situations. At that time I had been the state president of the NAACP [Kentucky Conference of the NAACP]. When I returned to Kentucky from New York [New York], we had only about four NAACP chapters active in the State of Kentucky, and the people in the leadership of the NAACP asked if I would serve as the state president. I really had not thought about doing it but they needed some help when I left and moved to, came to Baltimore [Maryland] to live and then gave up the presidency after fourteen years later we had forty two chapters of the NAACP in that city (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very good. Speaker 2: In that state I'm trying to say, but at that time we had only four active. Speaker 1: What year did you accept the state presidency? Speaker 2: I believe that was in 1972. Story_ID: 322314 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right after you had assumed the role there at Louisville [Kentucky]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Good, you know. Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, and when I took the job at the local human relations commission [Louisville and Jefferson County Human Relations Commission; Louisville Metro Human Relations Commission], some of the commission members felt like that I should not serve as the state president of the NAACP [Kentucky Conference of the NAACP] and as an employee of the Human Relations Commission and so that became kind of an in-house battle and I gave up the presidency for a year and the following year took a job as the director of--an assistant director for the Kentucky Commission on Human Rights. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which was right up the street, but that was a statewide agency. There they had no problem with me being the state president of the NAACP and so I continued then to serve as president of the state NAACP and worked for the Kentucky Commission on Human Rights. There was some fourteen different cities where we set up human relations commissions. We worked with black people to try to encourage them to run for elective office in the state. We had very few black elected officials and I never will forget having meetings after meetings about trying to get blacks to run for the school board. The people were just reluctant to do it, didn't think they could do it and we would say, "Well, look don't you know some people in that school that you think you could represent folks just as well as they are?" and over a period of time we were able to get that done, but so for roughly ten years or so I worked for the Kentucky Commission on Human Rights. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And setting up human relations commissions dealing with problems related to race relations in the state; worked on a multitude of things. We thought during that period that Klan [Ku Klux Klan (KKK)] activity was a thing of the past, and I never will forget getting a call one day from an NAACP chapter in the rural part of the state about Klan signs that were being circulated in the community. I thought this guy was just over-reacting. He said, "No, John [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson], there are Klan signs." I said, "Klan is outdated, nobody's in the Klan." I mean now the Klan people walk around boldly telling you who they are, but we thought that actually it was something of our past, that we would not have to deal with. So I drove down to this little city and sure enough there were Klan signs being posted all around and before long they were having meetings all over the state, but again it's just one of the many, many issues we dealt with there. Story_ID: 322315 Speaker 1: That was a very turbulent time in a state that was not particularly noted for violence in past years, of course, during the busing era-- Speaker 2: It became different. Speaker 1: --violence did-- Speaker 2: Yes, correct. Speaker 1: --visit your state, where I'm going with the question is most of the people in your State and you may already answered it by the number of chapters as you become president there in the entire state for--but what were the reactions that you were getting as you reached out for people to become involved in that struggle? Speaker 2: To be honest with you one of the successes in organizing NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapters as we would get complaints even at the state human rights commission [Kentucky Commission on Human Rights] and we would go into the city to meet with the people about the concerns they had. We would talk about the need for them to organize a NAACP chapter or some entity in their local community, whether it's NAACP or Urban League [National Urban League] or whatever it might be, to try to continue to address these issues in a manner that gave them some control of their own community, some input--some--to build a power base in the community so that you could impact change. And so we were able to convince people all over the state to reactivate or to organize NAACP chapters so that's to a large degree how we were able to get--as issues came up and we would go to the community. I never will forget, I mentioned Hazard, Kentucky, a small community, and I remember going there one afternoon to meet with some people because there had been--because of what people were seeing on the news as much as anything. These discussions of race were creeping into the community's divisions among the race, the effort to keep blacks in one group and whites in another and that sort of thing. There had been a fight where white students had come to school with chains and guns and the black students had ended up getting into a fight. Now, I'm not trying to say that blacks can't have chains and guns too. In that instance, they didn't have 'em, and it was almost unbelievable that we thought here are these children being subjected to this sort of thing, and so we went there to meet with the parents and to try to help address those issues and but those are the types of things. I told you earlier about an incident over in the western part of the state. Kentucky has a slogan that aces, I mean coal is Kentucky's ace in the hole. It's a large coal-mining state. In Western Kentucky for years prior to automation and all of that, there were little towns where there were black townships of people that worked in the coal mines, and you hardly see any blacks in the coal mines now over in the west, over in Eastern Kentucky. In Western Kentucky there is still some blacks that work in the coal mining industry, and there you go underground, down in the ground to--and these little trains or cars, if you will to dig out the coal, and the NAACP in a couple of cities in Western Kentucky asked us to address the issues of discrimination that they were confronted with and in terms of opportunities, employment opportunities upward mobility and what have you, and those people who raised those questions going to work would then find dead rats hung with their names on them. Hung--you imagine going six feet underground or whatever in this coal mine and looking up and seeing a rat hung with a hangman's noose, a small hangman's noose, with your name on it, and you don't know if you're gonna get out of it, the type of mental anguish that it puts you through, how you deal with that. Do you--you know who has done this and what, but those people confronted that. It hasn't been that many years ago, Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock]. Story_ID: 322316 Speaker 1: I would ask you honestly the--were there nights when you (laughter) were afraid for yourself or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, not-- Speaker 1: --your family, your kids? Speaker 2: --not, not so much to be honest, the truth of the matter is I could go into a town and come out, I mean at that time I was working for state government and, or doing stuff with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], but I would basically go and meet with people and hear their concerns and try to figure out how to get them legal assistance or how to meet with the companies, and for the most part you know you stayed in a fairly, what you thought to be a secure hotel or you came on back to the city, but the people who had to continue to live there were really the people who were being victimized, and who, you feared for their lives, and they were the real heroes or heroines of the movement in my opinion. Story_ID: 322317 Speaker 1: But at any rate I then left after some years at the Kentucky Human Rights Commission [Kentucky Commission on Human Rights] and went to work for the Louisville and Jefferson County Community Action Agency [Louisville Metro Community Action Partnership] again, an agency that I had wanted to work for, for many years. At that stage all the initiatives and the monies to do imaginative programs had just about dried up, and so I worked there as the director for that agency for a little better than a year. And Ben Hooks [Historymaker Benjamin L. Hooks] had been trying for some years to get me to come work for the national office of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and prior to that I should tell you, and if I could go back to '78 [1978] and '79 [1979] where I first met you I think, we--I had served as the state president, and, of the NAACP in Kentucky, and a gentlemen who had served on our national board of directors from Kentucky, Dr. Maurice Rabb [HistoryMaker Maurice F. Rabb] had decided to retire from the board, and his wife [HistoyMaker Madeline Murphy Rabb] approached me about replacing him as a member of the board of directors, because of the work I had done in Kentucky. And there is resolution after resolution. We'd worked on issues of trying to get blacks on the school board, trying to get blacks appointed to the boards of regents of the institutions of higher learning, trying to get blacks in jobs as state police officers, all sorts of things. Trying to keep the state from investing in South Africa during the apartheid period-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --trying to save Kentucky State University [Frankfort, Kentucky] when there was an effort to try to close the school. There's just campaign after campaign after campaign that we've been involved in within the state. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so Mrs. Rabb approached me about serving on the national board and I was honored to have that opportunity and so I succeeded Dr. Rabb as a member of the board in 1972, I believe it was, and was fortunate enough to work with other members of the board from around the nation, sixty-four members of the national board. I ended up being a vice president of the NAACP at the board level and Bill Gibson [William F. Gibson] was the chair of the board when I resigned to join the staff. Story_ID: 322318 Speaker 1: We had never held the national convention [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Annual Convention] in Kentucky, and so, we submitted a bid and not knowing the politics of the NAACP and we lost the bid two years running and finally we learned the politics of the association, and so the school of hard knocks and so we landed the bid, and in 1979-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the NAACP held its national convention in Louisville, Kentucky. It's the first time in the history of the NAACP it's ever held its convention in Kentucky. Speaker 2: And on that note I want to get in the part--Kentucky has a very rich history of probably the rich history of horse racing, the Kentucky Derby. Speaker 1: Yes, here. Speaker 2: And many people don't know about the part that African Americans played in the Kentucky Derby. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so let's visit that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And the number of people who've been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, one of the things of bringing the national convention to a city allows you an opportunity to do research, to expose things that you've wanted to expose and you couldn't. Most people don't know that the Kentucky Derby is probably the best-known thing that happens in Kentucky every year. The state becomes a whole different world for that week or two. The first eighteen, fifteen of the first eighteen Kentucky Derby's were won by black jockeys. You seldom see a black jockey today. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The first derby was won by a black jockey by the name of Oliver Lewis and so we formed something in Kentucky called the Oliver Lewis Derby Club and we--that club sponsored an annual fundraiser for the NAACP associated with the Derby. There are some three consecutive Derbies won by Isaac Murphy, a black jockey and so we gave the president of Churchill Downs a likeness of Isaac Murphy that sits in the Kentucky Derby Museum [Louisville, Kentucky] and a plaque with the history of those jockeys who won the Kentucky Derby. And so it, all of that still remains there at the Kentucky Derby Museum today. We renamed a street [Roy Wilkins Avenue] after Roy Wilkins. Mr. Wilkins had resigned, I believe in 1978 and so in '77 [1977] maybe it was. Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: And in '79 [1979] we renamed the street in Louisville in honor of Mr. Wilkins which still remains there. As a matter of fact it's the only place in the country where Muhammad Ali Boulevard and Roy Wilkins Avenue cross each other, and but it's right there in Louisville, Kentucky. And so, there are many things that we were able to do tied into that convention. We were able to highlight the life of Horace Mann Bond, Julian Bond's [Historymaker Julian Bond] grandfather, who lived in that state and many, many other Kentuckians. The work of Berea College [Berea, Kentucky], a school that integrated before--other ins--when actually the case went to the [U.S.] Supreme Court and they--the Day Law came about where blacks and whites could not go to school together but they were doing it before the law even allowed for integration, and so we were able to highlight many, many things during 1979. Speaker 2: Okay, so that was a great convention. Speaker 1: A great convention, I think, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Story_ID: 322319 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you're coming to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--you've served on the NAACP board as a vice president and done a lot of great things, but now you are, are resigning, your board seat to come back to the NAACP as-- Speaker 2: As a staff person. Speaker 1: --a staff person? Speaker 2: Sometimes the people that want--but I think I've been blessed, it was a good opportunity for me. Mr. Hooks [Historymaker Benjamin L. Hooks], our past executive director had asked me for years about coming to work on the staff, and I would not for several reasons, including the fact I couldn't afford to live in New York [New York] for the salaries there the NAACP pays, but the NAACP moved its national office here to Baltimore [Maryland] and my wife [Courtrina Patterson Johnson] has two sisters in this area--and what I failed to mention, Courtrina and I were married in 1977, and she has been the strongest person in my life. She's been there when nobody has and it scared it me and helped me get to whatever little achievement I've made to this point in life. But so, we moved to Baltimore with the intent of really of staying here just a few months to help with a voter empowerment program here, and with the thought that after the governor's race in Kentucky, we would probably move back to Kentucky and do some things in state government or what have you. It just so happened that we went from thing to another, to another so now I'm going into my twentieth year as an employee of the NAACP. I've been blessed to hold many, many jobs in the association, director of our voter empowerment program, director of the armed services and veterans' affairs division, our labor department, areas related to education, housing all of that sort of thing has reported to me. And for the last several years well I served as the executive assistant to Mr. Hooks when he was the CEO. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Then I served for the last several years as the chief of program operations for the NAACP where the ACT-SO [Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological and Scientific Olympics] program that you are quite involved in has housed our housing, health, education, economic empowerment and voter empowerment all of those programs were lodged at some point in that division. I've been--in recent weeks our new CEO [Historymaker] Bruce Gordon has asked me to join his immediate staff as the chief of the executive services division of the NAACP. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so that's where I find myself today. Story_ID: 322320 Speaker 1: Well, we wanna talk about a little about all of them. I'll let you go through them pretty fast, but you know I'm not gonna let you get away. Let's talk about some of the strides you made, have made when you were director of the labor department at the national NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Well I, I think--let's talk if we might about the armed services because they both kind of--labor and armed services were hand-in-hand in that particular instance, I've--there's been so, so many activities. The--just to give you a little of the background, the--well I said the armed services, let me go back to labor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just to give you little background. My experience with organized labor has not been that positive up until joining the staff of the NAACP. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were several people as you know on our board from the organized labor movement over the years. When we looked in Kentucky at opposition to school integration and the busing efforts, we found that in many instances the labor movement, many people in the Labor Movement were involved in supporting the Klan [Ku Klux Klan (KKK)] to stop busing and that sort of thing, and but to the AFL-CIO's [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] credit, I never will forget the civil rights director of the UAW [United Auto Workers; International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America] came down--the civil rights director of--the UAW civil rights director was Bill Oliver [William Oliver] at that time. Bill Pollard [William E. Pollard] was the civil rights director of the AFL-CIO. They came to Louisville [Kentucky] to meet with me to talk about what was happening. At our convention [NAACP Annual Convention] that year George Meany [William George Meany] then the head of the AFL-CIO didn't come to the Convention but sent a videotape about the importance of Labor supporting school desegregation and the right of every American child to have an equal access to quality education. In that discussion he went on to quote Malcolm X. I thought, I wondered if he ever knew he was quoting him, "By any means necessary, the AFL supports school desegregation," he said, and I thought that quite interesting--including busing, and any affiliate who found itself in opposition to that would be dealt with by their national office. Speaker 1: Whoa! Speaker 2: I thought it was a strong, strong-- Speaker 1: That's strong. Speaker 2: --statement and I gave, I've got the utmost respect from then on for Mr. Pollard and Bill Oliver and the others and what they had gone through to get George Meany to make such a statement. What I later came to realize, that on the average, black employees in this country make about thirty-three percent more in the labor movement than they do not in labor overall when you look at black workers in this country. Speaker 1: That's an important statistic. Speaker 2: Aside from, from health benefits, aside from employee protections my friends in Franklin [Kentucky] might still have a job in the factory if the union had been there at the time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But the--aside from all those sorts of things the income overall for black workers is something like thirty-three percent greater when they're in the labor movement than when they're not, and so for those and other reasons the NAACP has strongly supported organized Labor. Doesn't mean that there's not racism in the labor movement as there are in other segments of our society-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and where that racism exists we continue to work with organized labor to try to address that sort of thing and to try to weed it out but we are very pleased and appreciate the close working relationship that we've been able to develop with our friends in the labor movement. They have been probably outside of the black church, the labor movement has probably been our strongest support base in the overall Civil Rights Movement and certainly the work of the NAACP even today. Story_ID: 322321 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me interrupt you there to say Port Gibson [Mississippi] labor did play an important role, would you wanna relate that? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know that was the period when the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was sued, and we were among the organizations that were involved in boycotting some businesses in that state, in that area, because the businesses would not provide equal opportunity to blacks. As a result, the courts in Mississippi ruled--when they looked at the organizations remaining, then the NAACP was the only organization with some assets. We had some office furniture, we had a space and so forth, a little money in the bank, not much, and so the suit came down against the state--against the NAACP. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we were threatened with our doors being closed if we couldn't put up the proper bail. It was the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] through the work of Bill Pollard [William E. Pollard] that generated the money. Mr. Pollard brought the check to the NAACP to put up the bond for the NAACP so the NAACP would not have to close our doors because we didn't have the financial wherewithal based on what the courts had asked us to put up as a bond. And so we've had that close working relationship (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 322322 Speaker 1: On the armed services area we think overall, at least I think and I think you and others and many will agree with me, that the armed services has done more than the private sector by and large in terms of equal opportunity, in terms of recruiting people and moving people up the--and to opportunities. It doesn't mean that there's not still many areas where improvements need to take place. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so we continue to monitor what happens in our [U.S] military. When I first went to work for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I said, and Mr. Hooks [HistoryMaker Benjamin L. hooks] asked me to take on the armed services piece, I thought to myself. Why do I even wanna get into this, this is not really my cup of tea. It's not what I'm interested in. But then I started to realize the thousands and thousands of African Americans who look to the military for employment opportunities, for training opportunities. When all else fails, they've been able to go to the armed services for these sorts of opportunities, and whether our services provide equal opportunity or not is something that we continue to monitor. We spent with a team a few years back over in Germany for several days, hearing complaints of racial discrimination that exist even in recent years. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Or the perception of discrimination and whether it's true or not if people perceive that they are being overlooked because of their race or didn't get this promotion because or they're treated differently because of their race, then it's something that our society has to cope with. And so, we did this report called 'Continuing the Search for Equal Military Justice' [ph.] I believe was the name of it. I'll show you a copy of the report, and as a result of that study the armed services made several adjustments to the way they handle complaints and process investigations and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: A few years back, you will recall in North Carolina where three people were killed on the street by people in the military. We held hearings there as a result of that and tried to find out what had actually happened and what the military needed to do. Yeah, the military teaches people how to use guns and puts this warfare mentality in people's minds. But we felt the military had not done enough to talk about improved race relations, and many of these people, young white children whose minds were just being warped and taken into the wrong direction and don't we have a responsibility as a society, not only to teach our people how to fight, but also who the enemy is (laughter). And to, and to also understand the roles that we all share in our rights as American citizens for whatever color we may be. And so, we spent a lot of time on that. I had the good fortune to go to Germany three years ago for the U.S Army to do a series of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] programs during the Martin King holiday, and so I went to five different military bases in different parts of Germany to do that. And so, there've been some extremely positive experiences in those areas. Speaker 2: Well as a result of the fine job that you've done with labor and armed services and so forth, and you were appointed to head up the NAACP's national programs-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --which includes the ACT-SO [Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological and Scientific Olympics] program (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Story_ID: 321743 Speaker 1: Now you've done labor department, head of the labor department, armed services department, and as a result and a reward for the fine work that you've done there, you were appointed to head up the programs department for the national office of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], how has that gone, or how did that go? Speaker 2: Well it, I thought it went extremely well. Obviously you'd like to do more--the limited resources that are available to you limit what you can do in social service type agencies, civil rights, progressive roots, there's never enough resources to do all that needs to be done. We were fortunate a few years back to receive a sizeable grant to impact our voter program, and so we were able to hire some sixty-odd staff people around the nation and open up several outreach offices to try to impact the elections of 2000 and 2004. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And we registered thousands and thousands of people, and provided training to hundreds of people. Did an enormous amount of radio and TV and newspaper advertisement to thousands of pieces of earned media, so I felt most proud of that, the work that the volunteers did and just kind of showed if they just a little bit of resources what they could do. I mean over these almost--now we're in the ninety-sixth year of the NAACP, we're coming near the centennial of the association. But for ninety-six years the volunteers have carried this NAACP and it has in fact become the conscience of the nation on civil rights and social justice issues and continues to be today. But if they had just a few more dollars at the local level they could do so much more work. Speaker 1: Work. Speaker 2: And so I, I've been blessed and as I shared with my co-workers around the NAACP that those of us who are paid, some of us are paid weakly, very weakly but we are paid to provide services--should feel blessed that we are able to be compensated to do this work that so many thousands of others around the country do every moment they can because they believe in it. It's--they believe it's what God would have them do while on this earth and I think that we have a responsibility to do all we can, so I, I feel particularly blessed. My wife [Courtrina Patterson Johnson] and I often reflect that. She retired last year from the Girl Scouts of Central Maryland. But the jobs that we've had we hope we've been able to impact the lives of others, and we've been blessed to have that opportunity. Story_ID: 321744 Speaker 1: Recently you, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] national office, the national board voted in a brand new president, and that president thought so much of you he bought you in to a new position. Tell us about that position. Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: And about your new president? Speaker 2: Well, we are very pleased that, [Historymaker] Bruce Gordon is his name worked for Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.] for many years, has now joined the staff of the association as our president and CEO. Bruce is extremely committed to social justice issues. He like everybody else has been focused in the last few weeks on Hurricane Katrina and what the devastation that that's brought to the residents of the Gulf Coast, and trying what we can do as a volunteer group. I think he will take us on to the next level. He is quite committed to try to increase the, the funding base of the association to try to help refine the institution to provide training to the staff and guidance to them to be more efficient, to work in a more business-type manner, to help build the institution to be a continuing force for social justice in the nation. And so, he asked me to come over to work directly out of his office to assist him as he kind of plans and thinks through this work, and I'm again appreciative for the opportunity. I will retire before long, a few more years I need to work. I may need to work longer than that but our bodies will only allow us to go so long. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But I have been blessed throughout most of my career and am thankful for that and look forward for this next period of time and helping Bruce do all I can. Story_ID: 321745 Speaker 1: Is there anything that we may have left out or did not ask you that on reflection you can think right now that we should have asked you. Speaker 2: Well, Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock], I don't know of anything other than the fact that there are so many people that you meet along the way, and I would be wrong to participate in this interview and not to acknowledge the work that you do and so many others who sometimes don't have a chance to get in front of the camera, but who have certainly made significant contributions to the Civil Rights Movement and the Human Rights Movement across this nation as volunteers, as employees giving what you can, when you can, where you can. And if there's been anything that we've left out of this interview that I've not been able to just mention the names of hundreds and thousands of people that I've actually, literally met around the nation, who give all they can to help in this movement. And the success that I or others may have is only one small step toward the movement, but that even our success has been made possible by people like yourself and we appreciate it. Story_ID: 321746 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, you are getting to that place where you and your wife, Courtrina [Courtrina Patterson Johnson], will retire and prop your feet up, is there any legacy that you would like to see? If there's any legacy, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well I don't know if we're gonna prop our feet up. We do need to retire, I tell you that (laughter), but there's so much work that still needs to be done. I think we would like to find ourselves, in the way that we can, volunteer sometime to help with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and other groups for the days that we have left on this earth. I don't know, I would hope that my children, my grandchildren would respect what we've tried to do through our life, the time that we've taken from them that we look back on and say I wish I could've spent more with them. But that the time we stole from them was time that we tried to spend doing some good to help others, and that sort of thing I would feel positive about. Story_ID: 321747 Speaker 1: Okay, and let's not leave them out this time, let's have the names-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --of, and current, current ages of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Oh, you're putting me on the spot. Speaker 1: Oh, nope I don't wanna ask you that, right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) let me just share with you that my oldest daughter is Gloria, she, Gloria Yvette Edmonds, she has two. Speaker 1: How do you spell the middle name? Speaker 2: Y-V-E-T-T-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She is married to a young minister in Southern Kentucky and they are a fine family. They have two, two children, one in college and one in high school, and we are so proud of the work they continue to do in the ministry, particularly. She volunteers continuously in her church there in Franklin [Kentucky], and her husband is an associate minister of the church, and so we are quite proud of them. My son Keith is the next oldest, I believe. He lives in Louisville [Kentucky], works for an industry there and is doing quite well and we are thankful of that. Speaker 1: What is Keith's middle name? Speaker 2: Keith Lamont Williams is his last name, and-- Speaker 1: L-A-M-O-N-T? Speaker 2: Yes, and there is Don, Don Fredrick Johnson [ph.]. Don works for Toyota [Toyota Motor Corporation] in Georgetown [Kentucky] and Toyota's one of the better paying companies in that state and so we're thankful that he's been--he does a lot of volunteer work with the groups that he's involved with thorough his children's school and that sort of thing. The--then there's Kavin; Kavin. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: K-A-V-I-N, Kavin Douglas Johnson; Kavin works for the Best Buy company and I think has seven states that he monitors now for them in terms of their sales and production and so he's--the Good Lord's blessed him well. Our daughter Amur, Amur Williams [Courtrina Amur Williams]. Speaker 1: Spell Amur. Speaker 2: A-M-U-R is working in real estate in Louisville and we're--she has one child [Keith W. Williams], we call him Little Keith, who's kinda the light of her life when he's around her, he's just as active as he can be. And then there's Nicole [Nicole Liberto], Nicole and her husband--Nicole. Speaker 1: Middle name? Speaker 2: Lord have mercy. Speaker 1: Since I've been-- Speaker 2: Nicole and Mark, her husband's name is Mark Liberto, Liberto I'm sorry, I couldn't get that (laughter). Nicole is-- Speaker 1: Is it Mark, M-A-R-K? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nicole is a lawyer and works for the Department of Agriculture [Kentucky Department of Agriculture, Frankfort, Kentucky]. Speaker 1: And would you spell Liberto for me? Speaker 2: L-I-B-E-R-T-O, I believe it is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she works as an attorney in the Department of Agriculture in Kentucky state government and has done quite well by way of her career. And then there is Felita, F-E-L-I-T-A who works in the school system there in Franklin. Speaker 1: And Felita's middle name? Speaker 2: Felita Carol Holder [Felita Johnson Holder]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her husband is Douglas Holder and Douglas is a real estate broker there in Franklin and so they've all-- Speaker 1: And Felita is a teacher? Speaker 2: No, she actually works in the administrative offices there as a--at the-in the school system in Franklin. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, I thank God every day that they've all been quite successful and through His grace they've done well. Speaker 1: I won't put the burden on you, I'm trying to name all fourteen grand-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) All the grandchildren? I know them when I see each and every one of them. Speaker 1: You do better than I. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Story_ID: 321748 Speaker 1: We really appreciate this opportunity and because I think you have the best set of photos we've--I've seen at least and so as we show these photos in there. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: You can give us a background. Speaker 2: Certainly. Speaker 1: And a--thank you very, very much. Speaker 2: Okay, Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock], thank you again. Speaker 1: And we really appreciate this. Speaker 2: Thank you so much. (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We're rolling now, go ahead with your description Mr. Johnson. Speaker 1: All right this is a flyer inviting people to attend the renaming of Hale Street in Franklin, Kentucky to John J. Johnson Avenue in 1992. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And go ahead now. Speaker 1: This is a photo of Dr. John H. Purdue and his wife Adeline Young Purdue [ph.], who was the--who actually was a slave. He was born in 1812 and became the pastor of Emmanuel Baptist Church in Louisville [Kentucky] in 1808. I'm sorry that's wrong, he could've been born in '12 [1812] it had--in--he was born-- I'm sorry you all can I do it? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Actually, sir, it's on the caption. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And, and you're just reading the caption. We're, we're able to reproduce. Speaker 1: I'm with you okay. Now that doesn't make sense. Doesn't that say--what does that say 1908, Paul? Speaker 2: Let me see. Speaker 1: (Laughter) you're right there and can't. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Discussion. Oh, okay go ahead, sir. Speaker 1: This is Reverend Melvin Dupee Purdue, and he was the--he succeeded his father as the pastor of Emmanuel Baptist Church, he was the head of the Congress for Racial Equality [sic. Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)] in the state of Kentucky for a period of time. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on one second please. Standby. Okay, next please. Speaker 1: Am I right? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): As long as I'm rolling tape, I'm with you. Tell us about the top one and then I'll cue you as we go from the top to the middle to the bottom, and go ahead and just tell me what's in the top photo? Speaker 1: Well this was the first organizing effort of the Franklin-Simpson County [Kentucky] branch of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I believe that was in 1966, and what you see here are pictures of a playground area. The first is a just a set of swings. The next picture is a picture of a sliding board and some riding toys there for children there in the park and the bottom picture is a picture of a, of a sandbox there. We didn't have a lot of money. It's just limited money were able to raise and to buy some things and to put a few things together to make a nice little playground, and it became an organizing tool for the NAACP and as a new branch trying to build members. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay standby. Speaker 1: Not as long, but just on top. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead Mr. Johnson. Speaker 1: This is the cover of the program of the memorial service for one of my closest friends Dr. Leo Lesser, Jr. Leo was head of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC] in Kentucky for several years, a close friend of A.D. Williams King [Alfred Daniel Williams King], the brother of Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Leo also was the associate director of the local human relations commission and I succeeded him in that job after his passing. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, sir. Speaker 1: This is a caption from a story on some of the activity of the state NAACP [Kentucky Conference of the NAACP] in 1974. We had worked hard to revitalize our chapters around the country from some four branches to what ended up being forty-two and here you see Ozell Sutton who at time was the regional director for the United States Commission on Civil Rights, community services division, and Arthur Johnson, who for many years headed the Detroit [Michigan] branch of the NAACP. Both of them came to the state conference to speak to our delegates to assist us with our reorganizing efforts. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry, go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay, this is a photo of Prince H. Martin [ph.], my great uncle, Uncle Prince. Uncle Prince was the steward to the secretary of the [U.S.] Navy-- Secretary Forrestal [James Forrestal] when he was secretary of the [U.S.] Navy--but worked in many clubs in the Louisville [Kentucky] area and served the major Derby [Kentucky Derby] functions during his term as, as a head waiter at many of the clubs there in the city of Louisville. One of the better jobs that black people could get during that period of time. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go head. Speaker 1: Um. Speaker 2: And I'll get you a picture. Speaker 1: (Unclear) take that. Speaker 2: Okay, this is the memorial program of the service for Mr. Walter H. Story, who was the principal of the high school [Lincoln School; Franklin-Simpson High School, Franklin, Kentucky] where I attended high school, a strong role model for most of the young boys who attended that school and whose life was devoted to public education. Speaker 1: (OFF- CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, that's good. Speaker 2: Okay that's just a picture of me (laughter) during the time that I worked for the Kentucky Institute for Community Development. They wanted a professional picture made and with the copper tones or whatever they are, that's the best I could get (laughter). You wanna stick this one up here while you're? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson]. Speaker 2: (Laughter) that is a picture in 1979 before the national convention [NAACP Annual Convention] came to Kentucky. That was used as the official photo as the state conference president of Kentucky. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next one. Speaker 2: Probably wanna stick to this, this is. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay go ahead Sir. Speaker 2: This is my mother, Evelyn Elizabeth Johnson, a very quiet and unassuming lady. A very proud woman and I was blessed to have her as my mother. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE) Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We're ready when you are. Speaker 1: Okay is me at the age of two years old with Uncle Morris. Morris Benjamin [ph.], I called him daddy and that's when I lived in Detroit. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): One second please, okay next. Speaker 1: And that's a picture of Aunt Hagar [Hagar Benjamin (ph.)]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's good you're good there and then it's the whole thing left, left, keep going, keep going, keep going, good right there, beautiful. Okay go ahead please, wait a second I (unclear) the button, okay go ahead. Speaker 2: This is Hagar Elizabeth Benjamin, Aunt Hagar; I called her momma. She took me to keep me from going to an orphanage when I was first born and lived with her until I was three at which time I loved to Kentucky and later went back to get her. She lived forty years after I moved away from her. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next please. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Whenever you're ready, Mr. Johnson. Speaker 2: Okay this is Lenny Harris [ph.], Uncle Lenny, my great uncle who came to Detroit to get me to bring me to Franklin [Kentucky] and I lived with him 'til I was thirteen at which time he passed, but one of the stronger male influences in my life. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Whenever you're ready. Speaker 2: This is my Aunt Edwina Johnson [Edwina Johnson Griffin-Hayes (ph.)], she lived with me prior to going to college and then her son, Clarence [ph.], stayed with me. She has since deceased. Story_ID: 321749 Speaker 1: That's my uncle, Reverend Edmund M. Johnson [ph.], that's his high school picture actually. He pastored a church in Horse Cave, Kentucky and then in Paris, Kentucky for many years and he lived with me for a few months prior to accepting the pastorship in Horse Cave. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, next. Okay whenever you're ready. Speaker 1: That's my great uncle, Booker Martin [ph.]. Uncle Booker owned three cabs, a little small cab franchise in Chicago [Illinois], and was quite a business person in his own right during his lifetime. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Paul [HistoryMaker Paul Brock], can you go around behind the stand and kind of--and just kind--anytime you're ready, Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John J. Johnson]. Speaker 1: That's a one--that's a little one-room school house where my Uncle Frank, my great uncle Frank Johnson taught black students, all the black students in Lincoln County [Kentucky] went to this little one-room school house. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We got it, Paul. Speaker 1: Did you? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah we got it (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I guess that's his graduation when he graduated from. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay we're ready on the next one. Discussion. Speaker 2: Okay that is Frank Johnson, again my great uncle who taught students in Lincoln County. That's a picture of his graduation from a college in Louisville [Kentucky]. It then was called I think Louisville Municipal College [Simmons College of Kentucky, Louisville, Kentucky]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, very good next. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Do you have others, Paul? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead Mr. Johnson. Speaker 1: This is in 1967, the local Jaycees [United States Junior Chamber] had an annual outstanding young man award [Ten Outstanding Young Americans] that they presented, and I was the only black person at that time ever nominated for consideration by that group as a way of kind of forcing them to acknowledge black people did something of significance in the community as well. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right next. Speaker 1: This is a meeting of the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Freedom Fund Dinner in Franklin, Kentucky in the late '60s [1960] I think around '69 [1969]. Fermon Knox who was our state president joined us to speak for that dinner. Also he is--I am standing to the extreme right of the picture, Mr. Knox is to my right in picture. Just above me is W. S. Dotson who was our state treasurer for many, many years from Lexington, Kentucky and the other pictures--the others are people from the Franklin [Kentucky] community who were officers of the local NAACP. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay and go ahead when you're ready. Speaker 1: That's a picture of Lucille Griffin Brooks. Actually that's before she married Mr. Brooks [Matthew Brooks]. She was kinda like a godmother to me. This particular picture was made in 1946. I was only one year old at that time so I hadn't moved to Franklin, but later she would become more like my godmother and Mr. Brooks like my godfather. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, we're just moving to the one at the lower left, and go ahead with that one please. Speaker 1: That's Matthew Lewis Brooks, they have him listed here as Professor Brooks. He was a teacher in the school system, kind of like my godfather in the community. He is the--was the black elected official in the city, the first black to serve on the school board and a strong role model for black people in that community. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Anytime you're ready, sir. Speaker 1: That is a picture of the street sign that was named after me, John J. Johnson Avenue in Franklin, Kentucky. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right and go ahead with (unclear). Speaker 1: This is Reverend Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Benjamin L. Hooks], the executive director of the NAACP, to the extreme left. I'm to the extreme right of this picture. That is during a period when there was a dedication of our National Headquarters when we moved here in nineteen--some nineteen years ago now. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. There's some glare on that one, Paul. Speaker 1: As the armed services and veterans affairs director we have an annual armed services and veterans affairs awards banquet. Colin Powell [HistoryMaker Colin L. Powell] periodically visited us at that dinner. This particular picture here is picture of Colin Powell sitting with William Gibson [William F. Gibson], the chair of, the past chair of our National Board of Directors [NAACP National Board of Directors]. This was at the Spingarn Dinner [Spingarn Awards Dinner] where Colin Powell received the NAACP Spingarn Medal. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And go ahead please. Speaker 1: This is a picture of John Purdue and his wife at his retirement as pastor of Emmanuel Baptist Church [Louisville, Kentucky], and gathered around him are many family, family members at that occasion. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, stand by. I'll show you later, Paul, when the problem is with this newsprint to try to capture it this way. Go ahead Sir. Speaker 1: This is another picture of John Henry Purdue, this was prior to him going into the ministry when he was helping to organize his school in Franklin, Kentucky. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, very good next, go ahead, sir. Speaker 1: That's me with William Cofield [William Cofield, Sr.]. Bill Cofield served as the vice president of the Kentucky State Conference [Kentucky Conference of the NAACP] while I was state president. And then when I resigned as a member of the national board of directors Bill followed me on to the board of directors and continues to serve as a member of our board of directors and is the president of the Kentucky conference of NAACP branches. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay next. Speaker 1: Okay and I'm holding this one. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: At your desk. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Give us the date and any other pertinent information. Speaker 2: Well what's on the back of that real quick, the date? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead please. Speaker 2: That is a picture of me working as in 1991 as Ben Hooks' executive assistant at that time and working in the office adjoining his. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, very good. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's it? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: You get my wife in some? Speaker 2: Yes, we had--at the wedding. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay and you may begin your description any time you're ready. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, this is a picture of Courtrina [Courtrina Patterson Johnson] at my wedding in 1977 to the extreme left is my father-in-law Courtney Patterson, Sr., who passed now two years ago. As you see both Courtrina and I are both scared to death, but my father-in-law seemed to be able to carry us through...