 Story_ID: 347810 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Alyce Marie Earl Jenkins [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins]. That's A-L-Y-C-E, Alyce, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Earl, E-A-R-L, J-E-N-K-I-N-S. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 22, 1935 in Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well that's an interesting question. I'm a retired professor from Wright State University [Dayton, Ohio]. I retired in 1993, and since that time I've been doing consulting. Consulting with different universities and here lately I've been calling myself a project manager. Rather than just going in consulting and coming out, I sign up for four or five months to see a project through. So mainly I'm retired, and I select projects that I want to work on. Speaker 1: Now you have a distinction of being--well tell us the [U.S.] Navy connection--what--just tell us what that title is and then we'll go on and proceed with the interview after that, just-- Speaker 2: Well I received a direct appointment into the [U.S.] Navy Reserves as lieutenant commander in 1974 and then in 1983 or '82 [1982] I was promoted to full commander, and in '84 [1984], '85 [1985] I decided I wanted to separate from the Navy. Speaker 1: You were the first African American woman to-- Speaker 2: I was the first African American woman to receive a direct appointment at that higher level lieutenant commander which is equal to a major at that time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the Navy. Speaker 2: --in the Navy Reserves and then I was the first female to be a part of this new group that the Navy had that they called the campus liaison officers and the purpose of the group was to facilitate minority recruitment for the Navy. So I was first in both of those areas; first to be appointed as lieutenant commander and then first female. I--it was a nice experience being the only female with this group of males because at the time went in I think there were only twenty-five males and I was the only female so I had all this attention. They all took good care of me. Speaker 1: Now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 19, 2006. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Well you've converted my living room into a studio at 634, well-- Speaker 1: You don't have to tell the full address (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You've converted my living room into a studio for The HistoryMakers-- Speaker 1: Here in Yellow Springs, Ohio. Speaker 2: --here in Yellow Springs, Ohio (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 347811 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone I interview. And the first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Salmon. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Some people don't call it a color but I do, its beige (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I have favorite times, I have spring and fall. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Where there's water. I like to be, I guess on islands near water. Speaker 1: The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't know whether I should tell--let's see do I have a favorite--well, yes I have one that I use a lot professionally and that is: my dog's not in that fight. To keep me from getting over into some professional area that I don't really need to deal with I just say, "My dog's not in that fight." Speaker 1: Okay, diplomatically placed expression, yeah. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 347812 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history now. I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family first, and then your father's [Boysie Orr] side of the family. So we'll start with your mother's full name. Can you give us her full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Margaret M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T, La Vern, L-A, capital V-E-R-N, Wright, W-R-I-G-H-T, Earl, Cummings [Margaret Wright Cummings]. Speaker 1: Okay, she has a lot of names. Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born September 28, 1916 in Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace the ancestors? Speaker 2: Really, I can only go back as far as my grandparents; my mother's father and a couple of his brothers and sisters. I did not know my grandmother Alice [Alice Wilhite Wright]. She died when my mother was sixteen I believe, and I understand that we come from--that her mother was a full blood Cherokee. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story about that or that they tell? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: So there are no stories associated just that she was? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, she was full blooded then her mother, my grandmother's mother, was, and my mother's great-grandmother, on my Grandmother Alice's side great-grandmother, they had a picture of her this great-grandmother. Yeah, great-grandmother, and whenever my mother misbehaved her mother would put her in a room where this picture was and my mother would be afraid of this picture because the great-grandmother looked so stern and was not smiling. And so my mother was always afraid to be in that room as a child with the picture of that great-great-grandmother. Speaker 1: That's interesting all those portraits in those days were posed like that and people wouldn't smile because they didn't want to move and so I guess it did make them look stern. Speaker 2: And especially for a small kid. So that's the only story I remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 347813 Speaker 1: We were talking about your ancestors on your mother's [Margaret Wright Cummings] side and, you tell us what you know about them. You said you didn't know your grandmother on your mother's side, right? Speaker 2: No, she died when my mother was sixteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories passed down from that side of the family? Does the family--your mother was born in Birmingham [Alabama], but is that as far back in terms of place that you can go? Can you go back to the country someplace, or (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. No my mother was born in Birmingham and I think she was the third child but my father--her father [Rufus Wright] worked on the L&N Railroad [Louisville and Nashville Railroad] and so at that time they were living in Birmingham and then they later came back to Hartselle, Alabama. Speaker 1: So that was there--Hartselle is where he was from originally? Speaker 2: Well I don't know where he was born, but anyway they came back to Hartselle and so Hartselle, Alabama is like the hometown area because mama wasn't in Birmingham that long before they came back to Hartselle. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So she grew up in Hartselle? Speaker 2: She grew up in Hartselle, Alabama and my father [Boysie Orr] grew up in Hartselle, Alabama. Speaker 1: Now what's Hartselle like? Speaker 2: Well, at the time Hartselle was just a little small country town and to have a job working on the railroad was a good job then. Working on a railroad, being a teacher or a principal, and there was--the only business man I knew there was someone who had a lot of land and some property and he had a little store. Mr.--I can't think of his name now but anyway he had a little store and the rest of the people either worked for white people or they worked some--in Decatur [Alabama] someplace. So it was just this little small town with two churches for the blacks, two black churches, and then they had a county school. I went to school there one year, Morgan County Training School [Hartselle, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Did your mother go there? Training--? Speaker 2: She went there, and then my father--my grandfather always had a nice home, he had a real nice home and he had property around that house. I don't know how much property they had and then he bought another house across from the C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal] church and it had quite a few acres too. And my mother had five brothers and she was the only girl. And so she grew up with all those boys and she's very competitive because--and I think it's because of the boys. And my grandfather was very active in the church and he was looked upon with lots of respect, and so he had a good relationship with the white people in town, and because he had all these boys whenever they got in trouble or something he could talk to the man and get them out of trouble and everything, whatever trouble was. And my mother grew up being the daughter of somebody I guess, they were the children of somebody I guess, the way would look at it. Now her mother she tells me was a housewife but she could also sew very well and so she would make dresses for people occasionally. But the interesting thing that my Grandmother Alice [Alice Wilhite Wright] did and my mother told me about is that she would serve as a wet nurse for white ladies who couldn't nurse their babies and so she would nurse--serve as their wet nurse for a number of months I guess and I thought oh I didn't know she did that. My grandfather was sort of involved not only in the church but in community stuff too. People would come to him about things. But I think that's--something may come to me later--something more may come later but that's all that I remember. Speaker 1: Now were you named after your grandmother, Alice? Did she spell it the same way? Speaker 2: No she spelled it A-L-I-C-E and when I was thirteen I was reading The Birmingham News and I saw--I was reading an article about this lady her name is Alyce or maybe probably was. Her name was Alyce Billingsley [ph.] and she spelled her name with a Y and so I started spelling my name with a Y because I liked the way it looked and then I think when I was nineteen I had my name legally changed from I to Y. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I knew there was a story there (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 347814 Speaker 1: So your mother [Margaret Wright Cummings] went to training school in that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Morgan County Training School [Hartselle, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Morgan County Training School and did she have any stories about going to school and growing up that she shared with you? Speaker 2: Well, she did--I should've played the tape that I have of her. She's told tales about--she said that she was very good in math and she liked math and interestingly her math teacher Mr. Baugh, B-A-U-G-H was also my math teacher at Parker High School [A.H. Parker High School] in Birmingham [Alabama]. So he had been up in Hartselle, Alabama and then he was there. What else did she talk about? She said she liked math and she was devilish. Speaker 1: What do you mean by that? Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mischievous. I guess she was always teasing or getting into something, I don't know, when she was in school. And the other thing about my [maternal] grandparents [Alice Wilhite Wright and Rufus Wright] is that the teachers who taught at the school didn't live there and so they boarded with my grandmothers at my grandparents' house. So mama knew a lot of the teachers and I imagine when she said she was devilish, I mean she was probably taking advantage of the fact that she knew the people outside of the school room and maybe trying to get away with things. You know showing off, I don't know, I can't go beyond that I don't really know. Speaker 1: So not any devilish stories or stories of what devilment (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I don't have any devilish stories. I do even to this day, though she gets teary when she talks about her mother. Her mother died of cancer and my mother took care of her and she had to change the bandages and things like that and she talks about her mother having her to go to town to buy a dress for her and a gown because that's what she wanted to be buried in. And whenever mama talks about that, you know, she gets kind of teary and so when her mother died she was the one who was responsible for the cooking and all. But my grandmother had taught all the boys how to cook and how to iron and wash and everything. But she was the lady of the house so to speak, and-- Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters did she have? Speaker 2: Five and then another thing she told me when she was growing up that if she did something her mother would whip her. She said she would--my mother is fairer than I am and she--we both bruise easily and so if her mother whipped her she said she would nurse those whips or whatever you call them. You know how when you whip somebody your skin will raise a little bit until her father got home. I said, "Well mama why would you do that?" And she said, "Because I want him to see that I'd been whipped and he would tell mama not to whip me anymore." I said jiminy just taking advantage of being the only female and the only daughter you know. I'd say, "Okay mama," (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so--now did she go to school past high school, did she get a chance to? Speaker 2: No my mother didn't finish high school 'cause she got pregnant with me, and she didn't finish high school. Story_ID: 347815 Speaker 1: We'll pick up the story now with your father. If you could give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Boysie, B-O-Y--now I have to tell you this is interesting 'cause I have to give you two fathers' names. B-O-Y-S-I-E, Orr, O-R-R [Boysie Orr], and I didn't know he was my father until I was eight or something like that if I was that old, because my mother [Margaret Wright Cummings] married Arthur Fred Earl [Arthur Earl], and as far as I was concerned he was my daddy. Now my mother when I was born the lady who delivered me was a midwife and she would go around and deliver these babies but she didn't always turn the paperwork in on time. So I was born before my mother married Arthur Earl but by the time the midwife took the paperwork in, my stepfather and my mother were married and so on my birth certificate it's listed as the daughter of Margaret Wright Earl and Arthur Fred Earl but technically I was born out of wedlock, you know. I used to go to Hartselle [Alabama] a lot in the summertime and spends summers with my grandparents and people would walk up to me and say, "Oh she looks just like your daddy, just like her daddy." And there was this lady who would always walk up to me and just say, "How you doing honey? So nice to see you," and she was just always so nice. I was a little afraid of this lady 'cause she always had a rag on her head and she always had snuff in her mouth and she always had an apron on. I was saying, "Why is she always talking to me?" Well that was my father's mother, Grandmother Teedie Orr, T-E-E-D-I-E, Teedie Orr. So it was one summer that I was in Hartselle and my mother came up and we were going to the movies and so she said, "Alyce [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins] I've got to tell you something," and I was listening and she said, "Arthur is not your father, Boysie is your father." And I said, "Who?" and I started crying. We went on to the movie and then she told me about Ms. Teedie. That Ms. Teedie was my grandmother and then--his sisters were always nice to me and all that but I didn't put it together 'cause I was young. Speaker 1: Did you know him then? Did you know your father then? Speaker 2: I didn't know him then, she just told me and I met him later and then he had--I don't think he married this other lady but anyway he had two kids [Margaret Orr Blow and J.W. Orr] by another lady and he talked this lady into letting him have those two kids, my half-sister and my half-brother, because my father had married Ollie Orr and so he wanted all his kids in his house with him. So this other lady let him take her kids and he had started writing me and things like that. But I never responded and he was talking to mama about taking me and she asked me and I said I want to be here, you know, in Birmingham [Alabama]. So he came down once and he bought me some things and then he asked me about going back to Detroit [Michigan] to live with him. Speaker 1: He was in Detroit? Speaker 2: By that time yeah he was in Detroit--to live with him and I told him I didn't want to do that I wanted to stay in Birmingham. And, you know, I was finished with it because I knew I wasn't going to leave daddy and I wasn't going to leave my mama and then he would write me and tell me how much he could do for me and this that and the other and it didn't interest me at all. But it was really--it really hurt when I learned that my daddy wasn't my daddy and I was kind of angry too because then I understood why all those other folks was there and always looking at me and petting me and stuff like that. My father had said that I wasn't his kid; I learned this later that I wasn't his kid and I'm the only one who looks just like him--spitting image of him, you know. Speaker 1: This is your, Boysie or your (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boysie, Boysie the spitting image of Boysie Orr. Story_ID: 347816 Speaker 1: When I was thirteen I went to visit him [Jenkins' father, Boysie Orr]. I didn't want to go visit but I went, and I went up there with the intention of being just as mean to him as I could be. I was just going to be--I'm sorry not mean to him but mean to his wife [Ollie Orr], I was not going to be cooperative at all. I got there and she was so nice, she was just as nice as she could be, you know. So I thought well I guess I can't be mean with her, you know, uncooperative with her. So I kind of just put it aside because she was just so nice, you know. And my father was telling me about this house and he was telling me that if anything happened to him that I would share equally with his other kids because he's my father and all of that, and I told him that I can see myself, now, I said, "You're not my father, all you did was sire me." He went on up the steps and he called my mama [Margaret Wright Cummings] and said, "That's the reason she needs to be up here with me because she doesn't have any respect for anybody." I said, "I'm not going anywhere," and so the rest of my vacation I spent just getting on his nerves 'cause I couldn't get on her nerves so I got on his nerves. So then my sister [Margaret Orr Blow] and my brother [J.W. Orr] like I said, they were there with him, and of the three of us I was better off. I think I had a better life experience with my mother than they had with my father, and my brother was so disenchanted with him that when he graduated from high school he went on and joined the [U.S.] Navy and didn't come back to the house. My sister was so intimidated by him and everything because he didn't want her to do this and he didn't want her to do that and so restrictive and I kept telling her, "That's just because he was such a devil." And so when she would call me and tell me he wouldn't let her do something I said, "Well okay, I'll come on up there and we'll get it straightened," and I'd go up there and get him told, and get it straightened and come on back down. Speaker 2: Now how old were you when you met him? Speaker 1: Thirteen. Speaker 2: Thirteen (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No I was thirteen when I went to Detroit [Michigan]-- Speaker 2: Detroit. Speaker 1: --but I was about eight when I met him Speaker 2: Okay, now-- Speaker 1: --when mama told me. I don't know how old I was when I met him, and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, what's his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: I think his date of birth was like 1913 and I think he was born in Morgan County [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Okay, now what about your step-- Speaker 1: But I don't remember his date--I don't remember the date of birth. Story_ID: 347817 Speaker 1: But what about your stepfather [Arthur Earl]? Speaker 2: I don't remember any of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't remember his birthday. Speaker 1: Was he from Birmingham [Alabama] or from (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where she [Jenkins' mother, Margaret Wright Cummings] met him in Birmingham. Speaker 1: Okay, she met him in Birmingham. Were you close with your stepfather? Speaker 2: Yeah, daddy was a jolly type. He was a mechanic, an auto mechanic, and yeah. I was very close with him. He had been married and he had a daughter named Margaret [ph.] and one named Willie Mae [ph.] or something I think and his brother Uncle George [ph.] and his wife Aunt Helen [ph.]. We were all very close and Uncle George had a business where he sold wood and coal and stuff like that. I would go down there and I would help them stack the wood, and sometimes I'd go to sleep on a pile of wood after I'd stacked it. And Aunt Helen would--I remember one time I was down there and Aunt Helen was always cooking and so she told me to go in and check the biscuits and see if they were ready to come out of the oven, it was one of those coal stoves. So I went in and they were nice and brown they were ready to come out and I thought, well I think I want one of those biscuits. So I took one out and she said, "Alyce [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins] are the biscuits ready?" And I thought she was coming so I put the biscuit down in my bosom. I have a scar now from that and I didn't have to do that, it was just like, I want to do this, you know (laughter). Story_ID: 351388 Speaker 1: You were telling us a good story there about the biscuit, and--well it wasn't a good--it didn't turn out good but it was an interesting story (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah, a biscuit, yeah. Speaker 1: But what were some of the other sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, going back to my Aunt Helen [ph.] and Uncle George [ph.] and I was an only child and they lived down on--down near town when I say down near town I mean down near 4th Avenue, down near Ingram Park [Kelly Ingram Park, Birmingham, Alabama], I think that's the name of the park where civil rights, where the civil rights building is now. They didn't live too far from down there. Speaker 1: Now where did your family live in Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: In Birmingham? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We lived on--well we lived down there on that street whatever that was near downtown when I was little and then while I was still little maybe three years old or four years old, I--we lived on Enon Ridge [Birmingham, Alabama]. We lived on 5th Street, 1129 5th Street North, and we lived there until after I had graduated from high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] and gone to college [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] and then the highway came through there and tore up the community. But down--but even though I lived up there--we had moved up there I would still spend time down near downtown Birmingham with my Aunt Helen and Uncle George, and--but before we moved up on Enon Ridge when I was real small, I had a lot of dolls, because I was the only baby and everybody seemed like always gave me dolls. Speaker 1: So you didn't have any brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: The other were my half brothers and sisters. I grew up as my mother's [Margaret Wright Cummings] only child and I was the youngest of my stepfather's [Arthur Earl] kids and the youngest of my uncle's kids. And so anyway I always had a lot of toys and I had a lot of dolls and I would just get these dolls, and I would put them in a box and this box was out on the back porch once and somebody wanted to move my box of dolls and I wouldn't let them move them in. I was fussing about it and it rained on my dolls and all those dolls' faces just melted, you know, and I was real upset about that. But that was part of living down in that area. It had, the streetcar wasn't far from there and there were a lot of magnolia trees down in that area. Then when we moved to Enon Ridge, mama decided that she would send me to nursery school or kindergarten one, or something like that. And so she--so I remember made a gingerbread man for me to take to school and share with the kids, and so I took the gingerbread man to school and it was lunchtime and I was to share with the kids. So I would break off one finger--and he was a huge gingerbread man--I would break off one finger and give it away and break off a thumb or something, you know, all these little pieces. So when mama came to pick me up she asked if they had--if I had shared my gingerbread man and I said yes and then I--she said, "What is that?" and I had the whole body (laughter). She said, "Alyce [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins], you were supposed to give them more than that." And I said, "You told me to share and I did share." That kind of--that's a story that I remember a lot. Story_ID: 351389 Speaker 1: But now on Enon Ridge [Birmingham, Alabama]--now, but when downtown where Uncle George [ph.] lived there was Davenport Harris [Davenport Harris Funeral Home, Birmingham, Alabama] and Armstrong Funeral Home [ph.] and some other places in that little area there. But we weren't far from the business section--the black business section in Dayton--I mean in Birmingham [Alabama]. That's why I said we lived downtown but not really in downtown where the barbershops and the restaurants and the movies and all of that were. That's where they were located, we were just a few blocks from that and then Enon Ridge was much farther away. And Enon Ridge, I think was really a good move. I know it was a good move for my parents [Margaret Wright Cummings and Jenkins' stepfather, Arthur Earl] to make because I didn't realize it then, I realized it after I was an adult that I grew up not knowing that I was poor, and I grew up seeing and being around professional people all day every day. Because we were the only--I look back on it and we were the only poor people on that street. We were the only ones who were renting. Everybody else owned their homes, and they were teachers, doctors, lawyers, Pullman porters. They had their own businesses, and their kids we all played together and we all did everything together. I went to charm school with them. We went to charm school, we played--I never learned how to play tennis but we took tennis lessons, we took swimming lessons. We would go downtown on a day that we could go downtown to the museum. 'Cause there was one day a week that black folks could go to the museum and we would go and see the different exhibits and things. So, you know, I just had a very rich experience by that move in that neighborhood--to that neighborhood. It was a very good experience that I really learned to appreciate later on. It wouldn't have been that rich had we stayed closer to downtown there. Story_ID: 351390 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little girl? What were you like? Speaker 2: I'm a, I'm an introvert and like I said I'm an only child and I entertain myself very well and as a kid I was like that. I would play with paper dolls and play with my dolls and I'd go out and play a little bit and come back in. I was a part of a group but I wasn't a big part of the group. I had friends, but I pulled away and I'm still like that. I'm still like that, but I had friends in elementary school [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama]. Ernestine [ph.] and I became friends in elementary school and we're still friends--good friends. My friends in high school, we're still in touch with each other and we did everything. We made the telephones out of the can and the wire and we would catch lightning bugs and daddy [Jenkins' stepfather, Arthur Earl] would barbecue and tell lies. Like on Saturdays we'd sit around and barbecue over a--it was a tin tub. Speaker 1: One of those galvanized tubs (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah one of those galvanized tubs and he would be doing the barbecuing but it seemed like it was always calling mama. Margaret [Margaret Wright Cummings] bring me this and Margaret bring me this and she had to just run up and down the steps. An outing for us would be to go to the airport [Birmingham Municipal Airport; Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport, Birmingham, Alabama] to watch the planes come in. Take a picnic basket and, or mama and I would ride the streetcar, different streetcars to the end of the line to see more of the city and stuff like that. I mentioned that we were--we attended those different little schools. We didn't do any overnight stays though. I mean, like kids sleepover, we didn't do sleepovers. Speaker 1: Now, what are you--you're talking about like going to a-- Speaker 2: Somebody's house sleeping over like kids do now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I don't think they ought to do that now, because you never know what's going on in somebody else's house. But we didn't do that but we would spend time together, but then I always had my time to myself. Story_ID: 351391 Speaker 1: In elementary school I was a majorette. My mother [Margaret Wright Cummings] wanted me to take music lessons, I didn't want to take music lessons so I took--I learned how to play the accordion just enough to get by 'cause the band director said that all the majorettes should be able to play an instrument and so I said well okay I'll play the accordion, and I was drum major of the elementary school band. Speaker 2: Now where did you go to grade school? Speaker 1: I went to Lincoln Elementary School [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Okay. Did you go there the whole--? Speaker 1: Yes. See at that time we had Lincoln--we were in elementary school and then we were in high school, we didn't have middle school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so I went to Lincoln Elementary School, and my principal there was Professor Johnson [Robert Charles Johnson], and when I got to high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] he was the principal of the high school. Speaker 2: Okay. So, did you--was he a good principal? Speaker 1: Yes, he was, he was. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now Enon Ridge [Birmingham, Alabama] was like up on the hill and I remember one time I had some skates and I had learned how to skate on the streets where we lived on 5th Street but I decided I'm good at this now so I'll go over to the next street and I went over the next street and I was going down this hill and I lost control. I couldn't do it and the next thing I knew I was at Professor Johnson's house because I had fallen and knocked myself out and he took me home--to his home and called my mother and told her where I was and everything. But see he just lived down the street from us. He lived at--we lived at the top of the hill and he was at the bottom of the hill. If you were driving and you didn't turn your car to the right or to the left, you'd run right into his house. When we were taking ballet lessons they would give us lessons, and Alma [ph.] and I would try to practice our lessons and we couldn't do them and Professor Johnson would come in and he would show us how to do them. And we were saying. We were looking and saying, "Dang he can do them and we can't do them and he's big and fat," you know. Speaker 2: He could actually do the ballet moves? Speaker 1: Yeah, he could do the ballet moves 'cause he was watching us and he was light on his feet and he could do them (laughter), it was funny. It was funny, and--but he was really nice but he was a firm person. When I was in elementary school my mother came down for some reason because someone had told her that I had--was making fun of the teacher or something and this particular teacher, Ms. Trust [ph.] liked pigeon, squab you know, and she was always talking about it and we used to say she looked like a pigeon. She ate so much pigeons, she looked like one. So I think one day I was mocking her or something like that and somehow and another mama found out about it and she had to come to school and Professor Johnson was trying to tell mama what I had done (laughter) and so he was imitating me imitating Ms. Trust and mama said he was so funny she couldn't help but laugh. But he was a very nice person. Now, his daughter is [HistoryMaker] Alma Powell, Alma Johnson Powell, and her son [HistoryMaker] Michael Powell looks just like him that's Colin Powell's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] wife. Speaker 2: Oh okay so Colin Powell's wife-- Speaker 1: Alma. Speaker 2: --is the daughter of Mr. Johnson? Speaker 1: Of Professor Johnson. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. That's interesting. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Let's-- Speaker 1: And like I said Michael looks just like, looks just like Professor Johnson. Story_ID: 351392 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in grade school [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama] or did you like school? Speaker 2: I liked school but I'm trying to think, what was my favorite subject? See when I was in school they sent girls to cooking and stuff and the fellows went to other things and so in elementary school they had me taking--going to the sewing classes and I didn't want to be in the sewing class and so I passed by one building where I heard all this noise, and it was a printing class. So I checked to see if I get--could switch from sewing to printing and they said no. So anyway I stayed in sewing long enough to learn how to make an apron. I think I made two aprons and they had a beauty culture and stuff. And then when I went to high school it was the same thing. We had to take cooking classes. Speaker 1: Now what high school did you go to? Speaker 2: Parker--A.H. Parker High School [Birmingham, Alabama] and we had to take sewing or cooking, and so I was in cooking long enough to learn how to scramble eggs and then I went down to see about getting into printing down there. I was able to get into printing in high school, but I didn't like it because they wanted women to go--the girls couldn't go where they wanted to. You couldn't go to auto mechanics you had to go to those other things. But as far as the academic courses, I don't know that I had a favorite one, I really don't. I had--my favorite teachers were--one was Ms. Palmer [ph.] in English and another I think was Mr. Henry [ph.]--not Mr. Henry he was in music but it was a history teacher that I liked. But I don't think I had--when I looked at my grades, my grades were just average. I didn't excel in anything, I was just average so I think that's just how I was. But my mother [Margaret Wright Cummings] believed that I should make good grades and so I always had a study hour early on when I was a kid, I mean real little I had to study and during that study hour, I couldn't talk on the phone, I couldn't listen to the radio, I couldn't watch television I had to study. If I told her I didn't have any homework she'd tell me to read what I had done the day before and read ahead. So I always had a study hour and no noise around. An interesting thing about that when my mother came here [Yellow Springs, Ohio] in 2000 and got sick, I would go into my little boiler room back there, my work room, and start working and tell her we can't have the television on and she couldn't understand that. I told her look mama you taught me that way and I went through college that same way. When I study I want it quiet when I'm focusing on things, I want it quiet. So that's a carryover from really studying so I managed to make fairly good grades simply because I studied hard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not that I liked courses. Speaker 1: Now you said you were a major--Parker is an all-black school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah all my schools were all black. Birmingham [Alabama] was 100 percent segregated (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 351393 Speaker 1: And the community you lived in was called--? Speaker 2: Enon Ridge [Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Enon Ridge, okay. Is that close to those communities that were being bombed and so forth in the '60s [1960s] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's exactly where it was. Speaker 1: Okay. It was that community. Speaker 2: It was that community, it was that area--parts of that area and I'm not going to call it a name but it amuses me when I hear some people from Birmingham [Alabama] who refer to living where the strivers were--the so called strivers was the elite community. And we talk about that, because they weren't bombing over there, because the decision makers were not over there. The decision makers were on Enon Ridge. We had Professor Johnson [Robert Charles Johnson] and right next door to him was his brother-in-law [George Crenshaw Bell] who was assistant superintendent of schools and right next to him was the Clark family, and they were into all kinds of stuff. Right across the street were the Andersons and they were into, you know, professional kinds of things and you had the Davenports and the Harris and the Furnaces. These were the lawyers and the doctors and the businessmen and not just the teachers but the directors and the principals and all. And Arthur Shores was a few blocks at the lower end of Enon Ridge, north, still north and that was the area that they were bombing. That's where the bombs were and that's why they call it Bombingham. Speaker 1: Yeah, Dynamite Ridge or something like that (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, Dynamite Hill. Speaker 1: Dynamite Hill, right. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis' family and I mean that's where it was and we were on the edge of the Jewish community. There was a Jewish community and then there was a black community and then there was this white community up in Fountain Heights [Birmingham, Alabama] and we were kind of in between there, in the midst there. So the decision makers--all the deals were made over there. Not over there where that lady in the White House [Washington, D.C.] says they were made. Speaker 1: Okay. That's as close as we're going to get to her identity. I see (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right (laughter). Story_ID: 351394 Speaker 1: Now you were a majorette in high school--grade school and high school you said. Speaker 2: And college too. Speaker 1: And college too? Okay, all right. So usually the majorettes are the more attractive young ladies. Speaker 2: Yeah I'm glad you mentioned that, because I don't know Mr. Handy [Charles Handy] who was W.C. Handy's brother was the band director at Lincoln [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama] and he had somebody else to do, who was going to be the drum major and something happened to her and so he asked me to try out for it. And so I did and so I was the drum major for a couple of years and kind of had a little following for a while there. And so then when I went to Parker [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], I wanted to be a majorette. So I tried out to be a majorette, for a majorette position and Mr. Casswell [ph.]--see you had the band director and then you had the person who was over the majorettes and Mr. Casswell was over the majorettes and Mr. Hudson [ph.] was over the band. So Mr. Casswell looked at me and he told me that I was too dark and so I couldn't be a majorette. Speaker 1: Now this was in a black school? Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I had--I did everything. He put us through a little trial--a little routine and I did all of that, but I was too dark. So I said okay. So then I tried the next year, same thing. So then finally the next time I tried out, there were several of us and what, you know what he did Larry [Larry Crowe]? He decided since there were so many of us dark skinned girls--now I'm talking about my complexion, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, which is not really considered dark in the black community. Speaker 2: Okay but there were so many dark skinned girls--so many of us it was enough to make a second line so he put us on the second line and we were about the same height and he said that the reason that he was like that was because from the stands when we march--when we hold our leg out he wants it to look like one leg not different colors just one leg, one shade. In the front line was Joan [ph.] a good friend of mine and you couldn't tell her from white. When we would go to the museum or go downtown or something Joan would get on there and she'd strut straight to the back, and Joan was just as white as she could be and the folks would just look at her so funny. She was the whitest of the group then there was Yvonne [Willa Yvonne Echols Hamilton] and Alma [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] and then Ernestine [ph.] and I. So anyway Joan and Alma and the other girls who were very, very fair some of them had gray eyes or green eyes and they had long hair, they were on the front row and we were on the back row. And then there was this girl who was extremely dark, extremely dark I mean she was really dark and she had this pretty wavy hair and she was good, I mean she was really good. You know where he put her? He put her behind the drum major 'cause she had to be on a line by herself. So we were all the same height, same color on the--and the same size, nobody's fat. It wasn't any heavy set folks and then on the other front line was all the high yellows and the long hair on the front line. Story_ID: 351395 Speaker 1: How did--you know, this is 1950s--early '50s [1950s] we're talking about but in a black school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], and we like to think we've come a long way from that kind of thing now, you know with the Black Power movement and all that. I know we still haven't left it completely but how did that make you feel? Did you think that was a natural thing to do or--? Speaker 2: Oh no, I didn't like it at all, we thought it was unfair but we didn't think that because that was his [Mr. Caswell (ph.)] rule that we needed to give up. We could have just walked away and gone on and learned how to play a clarinet or something, done something else, but we kept being persistent and because we did and we increased our numbers we got to march anyway. But no I didn't think it was right. I didn't like it at all. Speaker 1: What was (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just like I don't like it now. When you look at a Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] these flyers with the--comes out with Sunday papers and stuff like that who do you--? They got all these fair skinned folks there, slender mixed with white and Mexican people, but you don't see that many dark skinned people, men or women. They all look mixed and you don't see many heavy set ones, and you look on television and so it hasn't changed, it has not changed. At least in my opinion it hasn't changed. Maybe some other people think it has but it hasn't. Speaker 1: Well it's still some persistent kind of like intra racism in a way. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean when it comes from the outside, but it's perpetrated on the inside. Speaker 2: Yeah and it's interesting that you said it because when I was on this, and I'm still on this committee Dayton Dialogue on Race Relations [Dayton, Ohio] and we were doing the ground rules and all of that kind of stuff and talked about the mission what we were concerned about. And somehow color got in there and this white woman there, Judy [ph.], I think was her name was there and she was saying that, "Well you know it happens within groups and everything," and she looked at me and did like this and I turned to her and I said, "I don't care what you say but we're talking about black and white relations here in Dayton [Ohio]. That's what this committee is going to be about." Now, that has--and I knew that I was being restrictive there but it was because of all this other stuff that was basically in the '60s [1960s] and the Civil War and everything. That was black and white and it's still black and white except now we have to expand it, and that's why I'm smiling because we were talking about it at a meeting not long ago and I'm saying yeah when they get ready to change it and say we're talking about black/white and Hispanics and other minorities, we have to do that now but at that time I said no because that's where I saw the differences--the problem was the black and white not the ethnic. Story_ID: 360892 Speaker 1: We're talking about high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama]. So you as a majorette and being a good student and everything you probably had--you did all the prom stuff and all the other stuff that people do in high school, happens. Did you have a lot of friends, were you popular? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think I was part of that group that, we looked fast but we weren't fast 'cause we were studious but we were flirty-like and you know, like sometimes you'd flirt but after you flirt you run, you know, 'cause you don't want people, you know. So that's kind of how we were and I think I went to one prom by myself and another prom I--my neighbor took me, I grew up with my neighbor. And so it wasn't a whole lot of stuff and I don't, I can't--I'm trying to remember what the other girls did, I don't remember what they did. But we were goody two shoes in a way, you know, kind of reserved and I don't think any of us married right out of college--I mean right out of high school or even--it was after college or while in college, something. So it's interesting that you mentioned that because I ran across a letter that I received from this guy, he was at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I was still in high school and, "My darling sweetheart so and so I just finished crossing the Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] line and I'm tired," and this, that and the other and, "I'm on my way back to Chicago [Illinois] and I will stop by on the way," and I said I guess I should have married Jackson [ph.]. Jackson was interested in me but I wasn't that interested in him and he was far ahead of me and he went to a different high school. So he wasn't around to take me to a prom. And, no, I wasn't too popular. I mean, I mean, folks look but as far as dating and stuff like that, I had a few dates but not a whole lot of them, at least I don't think so. Now my mama [Margaret Wright Cummings] might tell you a different story (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 360893 Speaker 1: Well when you were in high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], did you--what did you see as your prospects after graduation? When you were a senior what were you looking at doing? Speaker 2: Oh well, see we always knew when I say we I'm talking about my friends and all of us we knew that when we graduated from high school we were going either go to college or get married, but we were going to be out of the house. It wasn't about hanging around, you know, that's how our parents brought us up. We were going to be on our own and the only way you could be on your own, so in quotes, is to be married or you go away to college and then after college you were on your own, you know. Then you could be on your own. And that was--I was just planning. I had decided that I did not want to get married right away after college because I didn't want to leave my mama's [Margaret Wright Cummings] apron strings and go to some guy and have to be doing what somebody else told me what to do. So that was my decision and I was--a guy did want to marry me-- Speaker 1: That was interesting just back there for a second that is a choice you hit the nail on the head there. That was a choice in those days for women, right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: If you got married it was expected that you would do what the guy told you to do to a certain extent, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So leaving one situation with your parents where you are a minor and to go into another one in marriage where you're treated as a minor. Speaker 2: I didn't want to do that and I don't think any of us wanted to do that and we didn't do that. Also during that time they said that if you married at twenty-five--if you weren't married by twenty-five you were a spinster. Speaker 1: At twenty-five? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that's what they said and an old maid and all of that, you know. So I had said I'd get married at twenty-five and I woke up and I thought, oh my goodness I'm twenty-five. This is my twenty-fifth year and I'm not even engaged this year and I said uh oh and so I was dating this guy and I said well maybe I ought to be nice and so I kind of changed my attitude and we started--and I married him (laughter). I married at twenty-six, I didn't marry at twenty-five, I married at twenty-six. I was already--we were already dating but I wasn't seriously looking at it. Speaker 1: But you actually felt some pressure there, to get married (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah at that point because that's when I had said I was going to get married. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And nobody else told me that, that was what I had said. I was out of college [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama], away from home and-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --had been on my own. Story_ID: 360894 Speaker 1: Now you graduated in '53 [1953], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: From high school. Did--now, where did you go to college? Speaker 2: Alabama A&M in Huntsville [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Huntsville, Alabama, okay. What was that like? I mean, did you--why did you choose Alabama A&M? Speaker 2: Well, originally I wanted to be a lawyer and I didn't know how I could become a lawyer, and we had college night at Parker High School [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] and there was a representative there from Alabama A&M. And so I asked them if they had scholarships or anything and if so, how do you apply for them? And they told me and I said okay. So I applied for a scholarship and I talked to the counselor and I got one. Now that's the reason--when I was teaching--when I started teaching out at Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio] I always told students that, you know, you have to be careful not to lie by omission because that's what happened to me in high school. I did not know until many, many years later that in the State of Alabama if there was not a black school that offered the academic major that you were interested in that the State of Alabama would pay your tuition to go to school out of state. And it wasn't just Alabama some other southern states did the same thing. But my counselor did not tell me that. So I went ahead and went to Alabama A&M and because I had taken training and liked it when I was in high school, I went ahead and majored in printing, graphic arts in college. And then I came to Ohio and worked as assistant director of the printing department for I think eight years, an instructor for eight years. Speaker 1: Where? Speaker 2: At Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], uh huh. Speaker 1: Central State, okay. Story_ID: 360895 Speaker 1: In college [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] I enjoyed history and what other course did I like? What area did I like besides history? I can't think of it. Printing I liked. Besides history and printing--I think those were my two favorite areas (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what was it about history that you liked so much in college? Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: 'Cause this is an era where they say there wasn't a lot of black history being taught, and I don't know if it was that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well no it wasn't black history being taught. We had black history in high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], but Mr. Blackwell [ph.] was our history teacher and he just made it so interesting and he always--it wasn't just history it was also, like political science and history too, you know. And you would, could--he would teach it in such a way you could better understand the politics of today, you know, and how it all happened, because I think the way he taught history and connected it to political--to the system makes you think about the fact that it's not just one issue. You have to deal with the whole system when you're trying to make a change and when you're looking at something historically you just don't focus on one little area. You got to look at it, you know, over a period of time before you can figure out exactly what was going on, the whole scope of it. But I liked that, I liked the way he addressed it, he had us to look at it. Of course, in printing there I was the only female. It seemed like they only had one female at a time and I was the only female there. So it was doing as well, making sure you did better than the men. At least do as well but better if you could in those classes. So that was kind of nice, kept you on your toes. I can't think of any other course. I just took what they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were there any other-- Story_ID: 360896 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there any other mentors at Alabama [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mentors? Speaker 1: Yeah, at Alabama. Speaker 2: Yes I had quite a few. I had Tapscott, Mr. Tapscott [Harold W. Tapscott] and oh my goodness I can't think of Dr.--the director of the program. I don't know, who was his name? I can't think of his name but anyway those two and then Mary Chambers [Mary M. Chambers] who taught English [sic.] and was the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and there was Mr. Lee [Ralph H. Lee] who was the registrar, and I worked for him my entire time in school. He was the one who taught me how to make requests I guess. I worked in the registrar's office and I was supposed to work during the Christmas break, but I had finished all my work. I helped to get the grades together and sent them out to the different people--to different students and I did the transcripts. And so I had finished what I had to do and so I saw him walking down the street and I said, "Mr. Lee I'm going home for the break, I finished such and such thing and so I'm going home for the rest of the break." He said, "You're going home?" And I said, "I'm going home," and he said, "Okay." So I went home and when I came back I didn't have a job. So I reported for work and he said, "You don't have a job Alyce [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins]," and I said, "Why don't I have a job?" And he said, "You told me you left and went to Birmingham [Alabama]." I said, "But I told you I was going home," and he said, "Well you don't tell your employers that you're going to take off, you ask." I said, "Well, that's how I ask at home," and he said, "But this isn't home, Alyce." I would tell mama [Margaret Wright Cummings] I'm going to do so and so and she'd say no you're not going to do it or she'd say okay. So that was the way I was asking but he taught me how to ask. So I didn't have a job for about a week, maybe a week and a half and then he called me and told me I could come back and so I went back so he taught me a lesson that I still remember. So he was a mentor, a very good mentor, his entire family. So yeah those were my mentors (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 360897 Speaker 1: When you graduate--now what is it? Were you the only--you were the only woman in that department, right? Speaker 2: At that time yeah and when I came up here to Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] I was the only woman there. Speaker 1: Let's go back to Alabama [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] for a minute, were you involved in sororities or that sort of thing there or did you join any of that? Speaker 2: Yeah, well when I was in Birmingham [Alabama] the Zetas [Zeta Phi Beta Sorority] had named me their youth of the year and the National Negro Council of Women honored for something. So when I went to Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University] I had said if I join a sorority I would join Zetas but when I got to A&M I decided, well I don't think I want to join the Zetas and I didn't too much about it beyond that. And then the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] approached me and I decided that I would go ahead and pledge Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, and so I did that. And while I was pledging, you know they had me doing all that silly stuff and I had noticed because when I was in the registrar's [Ralph H. Lee] office I could see the students' grades change from one quarter, the quarter that they were pledging their grades would drop. Some dropped real low, and others wouldn't be quite so bad. And so when I was pledging I understood that, but I decided though that once I made the sorority I was going to change that and there was an incident during pledging that really made me very angry because they had invited sisters from Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and this little girl, Ella Johnson [ph.] I think was her name and we were supposed to bend down and say, "Me, I'm the lowly worm. Me, the lowly worm would like to speak to someone high and mighty and great." So I bowed down and she said, "That's not low enough," and then she pushed my head down to make me bow lower and I had a little sand bucket, we had a little sand bucket we were carrying around 'cause we were on line and so I threw that sand bucket down and took off whatever it was I had on and I said, "You guys can have this." She was just showing out because those other folks were there and I walked out. So Ms. Chambers [Mary M. Chambers] and Ms. Eunice Stuckey [ph.] and Ms. Johnson, I think was her name, they came and they talked to me and I went back in and I crossed the lines. But after I was made into the sorority, I decided that I wanted to be dean of pledgees, and so I campaigned for that because I wanted to change all that stupid stuff that they were doing. And they were blackballing girls simply because of boyfriends and stuff like that, and I didn't think that was right. And so I was dean of pledgees for two years and I was able to change stuff, and make the sorors have those girls do constructive things and service oriented kinds of things and also keep their grades up. You know, if you had--we were on the three point system if you have a two point five coming in you're supposed to have a two point five going out. If you had a three, you had a three crossing over. I didn't think it should drop that way but see I pledged and then I became a life member. I'm not active with any local groups but I do have life membership. Speaker 1: In AKA? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 360898 Speaker 1: How did you end up securing the job at Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]? You graduated in what, '57 [1957]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, and-- Speaker 1: Oh let me ask about this before we get out of there. You started school in '53 [1953], came out in '57 [1957] during that time the Montgomery Bus Boycott was going on. It started in '56 [1956] I guess. Brown v. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] happens. I mean a lot of stuff was going on in civil rights did you pay attention to that activity? Speaker 2: Not as much as I wished I had. I was reading about it and I knew about it but it wasn't actually happening in Birmingham [Alabama] at that time. So I was not involved okay. Speaker 1: There's a distance of, what is it, about two hours, three hours between Birmingham and Montgomery [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, very short distance but it didn't hit me at that time. It did later when I--just peripherally when I was at Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama], and I was coming home and my mother [Margaret Wright Cummings] was there and stuff like that. But I really regret, and I'm not the only one I mean it's just a few hours away but it still didn't hit home with us right then. We knew about it, we knew about segregation, we didn't like it and all of that stuff but it didn't hit; it didn't sink in, okay. When it really hit home was after my mother got involved because the other thing that had been happening before the boycott in Montgomery and all of that the other stuff that had been happening with the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] and the bombing and Birmingham period. I mean that was an ongoing thing, all the time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so homes were being bombed. There's a guy that they arrested a Klansman I guess named Dynamite Bob Chambliss [Robert Edward Chambliss] I think there was. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: They sent him to prison eventually when he was older, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm, older person. So we grew up under that, you know, we grew up under that. We weren't organized and we weren't protesting, okay. So that was happening down in Birmingham, I mean in Montgomery and all I was thinking about was I was graduating [from A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] and I was going to Huntsville [Alabama] to A&M. Now during that time when I would go home, I had to travel by bus. I would travel by bus, and there were a couple of times and nothing happened that I flexed my, that I flexed my muscles. One, I had caught the bus and we were going on in to Birmingham and these white folks got on the bus. I mean, they were just as dirty and scrunchy looking as they could be and they were standing over me and this woman says, "Why don't you get up and let us white folks sit down?" And I just sat there and I looked out the window. They had come from this bus stop wherever it was and it had men's, m-i-n-s and women's, w-i-m-i-n-s and I was like look at that, now this woman is standing here telling me to get up. And I sat there but the driver didn't say anything to me but that was--I'm going back to Montgomery and even though it was the city bus, this was a Greyhound--a Trailways bus I think I was on. Then the other thing you had these little stops where you could stop and get a sandwich or something like that and we had to go down a driveway, an alley like and then go in the back door to get the sandwich and so I got off and I was walking down there and it was muddy and watery and everything and smelly and I said I'm not going to walk through that stuff and I turned around, walked back and walked through the front door but I went to the back counter. When some of the other kids who were on the bus, this was a regular bus, saw me do that they came on in and they waited on us. They didn't say anything to us about it. So those times like I was telling you when our little group would go downtown, we would just get on the bus, put our money in--rode the streetcar or the bus and put our money in and walk straight to the back of the bus. Yeah, so that, that didn't--so I didn't participate in it. My mother when it was really, really heavy down there she was right in the middle of it. Story_ID: 360899 Speaker 1: Later on this week, we're going to be talking to Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] but now when did he start agitating, leading the agitation there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember the dates; I wished I'd known that you were going to ask me that. I told mama [Margaret Wright Cummings] to be here but she didn't want to come. Speaker 1: Was it before you left for college [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] or was it after when he got started? Speaker 2: No I think it was after. Speaker 1: I think you're right. Speaker 2: I think it was after, because my mother was involved she and her husband, Edmond Cummings. They were very active in that, and going to--they just referred to it as the movement--and going to the meetings and everything and picketing and all of that. I was away, I wasn't in Birmingham [Alabama] during the time she was doing all of that and I didn't pay a whole lot of attention to what she was talking about until I got home and then I saw what she was talking about. That this was an organized movement to change things in Birmingham. Not just the busses but the commercial places, the department stores where you couldn't try clothes on and all of that. They were attacking that whole, that entire system. And so they would meet once or twice a week and my mother worked for the Afro American Insurance Company [Afro-American Life Insurance Company]. And so she had to walk from door to door collecting the premiums and everything. So once she became involved with the movement she took her registration materials with her and she registered people as she was talking to them about paying their insurance. Then she and her husband got a voting machine booth or whatever you call it and had it put in the house and she would go over and get the people she had registered, bring them to the house and teach them how to use the ballot box. It was during that time that the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] started coming past our house and the neighbors started looking out for mama and them. I didn't know until recently that they had put their house down as a place where people could come and stay overnight, get a bath and food and everything and she was talking about these two white guys who came there and knocked on the door and they stayed there. So I regret very much that I was not there and more involved. I mean, I just wasn't there. I just wasn't there. Story_ID: 360900 Speaker 1: Cynthia Wesley, her mother, Ms. Gertrude [Gertrude Wesley] and her father, Mr. Claude Wesley, Professor Claude Wesley were our neighbors and like at Easter, my first Easter wearing stockings. Mama [Margaret Wright Cummings] had to work and I got dressed before mama went to work and I wanted to wear stockings and mama said, "Well I don't know whether you can wear stockings or not, but when you get ready to leave you go up to Ms. Gertrude and let her look at you and she can make the decision whether your outfit would look better or not with stockings." And so I did, and Ms. Gertrude told me I could wear my stockings. My mother knew her and I knew Ms. Gertrude and then my mother also knew the Robertsons. But no, I wasn't there and then I came here--this is skipping a little bit but I was living in Yellow Springs [Ohio] when they were protesting Gegner's Barbershop here in Yellow Springs. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Right, right, right. Speaker 1: And when we had the Prince George [ph.] students here. Speaker 2: Gegner's Barbershop, right. Okay so what was Ms. Gertrude's last name? Speaker 1: Wesley. Speaker 2: Gertrude Wesley okay, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah, Gertrude. They didn't have any children, she and Mr. Wesley. He was a principal and she was a teacher. They didn't have any children and so they adopted Cynthia and then when Cynthia was killed in the bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama], Ms. Wesley adopted, they adopted Cynthia's sister [Shirley Wesley King]. That's what I understand a lot of the teachers were doing, like girls would get pregnant in high school and they didn't know what to do with the baby, and so teachers who wanted children would adopt them. Story_ID: 360901 Speaker 1: One of the things I thought was nice, another nice experience we had at Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] was that Wernher von Braun who was stationed over at Redstone Arsenal [Alabama] would come over to Alabama A&M on a Saturday and just tutor or hang out with the students in the physics department. Speaker 2: Really, now that's somebody--now he was rocket expert (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rocket expert, German. Speaker 2: He was a German rocket expert who came over here after the war [World War II, WWII] and he was--I know Walt Disney did a feature ['Man in Space'] on him on television. So he would just come over and hang out? Speaker 1: Just come over and we didn't--initially we didn't know who he was or anything but we weren't doing that well in physics and Mr. Pugh--Dr. Pugh [Charles H. Pugh] who was our teacher was helping us out but then he would come over and after he'd been there a couple of times we realized, boy guess who he is. You know, the word passed around. But he would just come in and work with us on a Saturday afternoon (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's interesting. Speaker 1: --for a considerable amount of time. And was it Little Richard that went to the Seventh-day Adventist school and then--he was singing and then he went--he stopped singing and then he went to the Seventh-day Adventist school, Oakwood College [Oakwood University] there in Huntsville [Alabama], but that's neither here nor there. I was trying to think. Okay. Story_ID: 360902 Speaker 1: Now Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] how did you get this job at Central State, printer? Speaker 2: Okay when I was at Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] one of my classmates, Reuben Baxter graduated before I did and he was hired here at Central and when they said that they needed someone else he contacted me and asked me to apply for the job. I told him I wasn't interested in the job. And I really didn't want to come to Ohio, and after I graduated I was offered a job down in Texas, and Texas was too far. So I was working there in the registrar's [Ralph H. Lee] office as full time and so I just really didn't want to leave Alabama. And so finally President Drake [Joseph Drake] and Dean Carter [Robert A. Carter] who was an academic dean told me that I should really go ahead and work in the field for which I had been trained and that I should come--accept the job and that if I didn't like it they would have a job for me there at Alabama A&M. And Dr. Wesley [Charles H. Wesley] had been writing me as well. Speaker 1: The president of Central State? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, the president of Central State and so I came and then I didn't want to fail, you know, because I said--I was working hard to do well and to like it because I didn't want to go back. If I had the job--I knew I had the job but if I went back it would have meant that I couldn't cut it, you know. So that's how I got here. So Baxter was the director and Mr. Dungee [ph.] who had been the director was ill and he subsequently passed and so Baxter was named the director and I was his assistant director. Again, I was responsible for most of the linotype work and I taught the introductory courses in printing and composition and platen press and again I was the only female doing that. We had a secretary but I was the only female in there and they didn't want to give me any respect, and we had a huge platen press that I could operate as well as Baxter could. So I was having a hard time and they were teasing me all the time, and Baxter was out of town once and the linotype machine broke and I had to order the part and I was just so happy because I was able to--I knew the part to order, I knew where to call and I knew how to put it on, you know, this complicated machine. They would just tease me and I had been keeping all of this stuff to myself, you know, people. I was up here in the North and I didn't understand them and they didn't understand me but I was just keeping it all to myself. So it finally got to me, and I kind of lost it and told them you guys can have this job, I don't need this and I walked out. And then, what's his name? Mr. Sellers [Walter G. Sellers] and Mr. Johns, [HistoryMaker] Harry Johns talked with me and talked with them and so then I went back and I didn't have any more problems with them. They stopped teasing me like they had been because they were just disrespecting my position and I didn't like that. Story_ID: 360903 Speaker 1: And then the other thing that was happening is that the students were the same age--there wasn't too much difference between our ages, you know. And there was--Clay Dixon was one of the students (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He became-- Speaker 1: Henderson [ph.]. Speaker 2: He became the mayor of Dayton [Ohio]. I just wanted to point that out. Speaker 1: Became the mayor of Dayton. Yes, he became the mayor of Dayton. Speaker 2: Clay was-- Speaker 1: I had no idea he was interested in politics when he was a student. Speaker 2: He was my brother's roommate in college, Donald Crowe, yeah. Speaker 1: Really? And so Clay Dixon and John Henderson [ph.], his family had a print shop there in Dayton and they already knew a lot, because they had taken printing in school in Dayton and also Henderson was working with his father so they knew a lot of the stuff that I was teaching. So they were kind of, what, humoring me because they felt they had it going on. But it was, it was--I enjoyed it eventually and I worked with Ann (unclear) Williamson. At that time Central [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] had a journal they called The Journal of Human Relations and we printed that book. That book would be about two inches thick and we printed these papers written people all over the United States and abroad, from Europe and different places dealing with human rights issues and all of that was--the type was set, it was printed there and bound at Central State University. We did the gold torch; we did all of Central's printing as well as we had students who were majoring in printing there. So I was there eight years and they decided that they wanted to close the print shop. We tried to tell them that they really didn't want to do that but they did. Story_ID: 360904 Speaker 1: So when they closed the print shop I was without a job and so I was married then and so I just decided well I'll be a housewife, at least my husband said you can just be a housewife. Speaker 2: Now where did you meet your husband? Tell us, tell us about him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I met him while I was at Central [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. See when you came, when you came here--when I came here in '58 [1958] you couldn't just live anywhere and so they had barracks there for faculty for families. The families lived on the campus and then they had a couple of houses for single women and so I lived in one of the houses. I lived in Homewood Cottage [Wilberforce, Ohio] the other one was teachers' cottage. Speaker 2: Homewood Cottage that's the title of--that's the place where Hallie Q. Brown wrote 'Homespun Heroines' ['Homespun Heroines and Other Women of Distinction,' Hallie Q. Brown] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, really? Speaker 2: From Homewood Cottage right. She signs it like that from Homewood Cottage, Wilberforce, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's where I lived with other single women and there were three of us who were about the same age the others were older, much older. So one of the girls was dating this guy and he had a friend and so they introduced me to the friend and that's how I met my former husband--my ex-husband. I don't remember the date but then we got married in '62 [1962] and then we were divorced in '70 [1970]. And we moved, first we lived on Stewart Street in Dayton [Ohio] for about a year and then we built a house in Yellow Springs [Ohio] and moved over to Yellow Springs. And after the divorce I just stayed in this area. Story_ID: 360905 Speaker 1: So, 1966 the press [at Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] closed is that about right? Speaker 2: That's when the print shop closed except for one person Baxter [Reuben Baxter] was there and so I decided--well I was going to be a housewife and one day my husband came home and he said, "What did you do today Marie [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins]?" And I said, "I went out and got a job" and he said, "You did what?" I said, "I got a job, because I can't sit around here." 'Cause the ladies were watching the stories and talking about babies and neither one of those interested me so I started looking for a job and I found one. And then he came home another day and said, "Well since you want to work here's an ad," and that was an ad about graduate--they were looking for people to work for the Ohio Bureau for Vocational Rehabilitation and they were offering tuition for a master's degree. So I applied for that and went to Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] and completed that program in '68 [1968] and-- Speaker 1: So that's a master's program? Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: It was a master's in rehabilitation counseling and I worked at the Dayton mental health hospital [Dayton State Hospital, Dayton, Ohio]. It was on Wayne Avenue a long time ago. Speaker 1: Yeah, that used to be a running gag here in Dayton [Ohio] they would send you to Wayne Avenue if you were acting--kept acting crazy. That's what they used to say in my neighborhood. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was just known, like Wayne Avenue. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. So I worked there for a while and then I left there. Story_ID: 360906 Speaker 1: I guess I was there [Dayton State Hospital, Dayton, Ohio] a year or so and then they assigned--I was still working for the Ohio Bureau of Vocational Rehabilitation but then they transferred me to Greene County vocational school [Greene Joint Vocational School, Xenia, Ohio] and I worked there which was nice because that was just around the corner, it was just down the road from here. But one of the things--this guy was really nice, he was a nice guy and I talked with him a lot and we would have lunch together and so I mentioned something to him one day that I had gone to the doctor and the doctor told me that maybe I needed to take Valium or something like that. And he said, "Really Alyce [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins]? I didn't know black folks would get nervous like that." (Laughter) And I just looked at him 'cause I mean it wasn't any point in getting angry with the man. He didn't mean any harm. I just looked at him and I said I would talk to him about it later, and I did. I talked to him about it later and I told him, "It doesn't make any difference; we have things that upset us and we need to do this that and the other." I said, "It's not--anxiety and stuff it isn't by color," you know. But it was happy go lucky all the time and we had a nice conversation and he was really embarrassed that he had hurt me 'cause he was just a country guy from a very close environment and hadn't had any experience with black folks. I saw him a few years later at a conference in Columbus [Ohio] and he flushed when he saw me 'cause I knew what he was thinking and I never did revisit it again, you know. So that was an interesting experience there. But now you were saying how I got to Central [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]? What did I--what, after I left Kent [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], Yvonne [Yvonne Walker Taylor] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, now. Yeah, you were at Kent. Speaker 1: Okay so then I left (unclear). Speaker 2: Now Kent State, now, I just want to--at Kent State there was a lot going on there. Speaker 1: It was after I left. Speaker 2: Yeah after you left. Speaker 1: But it kind of affected me in a way because of some of the people who were involved there--some of the administrators who were involved. So I kind of knew some of the things that were going on. Story_ID: 360907 Speaker 1: In '68 [1968] you graduated and you worked for Dayton state mental hospital [Dayton State Hospital, Dayton, Ohio] and then for Greene County [Greene Joint Vocational School, Xenia, Ohio]. Now that's where we had you at Greene County. So how long were you with Greene County? Speaker 2: I don't know five years or so. I went to Wilberforce--Yvonne Walker Taylor--I must have been there longer than that, I don't know maybe a couple of years, maybe I was there a couple of years and Yvonne Walker Taylor recruited me for Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and--let me back up the program at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] was a two year program but while you were in the program you were also working before you got your master's degree. So when I was at Wayne State [sic. Dayton State Hospital, Dayton, Ohio], I was still at Kent State and then when I finished Kent State I was at Greene Joint Vocational School and then I think I was just there a year or so and then Yvonne recruited me for Wilberforce and I started working at Wilberforce with Yvonne Walker Taylor. I started working at Wilberforce and so I was at Wilberforce in '68 [1968] to '72 [1972] that's how that went. So while I was in the program I worked at Wayne State hospital and part of the--maybe six months of that time I was working with Greene Joint Vocational School and then a year or so after that. Okay. And so then they hired me at Wilberforce to be their director of counseling and that was a very interesting experience. It was a very good experience. Story_ID: 360908 Speaker 1: It started out very smooth, very easy to do but it wasn't long before students were protesting to change the different rules and regulations there [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], mainly housing. They wanted open dormitories. Speaker 2: Now this is--we're talking about a time period where-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --a lot of the universities in the United States, the public schools and the private ones, were opening up or relaxing rules that had been in existence since the 19th century. Speaker 1: In response to the students. Speaker 2: Except for the black schools (laughter) they maintain, they made the students take their hats off in class and if you wanted to date someone you had to go to the dorm and sit down and wait for them to come down to you and there's a curfew, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was a curfew. Speaker 2: These are rules that go way back to when the schools were first founded. Speaker 1: Yes now Wilberforce though was not quite that formal with the dating as say Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] where I had gone to school, but you. Speaker 2: Well Central [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] seemed pretty formal or the way my brother described it when he was there. Speaker 1: Yeah but Wilberforce wasn't quite-- Speaker 2: It wasn't as bad as-- Speaker 1: --wasn't quite that way but you did have the girls in one building and the boys in another. And so that was a very, very difficult time. It was a good time because we learned so much in that process because we had to--my position was to try to compromise with what the students wanted, with what the administration was requiring and try to come up with some neutral kind of thing that would work. But they were really gung ho and there were some administrators who were gung ho that nothing would change and Dr. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who were the student leaders there during that time? Speaker 1: There was one guy named McDowell [ph.], I think his name was McDowell and the other person you know very well Katrina Hazard. Speaker 2: Now Katrina Hazzard-Gordon. Speaker 1: Yes Dr. Katrina Hazzard-Gordon. Speaker 2: Yes, she's the author of a book called 'Jookin'' ['Jookin': The Rise of Social Dance Formations in African American Culture,' Katrina Hazzard-Gordon], and I think she's got another book out. Speaker 1: Oh really? Speaker 2: Well known in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Muggy Do [ph.], I can't think of Muggy Do's name. Speaker 2: Muggy Do? Speaker 1: Yeah she has a very successful independent school in D.C. and McDowell went on to get his law degree and was hired by Cummins engine [Cummins, Inc.]. We had some smart kids they were really smart and they knew they had our backs to the wall and we had to just--and their parents were supporting all of this stuff too. So anyway it was a difficult time but it was a very good time, because they were so well organized. And we said we know these kids are smart but something's going on here and we didn't know until later, much later that SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] folks were helping them with their planning. Speaker 2: Or organizing them? Speaker 1: No I think they came in--they didn't organize them, I think they came in after it got started 'cause Katrina and them got all that stuff started. But they were around helping not only Wilberforce, but they were stirring stuff at Antioch [Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] and Central State. Dr. Yvonne Chappelle Seon [HistoryMaker Yvonne Seon] and I were the two youngest members on the team and so we were working hard to resolve the issues. And we did, but it was something. I mean, we were making midnight trips out there and the kids had set the building on fire, "Look over there, Alyce [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins]--," Yvonne was driving and she said, "Alyce, look over there they are burning the place down." 'Cause they had called us and woke us up that night and told us that we had to get out there, you know. And we would go in, and--to meet with the students in one of the dormitories and it was just like some tribunal. They were all dressed up in their suits and everything and then we were on the other side of the table just going back and forth it was like labor union stuff, it was--it was something. Story_ID: 360909 Speaker 1: But it was also at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] with Dr. Stokes [Rembert E. Stokes] and Nancy Stokes [Nancy Phillips Stokes] that I got a chance to interact with a lot of people I wouldn't have interacted with otherwise. Because there, because it was so small--the university was so small everybody wore more than one hat and so you had to always jump in and do something and so we got a chance to meet people like John Glenn and Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], and John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.]. I remember I was taking John Conyers back to the airport. He'd been talking to people and I had to take him to the airport and so I was driving down Backbone--Devils Backbone Road (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now that is Brush Row Road they call it, it's the devil's--renamed it the Devils Backbone. Speaker 1: Devils Backbone, but I was driving. Speaker 2: It goes through Clifton Gorge [Clifton Gorge State Nature Preserve, Ohio] I guess. Speaker 1: Yeah it goes through there but I was driving him down through Brush Row Road which has a hill and curvy too and he was so and he was--and I was driving fast and he was like, "Are you sure you can handle this car?" And I said, "Yeah I drive it every day." "How far is the airport from here? Are we going to get there on time?" I said we'll be there on time and I got him there. But he was so nervous. I don't know whether he was nervous because I was driving fast or because I was a female. I don't know but anyway-- Speaker 2: No, it was because of Brush Row Road. I know the first time I was on it I thought I was going to die. Speaker 1: Oh, it was fun, you know, both of those roads. But-- Speaker 2: The Devils Backbone. Speaker 1: And Jim what's his name James Brown, yeah James Brown came in, Sammy Davis, Jr. Now the other thing about Sammy Davis, Jr. is that in Birmingham [Alabama] his father [Sammy Davis, Sr.] used to come to Birmingham and play at a place they called The Frolic [The Frolic Theatre, Birmingham, Alabama]. It was like a theater it was a vaudeville kind of place and he would come and bring Sammy Davis, Jr. who was a baby with him and the daddy would have my father, Arthur Earl--would always come to our house because he wanted my father to do his car, check his car out 'cause they would drive into Birmingham from wherever they were coming and go back. So mama [Margaret Wright Cummings] got to know them early on and to watch Sammy Davis not completely grow up in person but remember him as a kid and then see him on stage and in the movies and things. Story_ID: 360910 Speaker 1: We had lots of things going on there and lots of opportunities and it was there that I learned to become an effective professional networker because Dr. Stokes [Rembert E. Stokes] would send me to the American Council for Education [ph.] meeting when he couldn't go. He had someplace to go and he'd send me and I would have to go to all these meetings and since I had to go to all these meetings I figure I might as well meet some of the people and talk with them and all, and it was a good experience. I mean, I had a lot of opportunities same with the American Association for Higher Education [American Association for Higher Education and Accreditation], I attended those meetings representing him. The thing that I liked--the students finally realized that if they wanted to get something done, if they wanted Dr. Stokes to do something that they were going to have to attack people that worked for him, the ones that he wouldn't want anything to happen to and so I was one of the ones. So I had long line outside from my door outside the building of students coming in wanting counseling. Speaker 2: Well they did that to--as a demonstration-- Speaker 1: You know what they had this--I'm sure that the other folks told them to do this to get this part together. They decided that they would employ psychological warfare and they did it. They would rumble 'cause, you know, the administrative buildings were on the first floor and the students lived upstairs and everything. They would rumble up there and make all that noise with their feet and everything and then they would line up in all of these different offices, Yvonne's [HistoryMaker Yvonne Seon] office, my office and Cassie's [ph.] office, just line up, you know. Speaker 2: Were you in Shorter Hall [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]? Speaker 1: Um-hm in Shorter Hall. Speaker 2: That's the replica of the original building, right, they--? Speaker 1: Yeah it's gone now. Speaker 2: Yeah it's gone now. Speaker 1: So they were sitting there and I was going through all of that and I said Alyce [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins] why are you sitting here? You don't have to this stuff. This was after all the other protests that they had been doing, I mean it was just one constant thing right after the other. I said, you don't really have to deal with this and I had just written this grant for them--for the university and received the award for a hundred and some thousand dollars to start a rehab program there. I said yeah I don't need to do this and Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio] was courting me anyway so I just decided well I'll just say yes to Wright State and I don't feel bad about leaving because I'm leaving them with a grant, because they want more historically black colleges [HBCUs] to offer a degree program in rehab and I helped them out. And so at the end of that year I just accepted the job and went on over to Wright State. Story_ID: 360911 Speaker 1: Was anything--I mean were things resolved in Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] you think to your satisfaction when you look back on it? Speaker 2: I think some of the changes that were made and I'm trying to remember what they were, but I remember thinking that some of the changes made academically because they were complaining about that too. I think some of those worked out okay but the open dorm, I don't know whether that--I didn't think it worked out well. Speaker 1: So they did get the open dorm? Speaker 2: They got the open dorms but how do you limit--how do you determine whether or not you're dealing with a registered student or somebody off the street coming into those dorms? I mean, how do you regulate--how do you police that? And so I didn't--I personally didn't think that was good, I still feel that way about that because the students aren't mature enough. Now another thing this is kind of changing a little bit but we would get these students in and they would just raise all kind of sand and they would be up all night long, and I'm saying what's going on, I do not understand it. Then it hit me one night I had to drive out to something and I remembered when I first came to Wilberforce, I had a hard time adjusting, because I had come from the city, bright lights, no crickets, you know. And these kids were coming from Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York], California and places like that where they were used to hearing car horns and lots of stuff. They were used to being able to see their hand anytime they held it up before their face. But out there you hold your hand up, you don't see anything 'cause it's so dark, you know. And they would come in and that first three months man it was just awful and then it would smooth out, because then they had gotten used to it and I said okay (laughter). Story_ID: 360912 Speaker 1: Let me just ask you, though, just revisiting that for a second, so did things seems like you all took quite a beating in that situation, you and Dr. Chappelle, I mean Dr. Seon [HistoryMaker Yvonne Seon] and some of the other administrators and (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we did but they were right in a lot of ways, we did need to make a change and so we made those changes, we made those adjustments and I think they turned out okay later on. One of the other things that I did that I was pleased about while I was there is that I talked Dr. Stokes [Rembert E. Stokes] into hiring a company out of Washington to come in and help with building communication skills between, communication lines between faculty and staff, because most of the faculty--I mean, faculty, staff and students, because most of the faculty were white and they were just at each other all the time, you know and so we-- Speaker 1: So most of the faculty at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] was white actually? Speaker 2: Yeah the ones--I'd say it was probably 40/50. You know 40 [percent] white and 50 [percent] black or something like that, but they had a high presence okay. So I wrote this little grant--this little proposal and sent it to them and Dr. Stokes accepted and we developed these little encounter groups and we had teams of I think about ten, ten students and a faculty person and the faculty person's wife. So not only did they just get together and hash out emotions and feelings and attitudes about things but they also did social things. They would go out to different restaurants and things or go to a movie as a group and that kind of thing to get to know each other better and that worked out well. And we wouldn't have done that if it had not been for all of that other stuff that was going on. So I was pleased that I was able to make that happen. Story_ID: 360913 Speaker 1: One thing I--before we leave Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]--Wilberforce [sic.]. I neglected to ask you about this before we got started a couple reels ago. Tell us about your relationship with Dr. Wilhelmina S. Robinson, she said--you said she was one of your favorites. Speaker 2: Yeah I met Dr. Wilhelmina Robinson when I came to Central State. Speaker 1: That was way back in--? Speaker 2: That was in '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958]. Speaker 2: And I admired her, but I didn't know her and I didn't get to know her until as a friend I guess I would say until about '63 [1963]. I knew her because she and Gladys Powell were good friends and Ms. McCants [ph.] they were all good friends and I would be around her, you know. But I really got to know her after I moved to Yellow Springs [Ohio] and she lived down the street from me and I would go down and visit with her and she was writing and I would help her either with the research or she'd ask me to read over something and not really editing because I'm not that good at it but I could read things for her and help her make changes. And then I would drive her to her different speaking engagements and then other times we would just sit in her backyard and listen to--she liked Tom Jones and listened to Tom Jones and sit there and talk and chat. We would have dinner together and she was very--I would be there when she was preparing to make a presentation so I saw how she got her stuff together when she got ready to go make a professional presentation somewhere. Then I would get there, drive her there, and see her make the presentation, her style and everything and then how she would interact with audience there and all and then we would critique it, you know. As far as I was concerned it was great but she would self-critique it and I learned a lot from her. And then she--after she retired she moved to Florida it's right on the tip of my tongue, but she moved to Florida and I went down there and visited with her for a while. And she was sick and in the hospital up at Ohio State [The Ohio State University Medical Center; The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio] in '74 [1974] and I called and asked her how she was doing and she said, well whatever she had gone up there for, "They've taken care of that but now they tell me there's a spot on my lung." At the time I was smoking Parliaments and I had this cigarette and I put the cigarette out when she said that's what they'd found a spot on her lung and Mina never did stop smoking, but I put that cigarette out and never picked it up again. I don't know what was the cause of her death, I don't remember now and then when she did die they had this little tiny--some kind of little--a few lines obituary initial thing and so I just sat down and wrote her official obituary. Because I said there is no way anyone who had given as much as she had and who was as enthusiastic as she was about her work locally, nationally, you know and in the state should have just a few little lines like that, you know. And when she was working on 'Man in America' she was really thrilled when they contacted her. The guy from Burnett [ph.] and some kind of publishing company heard her make a presentation at one of those history meetings--historical, history professional meetings. Speaker 1: Probably the Association for the Studies of Negro Life and History [sic. Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and History; Association for the Study of African American Life and History]. Speaker 2: No it was the major one-- Speaker 1: African American Life and History. Speaker 2: No it was not just the Negro-- Speaker 1: American Historical Association? Speaker 2: It may have been the American Historical society or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so she accepted that contract, and, you know, and so I helped her with that. We did a lot together. When you work together with people you get to know them so she and I developed a real close friendship. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very good friendship. Story_ID: 360914 Speaker 1: You were asking me about Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio] and the courtship. Speaker 2: Right, then we got a panic (laughter). Speaker 1: When I was in the Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] vocational rehabilitation program, one of the co-directors of that program was Perry Hall and Wright State had hired him to develop a rehab program--rehabilitation program at Wright State and so he knew that I was at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and when I decided that Wilberforce should have a program in rehabilitation, Perry helped me to make contact with the proper people, and I went to a grant writing workshop then did some other things and then he reviewed the grant before I submitted it and it was during that time that he said, "Alyce [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins], I'm looking for somebody to come over and help me. Will you come?" And I said, "Well no, I'm not really interested," and I said, "We just started with this program, I'm working on that and I hope it's funded and I'd like to get it started." So he just kind of waited in the wings and all. He would come over and would call and then after I decided I would leave Wilberforce I called him and told him that I would consider it. So then he talked to his dean, Dean Marquis [F. Norwood Marquis] and Dean Marquis started calling me and was making offers salary wise and stuff. No, I went over for the interview, I submitted information, my application and then I went to the interview and then he started calling me about salaries and talking and I wasn't really enthusiastic about what he was offering me. And so one day he called and he said, "Well I don't understand why I'm having so much difficulty trying to get you to decide to come. What's the problem? How much do you think we should pay you?" And I said, "Well, I know you want me over there because of affirmative action," I said, "And I think you're going to be counting me, and so since you counted me three times, female, black and disabled then I should be making a little more money." So he says, "Oh okay. Well we'll up it that--up it to another amount for you." And so they did and I went on over to Wright State. Speaker 2: Now, something puzzled, you said female, black and disabled. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: What, what-- Speaker 1: I was wondering how attentively you are--and I said well if he doesn't come back to that then I know he's sleeping on me (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I'm not sleeping, so-- Speaker 1: I have a history of cancer and I had surgery some years ago and once you have cancer according to the federal government, you're disabled. Speaker 2: So this is prior to being hired at Wright State this is prior to '72 [1972]? Speaker 1: Um-hm, and so that's what happened and so then when I got over there and I decided that he was an interesting kind of old fogey guy, he was an interesting guy to talk to. I decided I would just kind of make him my mentor as well as Perry. Perry was just a lowly faculty member like I was so, but Dean Marquis was the dean so I started going down to his office and I told him that I was just down for a fireside chat, you know. And so we would talk about different things and I guess because I said fireside chat he thought I was a Democrat and so we started talking politics. Speaker 2: Harkening back to the Roosevelt fireside chats that FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] administration had (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. So when he found out I was a Republican then we started talking about Republicans (laughter). Story_ID: 360915 Speaker 1: Now that's something to ask you about, too. Now, so many black people started switching parties in the 1930s from Republican to Democrat. Most of us were Republicans following the party of Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] until the 1930s when the Depression [Great Depression] hit and a lot of black people started changing to the Democratic Party. The--and so by 1960 I think there was still enough debate in the black community where there was a kind of a split vote on Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] and Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] but after that a lot of black folks just became Democrats. How did you resist that? Speaker 2: But let me go back to something that you had said. Back in 1870s in the Reconstruction days, we had a lot of black Republicans and we had a lot of black elected officers, and the Democrats, the white Democrats didn't like that so they passed another law that put the Democrats in power and all of those newly elected black lieutenant governors and legislators and all that went by the wayside because the Democrats came over. So I want to put that little history in there too. But when I came to Ohio, I was a Democrat you remember I told you I lived in this dormitory [Homewood Cottage, Wilberforce, Ohio] with these single women and we were talking politics one day around the kitchen table and Dr. Henderson [ph.] said, "Well you're in Republican country now and so--." Speaker 1: In Ohio? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, you're in Republican country in Ohio, and so you register Republican and vote on the issues. So and another thing she told me she said, "Now you're up here with--this has nothing to do with politics but she said you're up here with all these guys and they're the same age you are and ought to look at them to see whether or not you want one of them to be your husband (laughter)." I didn't pay her any attention on that one but I did change--switch over to the Republican Party and this was in '59 [1959], okay? It was no big deal because most of the folks out there in Wilberforce [Ohio] were Republicans anyway. So then when I met my ex-husband and he took me up to meet his family we were having dinner and everything and started talking politics, Dad Jenkins brought the politics up and I told him that I was Republican and boy his eyes just lit up. Well, Dad Jenkins had been one of the first black appointed to something at the state level by the Republican governor and he was vice president for business affairs or business manager or something like that for Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio]. So it all just fit in with the family thing and so I just stayed with it and I've had coffees here for Hobson [David Lee Hobson] and I've had coffees here on political issues and I've had the wives in talking to women and I've had mixed groups, you know, talking politics. When I was at Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio] that was when I first met Dave Hobson because rehabilitation is so rooted in legislation and social services in general and so he was--Dave Hobson was over at--on a committee for health and human services when he was in the state legislature [Ohio Legislature]. So I would have him come to my classes and talk. Speaker 1: Oh this is the dean at Wright State now? Speaker 2: No, Dave Hobson. Speaker 1: Dave Hobson. Speaker 2: State representative. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, no-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he would come to my classes and bring my classes up to date--the students up to speed about the legislation in the pipeline, how it related to legislation in Washington [D.C.], in [U.S.] Congress and not only was he informing them they were getting to know him and also understand how politics is such an important part of human services. And they would like almost vote for him if they agreed with what he was doing. So that was my first connection with bringing him in. And then DeWine [Mike DeWine] wanted to have these grant writing workshops and he'd had one and I felt like it was time for him to have another one. So I called his office and said, "I think you need to do this," and he said, "Yes." So that was kind of how I started working with them more than I had 'cause I really didn't work him when I was at Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. But I did start working with all of the politicians. Story_ID: 360916 Speaker 1: I went to the Clinton [President William Jefferson Clinton] inaugural and I went to the Bush [President George Walker Bush] inaugural. There was a difference in the two; the tone was different in both of them, but it has not been diff (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the difference? Speaker 1: Well the Republicans when they came in 2000 this was the 2001 inaugural I mean they were so arrogant, because they had everything, you know. They had the House [U.S. House of Representatives], the [U.S.] Senate and the White House and those young dudes--those young studs, those gofers were coming in and I mean it was like take over. With the Clinton inaugural it was a feel good we're all here and it's almost like a love fest. It wasn't that arrogant, kick butt attitude that I saw at the--and I was in a good place to see it because I was a hostess for the VIP folks, I was at that. So I saw them coming in. You were asking about the others, the others I think are--I just think a lot of them are overnighters and they just going with the flow more or less, I don't know, and I guess that's what I did too. When I came here they said, "You're in Republican country so you be a Republican," and so I went with the flow. So I guess that's what they're doing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I guess in those days being a Republican didn't have quite the same meaning that it does now in some ways. I guess it doesn't necessarily mean the same thing all over but it tends to mean now that they are a more right wing conservative-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --person and in the '60s [1960s] being a Republican--Barry Goldwater was like the right wing fringe of the Republican Party. He didn't represent most Republicans (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, that's right. Speaker 2: And in a state like Ohio you have like Chuck Whalen [Charles W. Whalen, Jr.], congressman here who is probably the most liberal congressman in Congress as a Republican. [HistoryMaker] Edward Brooke ran for the Senate in Massachusetts backed by the Republican Party and won (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's true, Reconstruction. Speaker 2: --and was the first black senator since Reconstruction. So it's a different assessment of what a Republican--I mean nowadays you think of Republican and you see the president feeding and Christian right wing people, more than a--well it's different. Speaker 1: It's different just like the faith community is different. They're the same ilk because the religious community has always been involved but they have not been as adamant as they are now. I mean, it's my way or no way that's their attitude now. And the Republican Party--I don't know whether we need to be talking about this but the Republican Party is also different in that it's known for fiscal restriction (laughter) and they are outspending the Democrats, yeah. Speaker 2: But on different things. Speaker 1: Yeah on different things and they are outspending, and they are putting it to the people who can least handle the limits, cutting it out for the people who can least handle it, healthcare, education. That's when I fell out with one of the people I'd been supporting. I was watching him on C-Span some years ago and the Pell Grant was being discussed then and he snapped this little white student--this little guy got up there all dressed up 'cause he was there to talk to this politician in the auditorium and he cut him so I couldn't believe he did that. And the boy had a legitimate question and I had written letters relating to that and I said you know it's not about us and when I say us I mean low middle income and poor people and now you see it. It was changing then and that was just before all the Gingrich [Newt Gingrich] boys got in there, it was just a little before that. Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993] or so. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 360917 Speaker 1: So, now Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio]. How did things go at Wright State? Speaker 2: Well it was difficult for me. I don't remember now how many black faculty people were out there then. About the same number that's out there now, maybe fewer. I was often the only black person in my class. So it was hard for me because it was the first integrated situation I had been in you know educational so called integrated situation because I had gone to black schools and worked at black schools. Well Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], Kent State I hardly--it was like a blip. It hardly existed. So it was difficult for me but it wasn't as difficult as it could have been for two reasons. One, I'm an introvert the other was that I--at Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] I already had my base and politics. I have, I had a base, you know, a social base; I have a political base and then my own behavior just wanting to be by myself, you know. So I--it wasn't as bad as could have been and I went there as an instructor with the idea--they told me that they wanted me to get my Ph.D. and I said, "Okay I would." And I meant that but then I changed my mind and I decided I didn't want to do that, I didn't feel up to doing that. So I told them I said you told me that, "You wanted me to have my Ph.D. and that I would not be tenured without it and so I understand if you find it necessary for me to leave." I wasn't asking them to stay I just told them I wasn't going 'cause I was tired and I didn't want them to ask me about it anymore. So they said, "Okay, Alyce [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins]" and then the next thing I knew people can do anything they want to do, next thing I knew they came to me and said, "Alyce, we want to put you up for a promotion from assistant--from instructor to assistant professor. " So I said, "Well now, I told you I'm not going back to school so I don't think you really should do this." He said, "Well we want you to be here, we like what you're doing and everything and so we're going to put up for promotion." And so they did. I was promoted to assistant professor. Well then once I was promoted as assistant professor then I knew I was on the tenure track and that I needed to be doing some things and so I started trying to do some things but because they wanted me to succeed they sent other faculty around saying, "Alyce how about co-authoring and helping me with this?" You know, so that I could become published. Well, all this was new to me but once I realized what was going on then I started networking within the rehabilitation community so that I could get the required published articles, make the--I just started working to re-help the professional unit making presentations nationally, locally, statewide and doing all those things. And so then I was tenured and promoted to associate professor, and--but that never would have happened if they hadn't wanted it to happen because the prerequisite--one of the requirements was that I go--one of the conditions was that I would go ahead and get a Ph.D. So they could have fired me in a minute. And then after I was out there my very first year I was out there--the second year one--I didn't know what was happening but anyway this professor came up to me and said "Alyce, how about serving on the tenure removal committee?" and I said, "The tenure removal committee? I don't need to be in a committee like that 'cause that's not a good committee." They said we never meet so I asked somebody else and they said no they never meet. So then the second meeting we had they were getting reading to talk about removing somebody's tenure and I said oh my goodness. So I called over to personnel to see how much liability insurance we had 'cause the university does provide liability but they only provide twice your salary and I said that's not enough. If I were going to sue somebody I would sue them for more than twice my salary. And so I--that's when I started buying my own professional liability insurance. As it turned out this guy did not follow through on that particular case. They didn't have to follow through on it. But they were doing was--it's not easy to get on university committees and so they were putting me out there because when you go up for tenure you have to have published, you have to have served the university by being on committees and things of that sort and you have to have served the larger community as well. Story_ID: 351764 Speaker 1: Committees and all of that. Speaker 2: Right, committees at Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay yeah, so they helped me to learn how to navigate the higher education community, and I was able to get the tenure. And as far as my classes were concerned as I said most of the time I was the only minority in that class and I also had a lot of first generation white students coming in from rural areas and they didn't know anything about black people except what they had read or seen on television. And so it was--the atmosphere was kind of tense but the good part about it was that, I was the faculty member, I was a professor and I had academic freedom; I had control of that classroom. And so I learned early on to always remember that, you know, and not crumble or, you know, get weak in the classroom. And so as it turned out, I was looking through my retirement book and the comments of different students and they talk about how I influenced them and how much they learned from me and how--the different ways that I helped them and all and that they were pleased to have been in the class to have had a class with someone who was so committed to rehab as I was. So it turned out to be a good experience but the early years were kind of hard because I was trying to learn how to do that. I had quite a few military people in my classes and there was this one guy in my class and he would sit in the back and he would just frown--his non verbals were awful all the time. I said this man has a problem with me I guess it's because I'm female and he was just awful. So one day I had the call him and when I called him I saw that he was a retired colonel and I said, oh that's what his problem is. I am black and female and I'm in charge of this class and he's used to being in charge and so when he answered the phone I said, "Colonel Brimler [ph.], this is Lieutenant Commander Jenkins [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins]," and from that moment on I did not have any more trouble with him because it was officer to officer. Story_ID: 351765 Speaker 1: Now you haven't told us about how you became Lieutenant Commander Jenkins [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins]. Speaker 2: Well, the [U.S.] Navy decided that they wanted to have more minorities as officers and they thought the best way they could do that would be to have a special program targeting minorities at historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs]. And so Joseph Lewis was the campus liaison that's the name of the program (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is at Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]? What year is this, that this was going on? Speaker 2: This was like around '73 [1973] or so. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're at Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio]-- Speaker 2: I'm at Wright State. Speaker 1: --and Joseph Lewis is at Central State. Speaker 2: Yes so Joseph Lewis--Dr. Lewis had become a campus liaison officer. He was at the historically black colleges and universities, he had had prior military experience and they were talking to me about it and I wasn't interested in it and then I told them, "I'm at Wright State and I don't have any prior military experience." So they said, "Alyce, you can do this and you can do that and the other." So finally they asked me to go on one of those little tours that they have where they take a bunch of educators to a Navy base and introduce you to some of the Navy kinds of things. So I went on that trip with them and then I came back and they called me again and so I said well okay I'll do that but I'll work primarily with the communities--people out in the community because I don't have that many black folks, hardly any, at Wright State. So that's how I got into the Navy and so once I was in the Navy I did my drills over there on Gettysburg [Avenue] on the weekends and I sat around with the other officers and they were talking about golf and stuff really it was kind of interesting nothing you know but we were there. And then we--I had to do my active duty stuff two weeks and sometimes I did more than that. But every time I would go on a ship or go on a base I would always seek out the enlisted minority fellows and ask them about their experiences and I never did hear anything good. And then I saw how they treated the black officers, the regular officers I saw that and I didn't like that. It was negative, from lieutenants all the way up to admirals, I mean enlisted folks, just disrespectful. Then I sat on the--I was a thorn to my group on the selection board for the Navy ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] scholarships and the academy [United States Naval Academy] in Annapolis [Maryland]. I was a thorn because I was always pushing to get minority students in and poor students in and I didn't feel bad about it because for example, we would look at the total package. And so if this young rural white guy was working on the farm early in the morning and delivering papers and he was not an A student, he could move on. They'd pass on him and give him positives, okay. But if it was a black kid the fact that he got up early in the morning and he did this and he did that, they didn't count it. And so after the first time around I started making notes of the ones that they said yea to and the ones to which they said no to and then the other thing was that a lot of times they were friends of these guys--children of the--there was some Navy connection. Speaker 1: Of their friends? Speaker 2: So I learned how to deal with that so that they would have to say yes to mine and I would say yes to theirs and so I looked forward to going to the selection board, I really did. Story_ID: 351766 Speaker 1: Then they--we would go to these places and we would, like a bunch of little black birds in white uniforms would descend on this little town and people would get the impression look at all of the little black [U.S.] Navy officers, and it just kind of got to me. And I did it for a while and I recruited a lot of majority engineers for them, did the Navy League [Navy League of the United States] part with them but I wasn't doing what they had brought me in to do because I told them I couldn't do it, because I didn't have that population. And So I got out after ten years and so the others said, "Well, Alyce [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins] why are you getting out? You shouldn't do that you should stay in ten more years and then you would get the money," and this, that and the other. I said but you know it just makes me so--my stomach--I was actually getting upset--physically upset behind that when we would go out. I would do things like they sent us to Alpena in July (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To where? Speaker 1: Alpena, Michigan. Speaker 2: Alpena, A-L-P-E-- Speaker 1: N-A. Speaker 2: And it was cold and everything there and I told them I said, "I'm not coming out here anymore and I'm not travelling anymore, I'm a C-130," and he said, he said that what they needed to do would make sure that that not happen again. But, you know, I thought they were going to say if you don't do as we say do then you're out. So it was nothing that I do to make them just say well okay it's not working so I just said, "Well I'll just get out on my own." When I got ready to get out they said, "Well Alyce you're in line for being captain," and I said, "Yeah but I just can't handle it." And I really couldn't handle it. I made some good friends there and it was a good experience. I learned how to write reports so that the reader would think that it's a good report and it's not because that's how they write their fitness reports and everything. But it was not a good experience and one of the articles that I have over there they asked me about the Navy and I kind of couch it a little bit, what I've said and then the reporter goes on to say that what Lieutenant Commander Jenkins is saying is the same thing that Admiral Brady [ph.] was saying that the Navy really hadn't changed so I got out. Speaker 1: So when did you leave the Naval Academy [sic.]? Speaker 2: I guess '84 [1984] or '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I stayed there ten years. Speaker 1: Okay and you went back to Wright--you were still at Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was still at Wright State. You kind of--it was part of the job and Wright State was all--they were very supportive of it, they were pleased about it. Story_ID: 351767 Speaker 1: We said at the beginning that you were the first black woman to hold that position, right (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, I was-- Speaker 1: Lieutenant commander (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the first black female to be appointed lieutenant commander to the [U.S.] Navy Reserves and that's a high--that's an officer level, a high officer level. Then I was the first black woman to be a part of the campus liaison program which was that special. Now one of the things I did in the Navy 'cause I always liked to leave something nice, I was in Washington [D.C.] at cru com and I was-- Speaker 1: What's cru com? Speaker 2: The recruiting command for the Navy and I was rummaging around in the navy yard and I saw these pictures of ships and they had been named for black sailors, so I said, you know--and they wanted us to come up with some kind of marketing thing about recruiting and all of that. So I said, well that's what we can do, we can have a book with these ships in there like the Dorie Miller [Doris Miller] ship and some others and take this out to the community so that the community can see the number of blacks who had been in the Navy. They've served well, so well that they named a ship for them and so we did that book and they did, they used that for a number of years as one of their recruiting tools. Story_ID: 351768 Speaker 1: The other thing when I was at Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio] besides rehab [rehabilitation] once I learned what you were supposed to do in higher education and how you were supposed to do it I got Wright State--I wrote up a proposal to get a scholarship for students who were not 3.5 [grade point average] students but they had other qualities and they just needed a little lift to kind of get them in. And so I submitted that to Dr. Hathaway [Charles E. Hathaway] who was the academic dean then and he accepted the proposal and so we got the C.J. McLin [C.J. McLin, Jr. Scholarship Fund] scholarship monies made available to students. I can't remember when that was. It was in the '80s [1980s] I think, and it's still out there. I think that on the whole it has done well because it offered a little financial help to a student who would not otherwise be eligible for anything--any assistance. So I think--it's up to you now (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh that's--so you were at Wright State until--when did you retire from teaching? Speaker 1: In 1993. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-three [1993]. Story_ID: 351769 Speaker 1: So I was able to use my time at Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio], my time at Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and my time working for the State of Ohio vocational rehab [rehabilitation] and I was able to come out with thirty-three years all together. Then after that I started doing consulting and I was consulting mainly with the federal government, their Rehabilitation Services Administration and trying to help them strengthen and in some case develop their presence at historical black colleges and universities [HBCUs] with academic programs--rehab programs graduate and under graduate. I wrote a grant for Wright State and Wilberforce--Wright State and Central State just before I left that enabled--I think I had ten students, five students I don't know how many students--but anyway I had let's say ten students from Central State and ten students from Wright State who received full tuition for their studies in rehab. So it was a joint program and I taught the classes over at Central State and on Wright State's campus. So I did that just before I retired and then I wanted my alma mater to have a program and so I contacted the dean there and I wrote a grant for a graduate program there. What's neat about that is that the program is still there and now one of my former students is head of it so that makes it nice. She has her doctorate and so she's there at Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama]. So after I retired and then when I wasn't doing the federal government consulting, I started doing little things around different places. So I did--I had a contract with the Regional Transit Authority in Dayton [Ohio] helping them with their manual for their project mobility program. Story_ID: 351770 Speaker 1: And then I worked with the Center for Teaching and Learning. Speaker 2: At Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio]? Speaker 1: At Wright State and got a couple of things done there. One was I started a program for adjunct faculty, because the university tends to hire them but then they don't really give them any information, they don't give them an orientation or anything so I kind of initiated that. Then the other thing I did was I initiated the distance learning, what did they call it? Fellowship, yeah a distance learning fellowship for faculty because they wanted faculty to become more involved with technology in their class--use technology in their classes and do the distance learning thing. And so it was funded, and it's going well. They're still supporting that and then another project I had out there was with the black religion conference [National Conference on the Future Shape of Black Religion]. I think I worked a year or two years with that. Speaker 2: That's with Dr. Paul Griffin [Paul R. Griffin]? Speaker 1: With Dr. Paul Griffin, and one of the things that I really liked that I did there was that I had a workshop on HIV/Aids: African American Women and Children and we had it at Calvary Baptist Church [Calvary Missionary Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] out there on (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it's on, 3rd Street. Has it's moved? Speaker 1: No it's on Gettysburg [Avenue], I got the name wrong it's right next door to Weeks Funeral Home [Dayton, Ohio]. What street is that, that's Gettysburg isn't it? Speaker 2: Yes, I think so, yeah. Speaker 1: So that was a good program, and I was pleased about that. Then I also had the opportunity to work with Dr. Harley Flack [Harley E. Flack], Flake, Flack (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Flack, yeah. Speaker 1: --with his inaugural and then he-- Speaker 2: Now what was he inaugurated as? Speaker 1: President. Speaker 2: Of? Speaker 1: Wright State he was the first black president of Wright State. I guess he was there about three years or so before he passed. So I worked with that and then he had the Excellence for the Future lecture series or something like that and I worked with him on that and that was a good program too. Speaker 2: And you worked on the Bolinga Center [Bolinga Black Cultural Resources Center, Dayton, Ohio] twentieth anniversary I believe, right? Speaker 1: No thirtieth. Speaker 2: Thirtieth right. Speaker 1: Yeah the thirtieth anniversary. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 351771 Speaker 1: And you're a volunteer on a number of committees and boards and stuff, even now (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have been. Speaker 1: There's still some now right? Speaker 2: I don't have as many I'm still with the Dayton Dialogue on Race Relations [Dayton, Ohio], I'm on the Yellow Springs Community Council [Yellow Springs, Ohio] and I'm on the Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio] rehab advisory board. I've given up the national and those other things. Story_ID: 351772 Speaker 1: Tell me this. We always ask people this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I hope--I guess, I guess, let me say this one of my concerns is that we are not as connected as we need to be or should be, and I think-- Speaker 1: Connected in what sense? To each other or to the rest of the community? Speaker 2: To each other, to each other. You know, I think back to when I was growing up. We knew everybody and everybody could help each other, but now we're so dispersed and scattered that we don't naturally come in contact with people and we don't reach out. And so we--we're kind of dispersed and easy targets for people because we're so scattered out there and by ourselves. Integration I guess there's the positive and there's the negative and the negative is that it really uprooted business communities, black entrepreneurs and uprooted just regular living communities where people lived. And when young people come up with--they don't have a clear eye on what the real world is like. They're like in a bubble somewhere, you know. I don't whether I'm making sense to you or not 'cause you're looking at me like I'm not making sense, but-- Speaker 1: No that makes sense. Speaker 2: --that's, that's kind of a concern of mine. Because you can look at the university out there, the black faculty and staff out there they aren't as close as we used to be. Stuff happens to one of them and the rest of them don't know and don't care. They don't know each other. One of the things that I did when I was out there was every year I would check to see who the new faculty were coming in. There were new black faculty coming in I would introduce myself--go to their office, introduce myself to them and invite them to lunch. Try and get to know them because there is an academic game and it varies. There are lots of similarities from one university to the other but they vary and you need to know what the game is, how it's being played where you are and that's the reason why I do that so that I can get to know you and I can kind of tell you--you can benefit from lessons I've learned and lessons that others have learned. People don't--that doesn't happen anymore. That doesn't happen anymore, and bad things happen to them and they're out there on their own and it doesn't need to be that way. Story_ID: 351773 Speaker 1: I have a real, real concern about our young people, because the media portrays the negatives as opposed to the good that the young people are doing. All of the young people aren't out there doing nothing and drugging and stuff. But that's the big image and a lot of little babies see that and that's the wrong role model. That's the wrong thing to even know exists and so it's hard to deal with. I mean, you have these kids who have children--these young people who have children. They mean well, but they don't have any idea about how to parent and so their little three and four year olds--those early years those formative years are being lost because the parents don't know what to do with them. They're letting, letting TV teach them or somebody else. My mother [Margaret Wright Cummings] talks about, "I don't know about these folks they can't even cook oatmeal," talking about her healthcare aides. "They can't even cook oatmeal, they can't do this." And I said, "Well mama you have to realize that these are children--fast food children of fast food parents and fast food grandparents." "They don't know how to make a bed." I said, "Mama you have to realize no one has taught the child, didn't teach them and the mama doesn't know." That's what--it's a systemic thing and that bothers me. Like we're going to be working with some first graders and I was so glad that they asked how do you feel about working with parents as well and I said great because the parents need to know that there are opportunities out there for them other than what they see. And they need to be motivated--become motivated to learn more. And so I think it's fine that we're going to work with the parents as well as the first graders and this is in an underserved community. So that bothers me. Story_ID: 351774 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point is there anything that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Yes. I would persevere more; I would stay the course more. I tend to walk away when things become uncomfortable for me and that's not good so I would change that. I would figure out a way to do it--to stay there and make it work. Story_ID: 347863 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point again what today would you consider as your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy--I would consider that my legacy is the good work that rehabilitation students are doing who graduated from that program. By that I mean my focus was several things. One, I wanted them to be centered on the person as opposed to the disability. You know, the disability by itself because sometimes that overshadows everything. I wanted them to have unconditional positive regard for people regardless of their situation. I wanted them to be advocates for the people with disabilities and I wanted them to be political activists, and the students I come in contact with that's what they're doing--they're doing those things. To me that's a legacy. That's the one that I know--I mean I spent twenty some years with that. I met a girl the other day--one of the articles that I wrote about rehab it looks at thirty years of how people--blacks with disabilities have been treated and how HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] had been treated as far as rehabilitation is concerned and I saw someone who said, "Yes I was reading that book as part of my research that I was doing." So that's where I see my legacy. Speaker 1: Okay. And just for the record Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio] is a leader in American colleges and universities-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in services for and accessibility for the handicapped and the disabled. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It's been on '60 Minutes' and all that sort of thing so you're part of that. Speaker 2: No I went there--I'm part of it yes because like the undergraduate program I strengthened that to include courses in vocational rehabilitation and case management and there's a third one that I developed all to make it better so that the students would be better and stronger once they graduated from that program. They're good, they're really good students. I mean, now--they're good (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 347864 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. Now, I haven't asked you much about your family but what does your family consist of now? I know you were married until 1972. Speaker 2: My mother [Margaret Wright Cummings] and my half-sister [Margaret Orr Blow] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you don't have any children? Speaker 2: No, I didn't want any children. I decided when I was thirteen I didn't want to be a mother. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: I don't know why, but that was the best decision I ever made (laughter). But I decided at thirteen that being a parent was too much responsibility. Now I didn't know all the stuff that parents go through now but what I said to folks is that parents, when I was young, I said parents are responsible for the personalities of their kids and I realized that was a big responsibility that I did not want. So when I got married my husband had a child so I didn't feel like I was depriving him. He had a daughter. Then he talked about adopting a child and I flippantly said, but I meant it, "Why would I go out and buy something that I don't want?" and so that was the end of it. But I was in the airport not long ago Dr. Phil [Phil McGraw] was on and he was talking to this lady about kids and parents and that kind of stuff and he was so--and this lady was saying, "Well I let my child do this--my baby do this," and he says, "Wait a minute ma'am that's an adult you're talking to. It's not a child it's an adult. The personality that person has now that's one they're going to have when they are a hundred." That's true if you allow them to have temper tantrums, if you allow them to be disorganized, junky, that's how they're going to be later on. If you allow them to be satisfied with short term gratification instead of planning ahead that's how they're going to be when they're ninety. It's a tremendous responsibility, just shaping--and I think about little boy babies, I just love little boy babies oh they can't do any wrong. Those little boy babies grow up to be ne'er doers [ne'er do wells] you know and it's because women have gone and enabled them to do all of those things and they think that's the way it's supposed to be. So that's really how I feel about it. Now I didn't know about all of this boomerang stuff about they never leave, kids never leave as a responsibility to the parents. But I was just thinking about it's a tremendous responsibility and you have such a short time to help that young person, that baby that little person develop good ideas, good behaviors, good con--you know a personality that would be helpful to them in the future. You just have such a short time. Story_ID: 347865 Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't asked you that you think you should mention before I ask you my last question? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, this is similar to legacy, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a helpful person who maintained confidentialities. Story_ID: 347866 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Could you tell us who is in the photo and give us an approximate date? Speaker 2: That was in 1963 and--or maybe '64 [1964] and that's Dr. Wilhelmina Robinson [Wilhelmina S. Robinson]--I'm sorry Professor Wilhelmina Robinson in the blue, Alyce Earl Jenkins [HistoryMaker Alyce Jenkins] in the center and Dr. Newsome on the right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lionel Newsome? Speaker 2: And this is. Um-hm, Lionel Newsome and this was at a special book signing party for Wilhelmina for her book 'Man in America'. Speaker 1: She was a professor at Central State University [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yes she was a professor. She taught history at Central State University and served on state and national boards. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: It was '74 [1974]? Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, this is Dr.--this is Professor Wilhelmina Robinson professor of history at Central State University, Alyce Earl Jenkins in the center and the man with the red and white shirt is Dr. Reuben Western [ph.] co-host of the party that we gave for Wilhelmina. Speaker 1: He's also a professor at Central State. Speaker 2: Also he is a retired professor from Central State University. I can't recognize this. That's Alyce Earl Jenkins in Charleston, South Carolina participating with a group on an educational tour at the naval base there and this was in 1970s. And Beverly Pierce [ph.]. That's Admiral Gravely [Samuel L. Gravely, Jr.] the first black admiral in the U.S. Navy, Alyce Earl Jenkins and Beverly Pierce in Charleston on an educational tour. Yeah, he's from Birmingham [Alabama]. Navy all the way. That's Lieutenant Commander Alyce Earl Jenkins and Lieutenant Commander Gilchrist [ph.]. That was picture was made in Hawaii. Speaker 1: About what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's Lieutenant Commander Alyce Earl Jenkins on board of the admiral's plane going to Hawaii in 1977. Speaker 1: Your sister? Speaker 2: That's my sister Margaret [Margaret Orr Blow] in 1976 and my nephew Jeffrey Blow [ph.]. We were at Norfolk, Virginia. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is my brother J.W. Orr and we were in Norfolk, Virginia. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's Lieutenant Commander Alyce Earl Jenkins being promoted to Commander Alyce Earl Jenkins and President Robert Kegrist [ph.] to the right and Captain Kennedy [ph.], district commander--Navy commander of the recruiting district. That's just a file photo. Speaker 1: Robert Kegrist-- Speaker 2: That's just a file photo. Speaker 1: The official file photo as lieutenant commander or full commander? Speaker 2: Lieutenant commander. Speaker 1: Okay. What year is this, you think? Speaker 2: I don't know. Maybe the '70s [1970s], let's just say in the '70s [1970s]. It looks like I am telling them something there--disagreeing. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: That's Lieutenant Commander Alyce Earl Jenkins and two fellow campus liaison officers asking questions of one of the regular Navy guys. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is Lieutenant Alyce Earl Jenkins boarding the C1-30 [Lockheed C-130 Hercules] from Columbus [Ohio]--going from Columbus to Alpena, Michigan for two weeks duty in the early '80s [1980s]. I'm fussing again about something; I don't know where I am there. I'm fussing about something. I didn't write that down. That must have been when we were down in, maybe we were in San Diego [California]. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: Try this one next. Speaker 2: Okay. I can't remember his name but that's Lieutenant Commander Alyce Earl Jenkins in Crystal City, Virginia selection board review. Speaker 1: --Lyce Earl Jenkins. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Start again, please. Speaker 1: That's Commander Alyce Earl Jenkins at a local elementary school discussing blacks in the Navy. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was in 2001. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This was the campus liaison officers group in San Diego, California. Speaker 2: They are all black officers, right? Speaker 1: All black officers yeah for the campus liaison officers program. That's Alyce Earl Jenkins and her mother Mrs. Margaret W. Cummings [Margaret Wright Cummings] and the picture was taken in 2004. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's is my father Boysie Orr and that picture was taken in the '60s [1960s]. That's my mother Mrs. Margaret Cummings she was thirty-two years old and that was fifty-seven years ago when that picture was made. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Okay. Speaker 1: This is Alyce Earl Jenkins and Susan Magruder and Susan is presenting me with the National Rehabilitation Counseling Association award in New Orleans, Louisiana. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And the date? What year was it? Speaker 1: I think it was in the '80s [1980s], I don't know it's back there on the wall, but I don't-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a brochure that I developed for the U.S. Navy Recruiting Command to assist and publicizing accomplishments of blacks in the Navy including those who have ships named for them as well as admirals. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a book, a pamphlet that I developed for the Navy to publicize the achievements of blacks in the Navy and to be used as a recruiting tool. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's Alyce Earl Jenkins recipient of the 2005 Top Ten African American Women Award. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is Alyce Earl Jenkins with Dr. M. Johnson [ph.] presenting the Top Ten African American Women's Award and Judy Pepper [Judith Pepper]. Speaker 2: The award is for the Dayton (unclear)? Speaker 1: For the Dayton, Dayton [Ohio], Top Ten African American Women Award. Speaker 2: I don't remember the date. I'll have to look back there. That's an excellence in teaching award presented to Alyce Earl Jenkins by Dr. Gregory Bernhardt and Dean Frederick Guice [ph.] in 1990--in the '90s [1990s] at Wright State University [Dayton, Ohio]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Those are Central State--Alyce Earl Jenkins and Dr. Dalzine-Johnson [sic. Patricia Johnson-Dalzine] with Central State and Wright State University students who were recipients of the Rehabilitation Services Administration grant to study rehabilitation. Speaker 1: How do you spell Johnson's first name? Speaker 2: D as in David, A-L-Z-I-N-E hyphen Johnson...