 Story_ID: 29300 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Observing is Marty Bernadetti. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Renaldo M. Jensen, R-E-N-A-L-D-O, M, as in Mario, J-E-N-S-E-N. Speaker 1: Now, is there a significance to the Renaldo and the Mario as a, is there any Italian? Speaker 2: Spanish. Speaker 1: Spanish, influence in your-- Speaker 2: Spanish, yes, my grandmother was Puerto Rican on my father's side. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 29, 1940, New York City, New York. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Employed (laughter), occupation, I am the director of supply and diversity development of Ford Motor Company. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: April 8, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In my office at World Headquarters, Ford Motor Company. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 29301 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five "People Magazine-ish" type questions we always ask. They're lightweight questions. They only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They're kind of a warm-up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Not really. I like certain foods better than others but a favorite, pork. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Meat, as pork, potatoes, vegetable, grapes, as a fruit. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Don't spend maximum time with minimal people." Story_ID: 29302 Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. We'll start with your mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Her maiden name? Speaker 1: Yeah, and that too. Speaker 2: Doris Davis, D-A-V-I-S. That's her maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay, and she's-- Speaker 2: Jensen, J-E-N-S-E-N. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, shoot, 19--I don't know, 1906. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was she born? Speaker 2: Antigua, British West Indies. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Back to my grandmother in Antigua, and my grandfather. He was in the educational system, and-- Speaker 1: A teacher? Speaker 2: I think he was an administrator, and my grandmother on my mother's side was the, a principal, school principal, head mistress of a school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, in Antigua. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about your mother's family prior to your grandmother and grandfather? Speaker 2: Not that I know of, no. Speaker 1: Okay, so they both, were they both like college graduates from-- Speaker 2: I don't know. I just know they taught school. Education was a very, very important part of their life. Speaker 1: I know in the British West Indies, I mean a high school education in those days was the equivalent of a college education (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I would think so. I don't know. We didn't talk too much about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your mother grow up in Antigua? Speaker 2: Into her teen years and then she immigrated to the U.S. Speaker 1: Okay, did she talk about growing up in Antigua before she got here? Speaker 2: No, she talked mostly about growing up, having to take care of an aunt who was ailing in the U.S. So she came to the U.S. to work, to help her aunt, and she was the eldest of about six or seven children. And so she was the one that was selected to come. And-- Speaker 1: Okay, did she-- Speaker 2: --and she never went back. So she came here in her late teens and never went back. Speaker 1: Did she come to New York? Speaker 2: New York City [New York], yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, did she talk at all about growing up, about her early days in New York? Speaker 2: No, in New York? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, having to, her aunt died, and she didn't have a way back, and she stayed there. And she took on odd jobs as a seamstress, and during the second World War, she worked in the defense industry as a riveter at the outbreak of the second World War, 1940, '50 [1950], 40-something [1940-something]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So there're no stories about your mother's family that you-- Speaker 2: No, except that her, her brothers and sisters all immigrated to Canada and took on, and became very educated. And my uncles and aunts are PhD. professors, and then the college that most of them attended and took on professor roles were McGill University [Montreal, Quebec]. That sort of comes out, in Canada. But she and a couple of her sisters were the ones who came to the U.S. And, but the males went to Canada, as I said before. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because she never finished high school, and she came to the U.S. with my aunt, who was her aunt. The aunt died. She never went back, and she fended for herself doing seamstress-type work and in the Defense industry as a riveter. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she settle in, what borough in New York? Speaker 2: Manhattan. Speaker 1: Manhattan. Was she in Harlem? Speaker 2: Harlem, 138th Street off of Lennox Avenue. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 29303 Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Octav, O-C-T-A-V, Jensen. Speaker 1: Is there a story behind his first name? Speaker 2: Not that, well, Octav was born in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands]. Okay, which is the U.S. Virgin Islands. His father was the chief of police, a Danish, Dane, who had immigrated from Denmark, where he met my grandmother, who was from Puerto Rico. And unfortunately, she served as a maid in his household. See, this is where it gets kind of messy. And out of wedlock, my father was conceived, okay, and took on the name of his father, Jensen, J-E-N-S-E-N, which is Danish. Speaker 1: Danish, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. He grew up most of his life in St. Croix, was an excellent soccer player. His father adopted him, even though he never married his mother. Okay, and he left St. Croix and came to the States [United States] as a soccer player, and was drafted in the army [U.S. Army] and spent his time in the army; came out of the army and was very good with electronics. And he opened an electrical repair store, electronics repair store in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, so he came from St. Croix to New York-- Speaker 2: To New York, yep, yep, entered in the army, and then stayed in New York, met my mother [Doris Davis]. And they married and had two children. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did he come up just prior to World War II [1939-1945] or was the War going on when he-- Speaker 2: I don't have the slightest idea. I know he was, I saw pictures of him in a uniform. But after my sister was born, and she's older than I am, and after I was born, my mother and him separated. Her, and he went off and they never came back together again. So my mother raised my sister and I. Story_ID: 29304 Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story that's passed down as to how your mother [Doris Davis] and father [Octav Jensen] met? Speaker 2: No. She didn't talk too much about that. And she never talked too much about her family in Antigua [British West Indies] because she felt that they abandoned her because they never brought her back, okay. So she was just a very determined woman who was determined to see that her two children were going to get the best of life, the best she could do it. So we went on welfare, and she took on duties as a seamstress. And when the War was over, she just worked for the transit authority. She left the seamstress, the garment industry, and she became a change maker in the transit authority [Metropolitan Transit Authority], which is the subway. But she made change, took tokens and gave tokens so you can get on, and go into the subway. Speaker 1: So she would be in the booth down in the-- Speaker 2: In the booth, right, right. And so there were three of us there. And I remember she would, she enrolled me and my sister in Catholic school, St. Charles of Borromeo. And I was in the first grade. Story_ID: 29305 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? What's the first thing that you remember as a child? Speaker 2: I have a vivid memory of school, Catholic school, and having to leave school and go to a shoemaker store right down from the schoolhouse, from the school building, and waiting for her to pick us up and bring us home. And I remember that. And I remember being there one day and the shoemaker, who was friendly with my mother, my mother knew him and he sort of baby sat us. And he had a stroke, and that was the first time I--I thought he had gotten his hand caught in the machine, but he had a seizure or something like that. And I remember that vividly. But we would go there and wait until she came from work, and we would go home, and she would fix dinner, and do all the things you do as a family, three of us. The next day, we'll go off to school and she'd drop us off, and after school, we'd sit and wait for her in the shoemaker's shop. Story_ID: 29306 Speaker 1: What were, can you describe your neighborhood that you grew up in and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, living in New York City [New York], I remember the hot summers were just, the tar on the streets would just suck up the energy and the tar on the roof would suck up the energy at night, they give it off. So it was always hot, hot and humid. I remember that vividly, growing up in New York. A lot people out, milling about, sitting on the stoops, watching people go by and school. And in the Catholic school, we, even though she had to pay to send us to school, she was very, very intent on us getting educated, my sister and I. I remember I spent a lot of time in school. I was an altar boy and, with the nuns. And I remember learning the multiplication tables and the priest coming in with a bag full of change and whoever can through the twelve by twelve tables, and he would give you quarters or what have you. And it was sort of like a game, but it, you learned. I remember getting corporal punished and they'd smack your hands if you're caught talking in class. And I remember going to church every morning cause that's where took attendance. And basically, and serving as an altar boy, going into that, during that time of my life. And she always made Easter very, very pleasant for us. We always got a new suit and Christmas, you always got new clothes and toys and stuff like that, even though she was a single parent. And yet she, and also, she was very intent on saving money and being on welfare and the like, but she made ends meet. And we never really wanted for anything. We were a family of three. Story_ID: 29307 Speaker 1: Okay, now-- Speaker 2: And early I became the man of the house, which is something that was just, she started relying more on me as I grew up in age. She, she would put more responsibility on me to answer questions about things that happened in the street in our life. Now, that's interesting because the father [Octav Jensen], there wasn't a father around. So I would learn from talking to other males and watch, always would watch and ask questions and be curious about what things other people did and why they did them and how they did them. Speaker 1: Now, when did your father leave? Speaker 2: When I was about three months old. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't even-- Speaker 2: I didn't know him. I knew, I met him from time to time because he would, child support over the years, okay. Speaker 1: So he would come and bring some money from time to time? Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes. But they never got back together again. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Did you ever develop a relationship with your father after-- Speaker 2: No, no, nope. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I knew him, never called him father, sir, or whatever. I always thought that he left her, but come to find out she put him out. And I didn't find that out until a couple of years ago, later years in life. And my sister and I, we're talking, and she said you did know--my mother had since passed back in the early -80's [1980s], late -80's [1980s], she said, you know, Mother put father out, put dad out. I said, no, I thought he left. No, he didn't leave. She told him, said, he wasn't living up to his part of what the relationship was, and she said, "You're gone, I'm not gonna have it". So she was a very independent, strong, West Indian woman, and very, very strict. And that was typical of the West Indies, West Indians. Speaker 1: Yes, there's a stereotype that they always have a lot of jobs, a-- Speaker 2: A lot, she [Doris Davis] had a very, that's right. She had two jobs. She was working in the Defense industry and do seamstress and then even cleaned house. But she, we always, she provided for us. We never, when I got to be a teenager and I wanted to start working and shine shoes, she said, no. You will not shine shoes. And you would make these little wooden boxes and go out and stand on the, and go downtown and ask something a shoeshine, she said, no. She said, you will never, as long as I live, you'll never shine shoes. So I wasn't, she said, we'll make it. But you will not lower yourself to shine somebody's shoes. Speaker 1: Now, where did you live? You said 138th-- Speaker 2: A hundred--well, she lived 138th [West 138th Street, New York, New York], but when, my first recollection of a residence was 142nd Street, 115, I remember the exact number, 115 West 142nd Street, which is right off of Lennox Avenue, corner of Lennox Avenue and 142nd Street, Apartment 3A. I remember that vividly. And right up the street, one block over was this school, St. Charles [St. Charles of Borromeo] where we went to Catholic school. Story_ID: 29308 Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you like school? Did you-- Speaker 2: It was, that's all I knew. School was sort of a sanctuary. She [Doris Davis] wasn't one to--she wouldn't let us run the streets. We were in school or you were at the shoeshine, at this shoemaker's shop or you were home, okay. So, no, we, she was very protective of what we did after, when she wasn't around us, okay. And we sort of knew what she wanted and she was a pretty strict lady, very strong lady. But growing up was one of, not a big family, and we did things any family would do but it was just the three of us. It wasn't a lot of, I never knew cousins, even though I had a lot of cousins and aunts and uncles. But she never associated with them. Speaker 1: Even the ones from Canada? Speaker 2: Yeah, never associated. In fact, I'd never met half those people, but just maybe 10 percent of them. And 90 percent, I still don't know. I've never been to Antigua [British West Indies], never really wanted to go. My sister went back, but not me; been to St. Croix [U.S Virgin Islands]. But never really wanted--there wasn't anything there. You know, she sort of severed that because she felt that they had abandoned her and she never really told us much about them to the point where we would want to meet our relatives, if you will. Story_ID: 29309 Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Not really. I was very obedient. I did what they told me to do. When they told me to do math, I did math. They told me to do English, I did English. They told me history, I did history. Not much where I really enjoyed doing one more than the other. Speaker 1: Okay, did you like music when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Not necessarily or sports. Speaker 1: You didn't play a lot of sports? Speaker 2: No, I played sports, but it wasn't a big thing with me. Even to this very day, sports is, sometimes I question sports as to why would someone subject themselves to this type of injury-prone activity, like boxing. Why would someone be a boxer? I guess it's a means to an end, whatever the end is that you might want to achieve, and that'd be the only way you can get there. Sports, football, running around and hit somebody hit me, and that hurts. So, no, music. I like music, but I never was, wanting to sing or dance or anything like that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you liked it for just a, to enjoy-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I like a little music and, because I like the way it sounds, but as far as wanting to create music or be a musician, no. And as far as wanting to be an athlete, sports, no, never, never entered my mind. Speaker 1: Okay, well, was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: We were forced to. When you, if you understand Catholicism, you know, once you enter it, they don't let you go, okay. And Catholicism was a means to an end. First, my mother [Doris Davis] was a convert. She converted to Catholicism. And we were just thrown into it. In fact, she always told a story about my birth that when I was born, I was born very sickly and even to the point where the doctors said, there's nothing we can do for him. You just start preparing his funeral. And she said she took me home, and then took me to church and went before the altar and says, "Lord, spare his life so I can know what he could have become." And took me back home and miraculously I started to improve. And I was born in the same hospital that President Clinton [Bill Clinton] had his chest surgery, his heart surgery, Columbia Presbyterian on Broadway, on 60th Street and Broadway, New York City [New York]. And so as of that, she became very, very embraced, embracing into the Catholic religion, even to the point of saying, "you will go to Catholic school", never had a choice. You will go to Catholic, you will stay in Catholic, you will go through the whole Catholic regimen of elementary, high school. And the only time I didn't, the reason why I didn't go to Catholic college because at the time, there wasn't any college that I really wanted to go to that was Catholic at the time, so. But I went through the whole Catholic school system. And it was one that was very, a disciplinarian type experience. And I learned that in order to participate, you're gonna have to be disciplined. And I think it was a great training for me, and so whatever they put before me, I absorbed and took part. I never was one to rebel. And when it came to Math, I did what I had to do to excel in Math. When it came to grammar, I did what I had to do to excel in grammar and what have you, played basketball, ran track, but not to the point where I was fanatically involved in it. Speaker 1: Okay, were you involved in school clubs and that sort of thing, running for office? Speaker 2: Track team. Speaker 1: Running for office or anything? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Yeah, but track team, you did run track? Speaker 2: Yeah, because they forced me. They said you're gonna run track because you're fast (chuckle). So, okay. I was a sprinter, but other than that, no. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was the name of your high school? Speaker 2: Bishop Duboise. Speaker 1: Bishop Duboise. Speaker 2: Yeah, D-U-B-O-I-S-E, something like that, B-O-I-S-E, Duboise. Speaker 1: And that was in? Speaker 2: In Manhattan. Speaker 1: Manhattan, okay. Speaker 2: Amsterdam Avenue, 155th Street and Amsterdam Avenue. Speaker 1: All right. Now, what about television and radio? Did you listen to much television or radio when you were coming up? Speaker 2: Not necessarily, no. Speaker 1: Movies or anything? Speaker 2: Liked movies. We went to movies every so often, but we didn't have the money to go to movies. I spent a lot of my time sitting and looking at people walk by and wondering, well, why, what's so good about that guy? What's so good about her? What is it that I like that I would wanna be like, you know, so a lot of that. Speaker 1: Did you have any heroes when you were coming up? Speaker 2: Not really. Everybody was a hero. Everybody had something to offer, and I would look for that one thing or the two things that I thought was really neat that I would want to emulate, okay, but having a hero, no. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that were mentors to you or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or that took special interest in you? Speaker 2: No, just nuns and priests and brothers coming through. Speaker 1: So when you look back on Catholic school, was it, do you think it--are you glad you went or--? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. It gave me the discipline and the, it prepared me academically to face a lot of things I would have really, really had, would have had much difficulty if I didn't have that Catholic school upbringing, okay. Yeah, if I had to do it again, I would do the same thing. Story_ID: 29310 Speaker 1: So, from what it sounds like, you pretty much knew you were going to college, I guess? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, there wasn't a question. When I, came time to go to college, my mother [Doris Davis] had saved money. And it wasn't a question of are you going to college? She said, which one are you going to? Speaker 1: Was it the same for your sister? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I tell you. She was an amazing woman who really believed that education was the key to the future. And that's the West Indian upbringing. You know, you work hard, but you will be educated. You "will" be educated. There was never a question of us not going to college. Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you decide on which college you were going to when you were a senior? Speaker 2: A couple of ways. I wanted to go to Cornell [Cornell University], Ithaca, New York, at the time. But they wouldn't, they were kind of reluctant to accept African Americans at the time, okay. So my sister college before me. She went to North Carolina College in Durham [North Carolina]. And-- Speaker 1: Was that a black college? Speaker 2: Yes, a historically black university. And I wanted to, I guess being her sibling, I wanted to be closer so I went to, I wanted to go into the Air Force. I wanted to go into ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. And Howard [Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia]--and A and T College in Greensville, North Carolina [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University] had an Air Force ROTC program, one of the few black colleges that was available to us at the time, had an Air Force ROTC, Reserve Officers' Training Corp, a program. And I went to A and T. And interesting enough, at A and T, I got into the Air Force ROTC, and I majored in science. I didn't really know what I wanted to do. I just wanted to be in the Air Force, I guess. So I just picked something that I could use if I had to fall back on it in the Air Force. And I picked science, and at that time, general, really, first year especially, take the basic math, English, whatever. And interesting enough, the classes were so easy, and I took this as a function of my Catholic school upbringing and teaching and learning. But I never bought books (laughter), never. The money I'd use to buy books, I used it for something else and excelled in all the classes. I never really had to study because they were three years behind in what I had already learned from coming out of the Catholic school. So I excelled and I said, this is not for me. This is not--so I transferred to Howard University. Story_ID: 29311 Speaker 1: So you transferred to Howard--[Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia] Speaker 2: Howard, after one year at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], yes. Speaker 1: --after one year at A and T. Okay, A and T. All right, so you transferred to Howard, and then, did you like Howard better? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I went into engineering. I decided that I'm gonna, I was doing well in science at A and T. And I felt that I might as well--Howard also had an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] program, Air Force ROTC program, and I transferred to Howard University and went into the School of Engineering and that was in '53 [1953]. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was Howard School of Engineering. Now, did you get involved in any activities on the campus of Howard? Speaker 2: Well, I was the, got involved with fraternity, the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity. I was an honor student in Tau Beta Phi (ph.), Engineering Honor Society. And I took on a job in the physics laboratory as added income. So basically that, and basically, that's probably what I did most, and especially in ROTC, so I was a drill team commander. Speaker 1: Okay, now, there were a lot of personalities at Howard in those days. I mean some of the teachers were some of the best of any college in the country in those days from what I've heard from people that went to Howard. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Who were some of the professors that you had that stand out that you-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, shoot, my professors, especially in ROTC were Tuskegee Airmen. And one that really stood out was, they called him "the Whip", Elmore D. Kennedy. Speaker 1: Elmore? Speaker 2: Elmore, E-L-M-O-R-E. Speaker 1: -D., Kennedy. Speaker 2: Kennedy. Speaker 1: And he was a Tuskegee Airman? Speaker 2: Tuskegee Airman. Speaker 1: And you all called him the "Whip"? Speaker 2: The "Whip", but he, let me back up. He was the Command Commandant at A and T. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At A and T's ROTC, Air Force. When I transferred it was a guy whose name was, I can't remember the guy who impressed me as much as Elmore Kennedy did back in, at A and T. I wanna say Theas (ph.), not Theas. I can't remember the names of the Air Force officers who were the instructors at Howard. But, you know, I was in ROTC at Howard also. But as far as my military training in ROTC, it was Elmore Kennedy, the "Whip". Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, and he was basically a Commandant for the ROTC at A and T College in North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you wanna fly planes at a certain, I mean did you ever-- Speaker 2: Not at the time, no, no. I was strictly engineering. I wanted to pursue the engineering path, career path. Speaker 1: Okay, who were your engineering professors at Howard? Speaker 2: Boy, you ask, oh, that goes back. Steve Davis, Steve Davis. He's since passed. He was the, my thermo dynamics professor. I'm trying to think of someone that really stood out. Don Lee Howard. And he was in heat transfer, and Professor Steele. He was my professor for Dynamics, static end dynamics. Those are basically the ones I remember. Story_ID: 29312 Speaker 1: So after Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], you basically went into the [United States] Air Force, is that--? Speaker 2: I left Howard and graduated with a commission in the Air Force, as a Second Lieutenant. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so you just went right into the Air Force? Speaker 2: Right into the Air Force, as an engineer. Speaker 1: Now, you were in the Air Force for quite a while, right? Speaker 2: Twenty years. Speaker 1: Twenty years, okay. And where did you serve primarily? Speaker 2: Well, primarily, I entered in the Air Force in Panama City, Florida, Tyndall Air Force Base as a civil engineer. And from there, I went to, from Tyndall, I went to Grissom Air Force base in Indiana. And that's in Peru, Indiana. And then from Grissom Air Force Base, I went to Colorado, Denver, Colorado for training in electronics. And I finished that training program, and I went to Ramstein Air Force Base in Germany, Ramstein, Germany. And from Ramstein, Germany, I was called back to Montana as one of the first Minuteman Missile Wing combat crew members, ICBM's [intercontinental ballistic missiles]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're part of a Minuteman missile crew? Speaker 2: I was Minuteman Missile crew. Speaker 1: Okay, and was that basically a ground operation or was it--? Speaker 2: Underground, yes. ICBM's out of, Malmstrom Air Force Base Montana. And that was from 1962 to 1967. And I served there as a combat crew member, and then I served as a combat crew commander for the last two years, from '66 [1966] through '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, in those days, were you the first African American to do some of these things? Speaker 2: There were two of us. Speaker 1: There's two of you? Speaker 2: Yeah, myself and an officer named Horace Russell. Now, the interesting thing about that particular assignment is that we were the first Minuteman Missile Wing to be formed to these new missile units and it was an experiment where these missiles were the first solid propellant missiles. So they required very little maintenance. And we were chosen to man this wing because, one, we had the performance, the top two percent of the Air Force. And we're all engineers, and we had the academic excellence to, in their frame of mind, to do a master's program in aerospace engineering. So while manning the missiles for these years. We did a master's program through the Air Force Institute of Technology as an extension of the Air Force Institute of Technology [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio], which was basically based in Dayton, Ohio, that you know I'm talking about, okay. Speaker 1: Yes, okay. Speaker 2: And, so we did the master's program, and at the same time, we were manning the missiles. And the last two years of that five-year assignment, '62 [1962] to '67 [1967], I was a combat crew commander and commander of the wing alternate command post. And this was sort of a special advanced assignment because if there was a conflict and the main conflict post was knocked out, their SACH (ph.) headquarters in Omaha, Nebraska. The site that I was manning would take all 150 missiles, which is ten sites, fifteen missiles a piece and actually launch the 150 missiles and do the things we had to do. So that was the last two years. I left the missile and then was assigned as an assignment of choice to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Greene and Montgomery Counties, Ohio], in their propulsion laboratory. Story_ID: 29313 Speaker 1: Now, these missiles that you were assigned to, now, these are missiles, this is, we're talking about Cold War activity here-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and these missiles I suppose are aimed at other countries? Speaker 2: Yes. They are inert guidance-- Speaker 1: These are long range-- Speaker 2: These are ICBM's [intercontinental ballistic missile]. They go outside the earth's atmosphere and then back in and hit the target. And these are inert guided. In other words, once you fire them, there's no way to call 'em back. And, in fact, in '62 [1962], I was in the Cuban crises [Cuban Missile Crisis]. And we went on alert even down to the point of removing the safety wires on the arming switches. And we were double-manning the crews where there were two of us in a capsule. Then I had four, two to make sure no one preempted and fired these things off without a valid launch command. Speaker 1: Okay, so there are two black people involved in this-- Speaker 2: No, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You and-- Speaker 2: But he and I were working on the same crew. Speaker 1: Horace Russell? Speaker 2: Horace Russell, but he and I were in the, we were only two of the total initial group of Air Force officers to man the first Minuteman Missile Wing, okay. And he and I, they pulled me back from Europe, where I was in [Ramstein] Germany. I was only there for two years and normally it's a four-year assignment, they pulled me back--no, I was there for one year. They pulled me back because I was one of the few who had the credentials and the academic credentials and the background that they felt was required to do this particular type of duty. So I came back there, and he and I were the only two African Americans out of the total conglomerate of crew members there. And most of them came out of the [United States] Air Force Academy [El Paso County, Colorado], the [United States] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland] and the West Pointe [United States Military Academy at West Point] [West Point, New York]. So these were top-notch officers who they handpicked to do this particular duty. Speaker 1: This is an awesome responsibility-- Speaker 2: Oh, very much so-- Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: And it's unique in the fact that, it was the first of its kind and you were the top two percent in the Air Force who could do it, who they felt could do it. And to make a long story short, there were quite a few drop outs in the master's program. But he [Horace Russell] and I persevered and we graduated. And-- Speaker 1: Did you face, now, this is an era in which growing up in Dayton myself, I mean they were debating in Dayton [Ohio] in the paper whether a black boy could play point guard on the U-D [University of Dayton] basketball team. And here you all are-- Speaker 2: We were, we were the pathfinders, and like in my first assignment at Tyndall Air Force Base in Panama City, Florida, I was inadvertently assigned there because they thought Jensen, being Danish, [thought] I was not African American, I was Caucasian (laughter). And when they, I showed up, it was a first assignment, they saw this black face. They couldn't say, well, you're not, and by that time, the Air Force had been integrated. So I was there as the only African American officer on the base, which was fine. You do what you have to do, and-- Speaker 1: Well, how were you treated for the most part? Speaker 2: Very well, very well. I was an officer, first. And, now, once I left the base, then, you know, there are certain things you can do and certain things you didn't do. And so you don't push the system. You know, you--I remember riding in the back of the bus. Speaker 1: This was in Montana? Speaker 2: No, this is in Panama City, Florida. Speaker 1: Panama City, Florida. Okay, when you first got-- Speaker 2: I first got down there, okay, in '58 [1958]. And I remember one incident, I was riding from the, into town on the bus, and I got in the back of the bus. And a sergeant came and says, "Sir, you're a mount (unclear) officer. You're not gonna ride in the back of the bus. You're gonna sit up here with us or I'm gonna sit back here with you, said, you're my superior." And he sat back there with me, okay. But these, that's these little incidents, and working in that environment, you knew what you could do and what you couldn't do. And you just didn't push the system, okay. And so you knew where trouble was and you just avoided it. You just didn't try to confront. And-- Speaker 1: Did you follow the, were you like following the Civil Rights Movements? Was it a subject of discussion in the Air Force? Speaker 2: No, no, no, not at all. Speaker 1: So you really didn't talk about what Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was doing in those days? Speaker 2: No, no, I just did my job as an Air Force officer, and (unclear) that's all. But anyway, after [Great Falls] Montana, they asked me where I wanted to go after I got my advanced degree. I told them I wanted to go to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base as a research and development officer. And they said, great, said, fine, and you know, wherever you wanna go, we will accommodate you. And they did. And they assigned me to the Air Force Propulsion Laboratory. And I was working on supersonic combustion ramjet engineers, which were the engines of the future, hypersonic flow. And, cause I had a degree in aerospace engineering. So the next step was, what do you do next? The fact that I had taken this degree through the Air Force Institute Technology [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio] as an offsite campus in Montana, I said, well, I'd like to, maybe I could teach a couple of courses at night at the Air Force Institute which was right down the street from the propulsion lab. So I volunteered to teach rocket propulsion. And so I would leave the Propulsion Lab and go and teach my course to these--and these are master's degree-type students, and taught the course there. And evidently, I impressed the dean to the point where he said, we'd like for you to come on the faculty. I said, fine. Would you like to teach full time? I said, sure. He said, well, in order to come on the faculty, you've got to have a doctorate. I said, okay. He said, where do you wanna go for your doctorate? So I said, Purdue [Purdue University, Hammond, Indiana]. He said, okay, if Purdue will have you, we'll send you for your doctorate. And so I submitted my academic credentials, and I was accepted at Purdue. And this was 1967, late '67 [1967], September. And I took off my uniform and went full time, two and a half years, with no breaks, summer school, fall, winter, two and a half years straight, and took my degree in supersonic combustion, aerospace engineering from Purdue; worked on the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] contract. They funded my dissertation. That was about a hundred and twenty something thousand dollars in grant that they gave Purdue for, the work on the dissertation; graduated in 1970 and came back to the Institute, Air Force Institute of Technology and taught four years on the faculty. Story_ID: 29314 Speaker 1: This is back in Dayton? Speaker 2: Dayton, Ohio, right, back in Dayton, Ohio, I guess for, to, from '70' [1970] to '73 [1973], '74 [1974], about two and a half to three year assignment. And so, they said okay, we wanna you out at the Air Force Academy, want you to come up there and teach. So, I said, fine. So, I was gonna be reassigned to the Air Force Academy [El Paso County, Colorado] and I went out there to interview with the academic department of the Air Force Academy. And I was accepting the position there on the faculty and by the time I got back to Dayton, Ohio to finish up what I was doing to be reassigned to Colorado Springs, I got a call from the Pentagon [Arlington County, Virginia]. And the people there said, Dr. Jensen, you've had enough academics. We want you on the Air staff. So that cut out the Air Force Academy, and I was reassigned to the Pentagon on the Air staff in Studies and Analysis. Speaker 1: What was it called now? Speaker 2: Studies and Analysis, Air Force, Studies and Analysis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And what they did was, we do a lot of computer simulations on issues that require command and control or warfare, if you will. And I was assigned to work on a new computer model called the Combined Armed Simulation Model (unclear), where we were looking at article intelligence, using article intelligence to predict the outcome of a battle. And so we would look at the different issues in the battle and put the issues into this computer model and get an idea on how the battle would come out based on certain decisions. Now, that required a change in my education. It was no longer Aerospace. It was Operation Analysis, System Analysis, operational system analysis, operational something. I forget the title of the field. No, operation analysis system, oh, I have it written somewhere. But anyway, it required a different discipline where you're looking at more parametric type studies type things rather than hard mechanical, and you deal with computer models to predict, putting different inputs in, you can predict what's gonna happen in the future, okay. So I went into this new field, and this was like on-the-job training. And I was working with many of the think tanks, like the RAND Research and Development Corp., RAND Corporations. I was working with the National Security Agency. I was working with a number of the other type of think tanks. And I did that for five years, and to '78 [1978], from, let's see, I left (unclear) in '70 [1970], got there in '73 [1973], '74 [1974], '75 [1975], did that until '78 [1978] and decided to separate from the Air Force, retire. Story_ID: 29315 Speaker 1: I mean how did you feel during that period of time? I mean one could only imagine, but I know how everybody felt at, I mean how folks felt at home, you know, but how did you feel being in the-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, I knew that I was expendable because if we actually had to fire those missiles, and, you know, we had missiles pointing at our targets in the Soviet Union, and they had missiles that can be pointing at where, at us as targets. Speaker 1: And you're sure that they knew that you all were in line-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure, oh, yeah, oh, yeah, sure. And we knew where their sites were, and they knew where our sites were. And you have nuclear missiles aimed at one another, and if they had actually fired and we fired, and we were eighty-five feet underneath the ground in these capsules. And we had lines out to ten missiles, fifteen sites all over Montana. It took me a half hour to go from the base to the site on a helicopter. You know, that's how far we were away, 120 miles away from the base, where you live. But you had sites that were this far away, but you had missiles from five to fifteen miles away from the missile combat crew, control (unclear), and we were eighty-five feet underneath the ground with a blast door that you go down, go through this door. It's about, it's four and a half feet thick of reinforced steel and concrete, just slam shut and it actually looked like a bank vault. And you were in this thing for twenty-four hours, thirty hours at the most because of the crew change. But every three days, we would go on alert, every three days for four, five years, I did this, except for vacation. But you're there, and you know what you have to do. And when we went through training, just before it became certified, as a combat crew member, you went before the commanding general, and he asked you two questions. And based on the two questions, and how you answered them, was whether you were certified as a combat crew member. And the question, the first question was, "If you were told to launch this missile, knowing that you would wipe out millions of people, would you turn the key?" And you said, yes. If you hesitated, he says, all that training that you've gone through, reassigned. Okay. And I had no qualms. I was trained, and I said, "better them than us". And this is something that I have been trained to do and knowing that I will be wiping out millions of people with the turn of that switch, cause each one of those warheads was something like fifty megatons of TNT, similar to what was dropped in Hiroshima and Nagasaki [Japan]. But that was the job that I was trained to do, and this was the task that I was responsible for, and I had no hesitation that I would turn the key. Speaker 1: Now, what was the second question? Speaker 2: The second question, if you had to, if someone turned the key inadvertently to preemptive, something like we did in Iraq cause we was, back at the time, we were not going to ever preemptively strike someone unless we were threatened, and it was certain that they were gonna be hit. If there was someone there who would inadvertently try to launch a missile without a valid launch command, would you kill him, cause we had side arms? And the answer is, yes, you will, cause the worst thing you can do, as far as they're concerned, "they're", being the commanding officer, is to launch a missile when it's not supposed to be launched. The next worse thing you can do is to not to launch one when it's supposed to be launched. Speaker 1: Well, both of those scenarios created like a nightmare in the American minds in the early -60's [1960s]. Do you remember the movie, "Dr. Strange Love", by Stanley Kubrick? Speaker 2: Yep, yep, I remember it very well. Speaker 1: Did you ever hear of or know of any personnel in the Armed Services that would be comparable to that General in Dr. Strangelove, that wanted to launch-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: --a preemptive strike against-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: All right, nobody like that? Speaker 2: I have never seen that. And there were some people who really couldn't take it after three years of going down into this hole in the ground and staying there for thirty hours, knowing that you may not come back out, okay. And with the Missile crisis when we started unlatching these arming switches, you know that this may be the last time you'll see your loved one or that you'll see the base. And we got down to the point where it got down to what we call "DEFCON 1". Speaker 1: This is in '63 [1963] during the crisis? Speaker 2: Yes, DEFCON, Defense Condition 5 is normal every-day. DEFCON 4, there is some type of concern, so you're readiness gets a little bit more, a little tighter. DEFCON 3, you start doing those things that you need to prepare to go to the next DEFCON which is two. DEFCON 2 is when you start unlatching these, the safety wire off of these arming switches, which must be flipped up to arm the missile for launch. DEFCON 1 is when they said, you're waiting for the "go code" where you hear the "deadle, deadle, deadle," is coming from SACH Headquarters in Omaha saying prepare for a message. The message is, "dot, dot, dot, dot," you know, and it's encoded, telling you copy the message, then around your neck there's a plastic container that you break open. And the message has to match the code in this container around your neck. And if they match, the next thing you do is you go over to this box where you have keys. And there's a combination lock on the outside, and there's a combination lock on the inside. The crew commander deputy has the combination lock to the outside. The commander has the combination lock to the inside. You open that up only after these two things authenticate and verify. You go in and you get the key, and you put the key in the lock after you arm the missiles. They're already armed. And you, if you have the valid "go" card, "go code", then you say, "on my mark, three, two, one, mark". And you both turn the keys. And those two keys must be turned within three seconds of one another to get a valid launch signal to the missiles, and that thing lifts off, and it's gone. Story_ID: 29316 Speaker 1: Test missiles. The first dual-mode launch of the Minuteman system was launched by myself and my crew member, okay, out of Vandenberg Air Force Base [Santa Barbara County, California]. Speaker 2: Now, that was the first test of--? Speaker 1: The first, actual, successful launch of the dual mode. And when they say two mode, it's two missiles at once. They had launched single missiles on the test, okay. But there had never been a launch of two together, like you would launch a salvo, okay. And it was beautiful because they both came out, and when, the nice thing about the Minuteman missile, its comes out of a silo. The cover blows back. The missiles are fired, and then out comes a big smoke ring, like you would blow smoke from a cigar. And then out of that, through that smoke ring, you see these missiles lift right through the center of the smoke ring and head out towards the Atlantic, the Pacific Ocean. And you see it, in fact, it used to be on, as one of the advertisements for something that the [United States] Air Force was doing. But you had these smoke rings come up and out of there comes these two missiles, joined together, heading out. So it was a real good--and it happened by stance because we were actually going through the alert sequence where you go on alert, serve your, do your duty, come off alert. The next crew takes over, and you go through the ceremony of changing over. And I happened to be on alert when we got the go code to launch. And so I was sort of the luck of the draw, if you will. Speaker 2: Okay, so it wasn't planned that way, but necessarily just kind of happened? Speaker 1: It worked out that way, and so I got all the publicity and accolades for being in the right place at the right time. Speaker 2: Okay, and-- Speaker 1: Where are we now? Speaker 2: Well, we got you to '78 [1978] chronologically, but I was gonna ask you about a couple of other things--. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --maybe in terms of--now Wright Patterson Air Force Base [Greene and Montgomery Counties, Ohio], maybe, I don't know if I should ask you something (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Ask it. Speaker 2: But in the, well, some of the airmen I knew out there would always talk about the different experiments done with animals in terms of-- Speaker 1: Sure, aerospace (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --seeing how the G-forces they could stand and different and things of that nature. Speaker 1: Yep, yep, I worked with those guys. Speaker 2: Did you? Okay. Speaker 1: Yep, yep. I worked with those guys, and as a PhD you had an option as an officer of working with Aerospace Research Labs, ARL. And to one, as an engineer, who has a doctorate in engineering, they felt that you can better explain sensations that you would experience from an engineering point of view. And we were offered the opportunity for, to receive hazardous pay if we would participate in some of the experiments, like drop tests, like the centrifuge, like special helmets or special things you had to do with eye-to-hand coordination under adverse conditions or what have you. And I wouldn't do it (laughter). I refused. I didn't wanna, no. And again, it's like playing football. I don't see the need of having to go through pain and to me, the money wasn't worth in because, of course, you can injured. And-- Speaker 2: A lot of risks? Speaker 1: There was risks involved, and they paid. Just like flying an airplane. You get hazardous pay for flying. But even though I was, as an engineer and being in the propulsion laboratory, and we're looking at supersonic combustion, jets, ram jets that would power vehicles, of course, the effect of simulation, the effect of acceleration, rapid acceleration and G-forces and all that stuff was definitely in some of the things that we would be interested in and the Aerospace Research Lab would be interested in also. So even though I worked with them, but I never was one to be a part of their experimental programs where I'd actually submit my body for, as a guinea pigs. Speaker 2: Now, this is like a popular culture question to, we were just talking to Roger Walden who was in the U. S. Army Air Corp, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he was telling us about this Hanger 51 at Wright Patterson Air Force-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, they have that. Speaker 2: --Blue book and all that. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. We didn't get into that. No, and we don't talk about stuff like that. As far as these aliens coming in and they're hiding them. And if they were, that's where they would be, okay. Let's leave it at that. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: There's much more interesting stories coming out of the Pentagon that you would love to know about, called Green Room. And we won't talk about that either, okay. Speaker 2: We can't talk about that a little bit? Speaker 1: No, you can't talk about that because, again, being in Studies Analysis, we actually did analysis for the Arab-Israeli War, as part of our--we actually did the analysis of some of the battles. And also-- Speaker 2: In '67 [1967]? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: The '67 [1967] war? Speaker 1: Yep, and also we used that as a testing ground for some of our advanced weaponry, for instance, our optical guided laser missiles, optical. Now, these-- Speaker 2: So those were available in '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: That's right, but, you know, but we never really tested them in an environment like the desert where you have the contrasts of white sands and the bright sands like you, it's different than what you have in urban areas where you have shadows and dark. It's not the bright sand, and you deal with optics. Light effects them differently, okay. But we never really had to prove it in an area like the Sahara, the desert, if you will, and where that war was fought. So, and we did the analysis on the effectiveness of the weapons and it was a great opportunity for us to actually learn, first hand, the effect of and how successful those weapons were or were not. Speaker 2: That war, I mean, and I was in a Jewish high school at the time, a lot of the high school kids were ready to drop out of school and go and fight, but before three days' time, it was all over with, the whole war. Speaker 1: Yeah, but-- Speaker 2: And it happened so fast, it seemed to prove the effectiveness of a good Air Force against those who did not really (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I mean and not, it wasn't the effect of the outcome of the war. It was the effect of, or were the weapon systems that we were designing and putting into the campaign, were they behaving the way that we had predicted they would behave under laboratory conditions. And, you know, nothing beats a condition than real life. And if this is the way it's gonna be used, how is it gonna be functioning in a real situation, not in a laboratory-controlled situation. But that's part of the things that we did on air staff, in Studies Analysis. We did studies and analysis. Studies of what is to come; analysis of what has happened, okay. And we'll leave it go at that. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 29317 Speaker 1: And the Gulf War-- Speaker 2: Oh, operational, I'm trying to think of the term of the area that I had to go into, Operational Research Studies and Analysis, studies and analysis, Operational Research. And that's a branch of science that deals with the computer simulations, Operational Research Studies Analysis. And then that is actually a discipline of engineering and science, okay, that people have trained for, but I had to learn on the job. I mean, they didn't send me to school for that. I just learned by doing and being a part of the seminar circuits and discussions and the like. Interesting. Speaker 1: You seem to be on a, the time that you were involved in all this is the time when computer technology is going through a transformation-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --as well. Speaker 2: In fact, we were using Cray computers which at the time was the most powerful computer on the planet. Speaker 1: What type did you say? Speaker 2: A Cray. Speaker 1: Cray. Speaker 2: Yeah, C-R-A-Y. And these were the highest and some of the fastest and largest capacity computers known at the time. And, because you start trying to simulate human intelligence--the brain is a phenomenal organ, you know. And the brain can do some things that a computer will never do. And to try to simulate that, it takes a lot of computer power. Story_ID: 29318 Speaker 1: But anyway, coming to back to--where are we now? We're getting ready to leave the [United States] Air Force. Speaker 2: Yes, '78 [1978], yeah. Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], and while I was at the Pentagon [Arlington County, Virginia], I was teaching school at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] as a adjunct professor of engineering at night. And I did that the whole time I was at the Pentagon. And in 1978, around June or maybe May, I was teaching a course in heat transfer. And my students were seniors, and they were looking at opportunities for, after graduation. And they went to a job fair in D.C., Washington, D.C., at the Marriott Hotel. And they asked me to come along, so I went. It was on a Saturday, and I went there just to see what they were being exposed to as far as life after college and how they were going to look at going into job opportunities. And I was still in the Air Force now. And Ford Motor Company was there, and Ford was interviewing these students for jobs in aerodynamics. And Ford was starting a new program to look at aerodynamics as a way of reducing drag and increasing fuel economy. If you remember, back in the late '70s [1970s] that's when they started having the oil embargo and remember we were going through that. Speaker 2: Right, there was a gas crisis-- Speaker 1: Gas crisis [1973-1975], right. Speaker 2: --and the speed limit was reduced to 50 miles, 55 miles an hour. Speaker 1: Miles an hour and you had to stand in line and get gas on the alternate days based on your license plate. So Ford was sort of taking the attack that they were gonna look at aerodynamics as a way of increasing fuel economy and reducing drag through the reduction of drag. And I happened to be talking with the guy who was heading up that department who was here interviewing students. And just casually, he asked what I was doing. I told him I was here with the students as a professor of engineering. And I told him that my background was a doctorate in aerospace engineering from Purdue [Purdue University, Hammond, Indiana] and my field was supersonic combustion which is internal gas flow versus external gas flow, which is over the external surface like the wing, lift, flight. Internal gas flow is gas flowing through a container, adding fuel to it, igniting it and getting propulsion, okay. So internal gas flow is more propulsion generation. External gas flow is basically over a lifting body to get lift and flight. And they said, would you be interested in coming to Ford. I told him, well, I'm getting ready to get out of the Air Force. I'm coming up on twenty years. He said, well, we would love to have you come out and see us. I said, fine. So I flew out, they flew me out; interviewed with them. That afternoon, they said, "We want you. What would it take to get you?" So I said, it will take this amount of money and this level of management. And they said, fine. We want you. Said, on second thought, up it another $10,000 and I'll be there tomorrow. And they said, okay, we want you. So we shook hands. I went back, put in my papers for retirement, retired nineteen years, nine months, had three months terminal leave; left the Air Force on a Friday and started working for Ford on a Monday in the Design Center as an aerodynamicist, heading up the Aerodynamic section. Story_ID: 29319 Speaker 1: So this is in Florida, right? Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry? Speaker 1: Now, where did they send you? I mean where did you go? Speaker 2: Here, Dearborn [Michigan]. Speaker 1: Here in Dearborn? Speaker 2: Yeah, right over there in the Design Center [Ford Motor Company], the Design Center where they had formed, they were forming this new department, and headed up the Aerodynamics section as a aerodynamicist, okay. So I did that, and then I moved on to advance engineering where we were looking at different type of phenomena to increase the fuel economy, increase the reliability, increase the, what were called the creature features, things that make someone buy a Ford versus a General Motors product or a Chrysler product or a Toyota or what have you. And I did that for about ten years, from '78 [1978] to '88 [1988], '87 [1987] to be exact. And that job took me all over the world, over into Japan, to Italy, to Germany, to Spain, England, looking at opportunities for an advance engineering, phenomena, like distance measurement, how to design (unclear) luminescent lighting, that you can just energize and put on the side of a panel and it will glow brightly. You've seen these little lamps you plug in the wall and they glow green or white or whatever. We were looking at that for instrument panels, for--in fact, we actually put them on some of the vehicles that we called coach lights, around the center pillar. So, we were looking at different sound deadening materials and technologies because we were making plastic parts and no one really knew how plastic would hold up as far as noise abatement and what have you. So that took me to Sweden, not Sweden, but Switzerland to look at that. And I mean all over France, with different type glass, sloping glass. I don't know whether you know how we make windshields, but windshields are what we call, they're sagged. In other words, we put a windshield into a form that's like a, inside of a bowl, and we put a sheet on glass on there and heat it up and the glass sags to fit the form, okay. And so you use gravity to create the weight of the glass to form, fit this form. But how do you make a compound for them like this, where part of it is convex and part of it is concurve [sic, concave], okay. And that was, and the French were doing this in Paris [France], and so I went out there and started looking at how can we make a windshield that will down like this and then the part, it'll flow right into the hood of the car. So these type of things that took me all over the country and all over the world, which was great. Story_ID: 29320 Speaker 1: Anyway, I got a call one day and, from one of the vice presidents, and he said, Ford [Ford Motor Company] has been involved with supply diversity for a number of years now, and we wanna move it to the next level. And the individual who we have working in this area has been offered a buyout of an $85 million company. And he's gonna do a leveraged buyout, and leave the company, and we want someone to take over and take this program to another level. And based on our requirements and things that we feel that would be required of the person to lead this program, you came out as number one on a list of forty people. Would you be interested? So I said, well, I looked at them and said, well, if this has minority in it and talking about affirmative action and stuff like, I said, no. It's the kiss of death. And if you do accept it and you do well, you're gonna upset someone in levels of management who feel that this isn't in their best interests as far as Ford Motor Company to give preferential treatment to a diverse group of people, minorities, if you will. And so it's, I said it was a no-win situation. If you do well, you'll upset some people. If you don't do well, you're not doing the job and they'll kick you out anyway. So I said, why would I wanna get into a situation like that. And so I started hesitating. The guy said, listen, this is something that we're very, very serious about. The future of our company is gonna depend on a global market. As you know, the global market is a market of color, third-world countries. We recognize that the minorities are gonna start reaching a point affluence where their buying power is gonna be something that we're gonna have to contend with. And if we don't get started on doing something to bring equity into our supply base, in other words, bring in diverse suppliers, our customers are going to see that we are not putting our money where our mouth is, okay. We talk a good game, but we're really not doing the things that is effecting equity in economics as far as those people who we sell our vehicles to and those people who we use to build and develop our vehicles, the suppliers. And we need someone who can do this program and do it in a way that is going to make sense and something that's going to better Ford's position as a competitor in the world market. We're serious about it. We'd like for you to consider it. We'll make it worth your while. Now, here's a vice president level. So I said, okay. So I left engineering and I came into supplier diversity as the director of the program, reporting to the vice president of global purchasing. And it's been the best decision that I've made. With my military background, my engineering background, my technical background, my relationship background because being on the other side as a supplier, as someone in the Air Force who works with contracts and suppliers, I got to learn the nuances of working with industry as someone who is monitoring their performance. And with the backing of Ford and senior management, it's been a fantastic, fantastic career. Story_ID: 29321 Speaker 1: Now, what's the scope of what you do right now? I wanna backtrack and then ask you about some of the problems. But what's the scope of, I mean how much, I guess, in contracts goes to minority suppliers? Speaker 2: Right now we're [Ford Motor Company] doing over 3.7 billion dollars per year, and that's with 309 diverse suppliers. These are individuals own and operate and control the day-to-day activity of these businesses, okay. So you're talking about big bucks. Speaker 1: And how many suppliers are we-- Speaker 2: Total? Speaker 1: --talking about? Speaker 2: Total supplier base, not just minorities? Speaker 1: Well, okay, what's the total supplier base? Speaker 2: The total is about 2,200 suppliers. Speaker 1: Okay, and how many are minorities? Speaker 2: Three hundred and nine [309]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of the 2,200. Okay. Speaker 1: All right, now-- Speaker 2: Now, of that 2,200, we do something like 90 billion [dollars], and that's worldwide. In the U.S., we do about 50 billion [dollars], 48 to 50 billion [dollars] just in the U.S. The other 40 billion [dollars] is done, including Europe and Asia and South America and outside the U.S., okay. So we're doing something like eight percent of what we buy in the U.S. is being done with minority suppliers, eight percent of everything we buy in the U.S. is bought with minority suppliers, which by industry standards is a big number. Speaker 1: And who are all the groups that are included in the definition of minorities? Speaker 2: Asian and Indian. Asian--back up. African American, Hispanic American, Asian-Indian American, Native American and Asian American, so it's U.S., all must be U.S. citizens, okay. Speaker 1: So are women included in the minority-- Speaker 2: Women are starting to be included, but the numbers I gave you are strictly ethnic minorities. But women are now beginning to be bought in because we feel that we have learned how to do it, okay. And now we're sort of broadening out our (unclear) program to include non-ethnic women. Speaker 1: I think you said before we even started the interview that when you started this job, now, you had a real big job-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean we were doing-- Speaker 1: --when you came in it. Speaker 2: --347 million [dollars] in '87 [1987], 347 million dollars total. And now we're doing 3.7 billion dollars. And we've grown quite a bit. Speaker 1: You said you had to work like seven days a week for a-- Speaker 2: I worked seven days a week to stay on top of this because, one, I didn't know how to do it, and there were people asking me for assistance and trying to actually create the resources within Ford [Ford Motor Company] to address these issues that they were having in doing business with Ford. There's more in doing business with Ford than just coming to Ford and they give you business because that business that you're doing has to be competitive as far as cost. It has to be reliable as far as quality. It is has to be timely. When a car is launching, and say, we're gonna launch the 2006 Mustang, in October of 2005, those parts gotta be ready, there and continually coming in to be assembled on that vehicle. They can't be coming here late. They have to be right, timing is very important. Delivery is very important. And they have to be reliable when you put them on the car. You heard about the Pinto, okay. When you put them on a car, it has to be one that is going to be reliable to do the job over the length of time it's supposed to do it. So all those things have to be met with minority suppliers just like we do with majority suppliers. There's no difference in the quality that's required as a supplier to Ford. My job was to make sure that they had the support there to get to that quality and maintain it, okay, which it takes a lot of internal support mechanisms, not only financial, but technical assistance, problem solving, learning how we operate as a customer so you can satisfy and complement our needs as a customer. Speaker 1: Now, do minority suppliers get a, say they blow it, you know, they--you know, I guess it depends on the degree of how bad somebody blows something-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but say they have a contract and they're a little late or something, and they can't quite supply all of the parts they said they could, I mean do they get a second chance? Do you work with them and try to get them up to speed or do they-- Speaker 2: The worse thing we can do is put a supplier out of business, and you could said any supplier because you could get non-minority suppliers who have the same type problems, okay. And our job is to be there to support them. And they're going to stumble, just like we stumbled. If we have a recall, okay, it's due to our fault, okay. So what do we do? We pick up our pants and you keep going forward. We solve the problem and keep going. The same with the suppliers. But the thing about it, we have the resources to help that supplier because the worst thing you can do is to have zero suppliers. If that part doesn't get made, the car doesn't get assembled. So it's not a matter of having suppliers or he's failed, so he's out. We're single sourcing that part. Okay, if he's out, that's part's out. So therefore, the car doesn't get built, and the worst thing you could do is shut down a plant because a plant is fixed cost. The plant is there. If the plant isn't up and running, you're not making money. You're just throwing money into the ground because the plant has to produce, okay. If that plant is idle, you're losing money. So you can't afford to shut down that line. That line has to keep pumping out those vehicles, okay, and we all know that. And that's the nature of our business. So if a supplier has problems, you're the first one there to help them solve their problem because that plant has to keep producing vehicles. And the same thing we've been doing for years with non-minorities. So it's no different. The only minorities now have to come up because they're starting way behind the line that these guys who have been in business with us for a number of years, since 1902, okay, they started out small. They started out, and we had to help them. So what's the difference between that and the minority suppliers? The only difference is that we need these guys because these guys are the bridge to the communities where they operate their business that we use to create the wealth in those communities that they need to buy the products that we produce. So by having a minority supplier grow who creates jobs in those communities, they effect the tax base, the quality of life, we're actually putting wealth in their communities to be used to buy the products that we sell. So, and that's Economics 101. So, and we get it. Ford gets it. That's why I love the fact that I'm in this program. Ford (unclear) understands this philosophy, which is very easy for me. There are a lot of companies that don't get it. They think doing business with minorities is a social event. You know, we are investing in these lives because we don't want them picketing our building and Jesse [Jackson] down here getting ready to drop the hammer on us and Al Sharpton getting ready to march on us. No, when you help minorities grow, you're helping your bottom line because these are the guys who are the bridge to the communities where you sell your product. So we understand that. That's the philosophy of which we work under. Story_ID: 29322 Speaker 1: I've had a very, very charmed life, and I've been blessed. And it's unfortunate--not unfortunate, it's fortunate that things have really worked for me, opportunities has always presented itself and I always took advantage of them. And I really haven't had a setback. And people say, well, what's the worst part of your life. I can't find a worst part of my life. The [United States] Air Force has been fantastically good to me. Everything I wanted in the Air Force, I received. My two children were born for like five dollars and twenty-five cents each because they were born in the military hospital. One was born in Dayton, Ohio, the other one was born in Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland. The Air Force, the government has been very good to me. And as far as taxes are concerned, I never hesitate to pay my taxes, income taxes, because my education was paid for with taxpayers money in the Air Force, okay, for the master's degree and the doctorate degree. And plus I got a salary, full salary while I was going to school full time. The only I had to do was take off my uniform and put on blue jeans and a golf shirt and just kept, for two and a half years, I got my check as I was still in the military. And by the way, I retired as a lieutenant colonel, getting full pension. And so I came to Ford Motor Company with a full pension and receiving full pay at Ford. At Ford Motor Company, I must say the same thing. I've been treated very well. I've been given ultimate opportunities to do what I do best, and they have never said no to me in this program. And I've proceeded in promotions. Again, blessed. Some people say, well, maybe you deserve it. Well, I mean I believe in what I do, okay, and I'm twenty-four seven. I believe that Ford is doing the right thing, and I'm a 100 percent Ford. I believe what they're doing is something that I'm proud to be a part of and will defend till the day I die and this is the right thing and things being done the right way. So, no regrets for the military, no regrets in my education as far as the Catholic school. They prepared me very well. Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] was great. Going from, what I like to say, I went to a predominantly black school, came into the Air Force, went through a master's degree in a predominantly white environment, took a doctorate in a very, very competitive white environment, excelled, completed that program. When I went back to the Air Force Institute of Technology as a professor on the faculty, I was the only one, the first African American on the faculty. My student, which is something I'm very proud of, Guion Bluford, for a doctoral in the aerospace engineering. I taught him quantum mechanics, one on one. He's the first African American astronaut. Speaker 2: Now, you taught, where did you teach him at? Speaker 1: At the Air Force Institute of Technology [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He took his doctorate through the Air Force Institute of Technology prior to going to the astronaut program. And he was one of my students. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, and he was the first African American in space. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Guion Bluford. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: Did you know Ed Dwight, as a matter of fact, when he was-- Speaker 1: No, he got killed, no-- Speaker 2: No, it-- Speaker 1: No, the other one got killed. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No, he was at Wright-Patterson [Air Force Base, Greene and Montgomery Counties, Ohio] at the same time in the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know. Speaker 1: --astronaut program, but I never got to meet the individual. Story_ID: 29323 Speaker 1: You were telling us some stories when we first came in about people, the calls you'd get from people who want to be minority suppliers (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they're, maybe it's our culture, and I think it is, that we feel that we are not going to be given a fair opportunity in corporate America. There's not many of us who could really excel in corporate America unless you've got the mindset, and you've got the training and the experience and the wherewithal to excel in corporate America. So a lot of us go into areas where we feel we have more control of our lives. And this is entrepreneur. And Ford [Ford Motor Company] has been very successful with this program [Supplier Diversity Program]. And as I said before, we went from 347 million [dollars] in 1987 to 3.7 billion [dollars] in 2004 in doing business with diverse suppliers, but more so, Ford was one of the few companies who actually put programs into place to grow these suppliers, to make them self sufficient, to make them more efficient in providing the goods and services that we buy from them the way we want them to provide it to us. And therefore, with that reputation, we have won every award that the National Minority Supplier Development Council which is Harriet Michelle (ph.), and he met with Gibbs at least once, but as many as three times. I have won every award that they give as an individual as a program director for a diverse suppliers program. I'm very proud of that. In fact, this last January [2005], I was one of the original inductees into the Minority Supplier Hall of Fame and Museum [Minority Business Hall of Fame and Museum]. It was done in New York, with seven other individuals of note, Parren Mitchell, Harriet Michel, Jim Lowry, Earl Graves, Hector Barreto, Sr. Hector Barreto is the father of the SBA [Small Business Administration] administrator, Hector Barreto, Jr. who is currently head of the SBA. Abe Venable, Abe Venable is the first executive director for diversity for General Motors back in the '70s [1970s], and another young lady. Her name is Sue Allen [Susan Au Allen]. She's with the Asian, Pan-Asian group. So we were inducted as the first inductees in the Minority Supplier Hall of Fame [Minority Business Hall of Fame], and that is an honor to be in the same group with these guys, and not that I have done anything because I was probably the one who was the only corporate member who was a program director. Most of these people here are in government and in private industry and the like. But just to be honored along with them, and just being with them made it much, much more rewarding. But it all goes back to Ford Motor Company who allows me to do what I do. And with that reputation, we get all sorts of individuals who see Ford as really trying to make a difference, and so they come to us. And they ask us. We wanna be a supplier to Ford Motor Company because you're doing so well in helping diverse suppliers grow their businesses and make a difference in their communities. And so when I get these telephone calls, I take them, and, you know, a lot of people would just ignore them or shut them down. I sit and talk to these guys. Story_ID: 29324 Speaker 1: You've had calls where people call to ask like, what can I make to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly right. And you know, you can laugh at them [suppliers] and say, oh, this is ridiculous, but I believe they're sincere, that they really want to have a business. They really want to provide something and here's an opportunity they think that maybe they could take advantage of, and here Ford [Ford Motor Company] is reaching out to this diverse community for whatever reason. They may not know, but they say, here's an opportunity, and why don't I just ask. So they call me and say, you run the program for? Yes, I do. He says, well, I'm an entrepreneur. I wanna start a business. I wanna supply Ford because you guys are doing such a fantastic job in developing suppliers, and you won the award. So what can I do and what is it that you need that I can help you by providing? Okay, and, of course, we say, you've got to be in business to do business with us. We are not in the business of putting you in business. We're in the business of doing business with you. So you have to have a business. You have to have a skill. You have to have a product that is of value to us now and in the long run. So once I explain it to them, they understand. And then you get some really irate guys who says, well, you're a prime contractor to the federal government. Yes, we are. Oh, you're, being a prime contractor to the federal government, you have a contract with the federal government. I said, yes, we do. Well, the SBA [Small Business Administration] says that you must be doing, you must, as a prime contractor, do business with diverse groups. I say, yes, they do. Well, I'm a diverse group. I said, okay, what do you provide? He says, I provide furniture, and I know you're sitting in a chair in your office, and you have a desk there that you're writing on. I said, yes, we do. He said, well, I'm a small business. You're a prime contractor. I sell office furniture, so you must do business with me. I said, really? He says, yes, because you serve as prime to the federal government, and you must do business with small businesses by law. I said, okay. How many types of furniture do you have? How many models? How many models and brands do you stock? He said, well, I stock four. I said, okay, who are they? Steelcase and a couple of others, three others. I said, okay. How many are out there? He said, what do you mean? I said, how many are out there besides the four that you stock, how many other models or brands of furniture are out there that you elected not to stock, except for the four that you do stock? He said, well, there're about seven others. I said, so you're making a decision on who you do business with, right? He said, yeah. I said, well, bingo, same thing we do too. You're a small business. We must do business with small businesses, but we make a distinction of who we do business with, and your approach is, I don't believe, is in the best interest of Ford Motor Company or Ford Motor Company doing business with you. Bam. Then that's it, conversation over. But that's the type of calls you can, you get. And, you know, and it can get kind of sarcastic, but because they're trying bogard (ph.) your way in to say, hey, if you don't do business with me, you're a racist. Or if you don't do business with me, you're not obeying the law so therefore, I'm a small, and you've been discriminating against small businesses all your professional life, and I'm a small business. You're gonna discriminate, be discriminating against me, I'm a take you to task. (Unclear) deal with it. But again, in the long run, we do business with those who we feel add value to our long-term process of satisfying our customers, the people like you and the public. Story_ID: 29325 Speaker 1: Do you plan to, you've done so many things, and now, do you plan to write your memoirs at some point or have you? Speaker 2: No, no. People have said, you know, you've done so much, and you had such a varied career, and you should write your memoirs. I say, well, I, there may be value there, but I'm not the type of person who sees--I think I've been given a task through whoever is up there, even Allah or God or what have you, and I make the best of what I do and I enjoy what I do, and so far it's been working for me. And I like people, and I like helping people. And I realize that when you have an individual calling up here, wanting to do business with Ford [Ford Motor Company], a business owner, who has his home, his savings, invested in his business, trying to make the next thing happen for them, they're no different than the chairman of the board of Ford Motor Company who's running a business. And they, you ought to give them the same amount of respect, even much more respect because Ford doesn't have the skin in the game like this guy has the skin in the game for his business, okay. All right, so I value that, and I'm sensitive to these individuals who really want to grow their business. Some of them don't know how. Some of them shouldn't even be within ten miles of a business as far as what they do, but you sit there, and you want to make the best of the conversation, and offer them as much advice as you can in dealing with corporate America, okay. And that's my job, and the rewarding thing is, after you (unclear), says, you know what? I really appreciate you taking the time with me. I see what I need to do. Thank you, because a lot of guys don't take the time with them. But I will, I will. Speaker 1: Tell me, now, you said that you don't have any regrets, but is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it? Speaker 2: I wish I could tell you yes, but honestly, there's nothing, I don't believe, that I would do differently. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I sleep well at nights. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do, seriously, and I enjoy coming to work. I enjoy doing what I do. I enjoy, I have a great staff. I do a lot of public speaking around the country, and I'm gone about one third of the time. And I don't even call back here. If they need me, they call me. And my instructions to them is make the decision. If it's the wrong decision, we'll come back here, and we'll straighten it out and make it the right decision, okay. Don't be afraid to make the decision. Move the needle. Story_ID: 29326 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Hopes and concerns. My concern is that there are a number of African American people out there, suppliers, who are still ten years in the past. And they really haven't seen the need or appreciate the need to change with the times. There are many of them who have been in their position with their businesses over the years, as a function of relationships. And now corporations are beginning to get so competitive that unless that relationship is one of business and profitability and productivity and quality and longevity, unless that can equate into those terms, it doesn't add value. At one time, you could call up the chairman of the board, William Clayton Ford, and say, Mr. Ford, you know, your daughter and my son went to school together, and I live in your community, and I got this business. I'd like for you to call your person and say, let me meet with him and with your blessing and maybe we can do some business with Ford. Those days are gone, okay. If you cannot deliver at the right price, at the right quality, at the right time, with the right reliability, the right function, you're not gonna play. And there are some of them who still believe that the injustices that were done in the early '70s [1970s] and the early--late '60s [1960s] as far as discrimination and affirmative action, there a number of (unclear) companies that have done enough to overcome the guilt. And it's now down to those who can provide the goods and services in a profitable manner. And they're willing to work them. We understand the value of diversity. We understand that the world is now a place of color. We understand the lines of communication are very short. What happens in South Africa this morning is gonna be discussed here this afternoon, okay. And these companies, these countries--companies--these countries that we are looking at to expand into as a business opportunity as countries of color, they're gonna look back and say, what are you doing in your backyard, Ford [Ford Motor Company]? Do you have a diverse community of color in your backyard? How are you, how are they playing a part in your goods and services that you wanna sell to me or bring to my community to develop for your world objectives? Do you treat them no better than you treat me? Do you treat me no better than you treat them? So therefore, we know what you do. So we see that, and we've got to make sure that we are doing the right thing in the right way for the right purposes. The thing that I really always look for in whatever I do in supply diversity is, if it doesn't create wealth in the communities that we do business in, then it's a waste of time. And why is creation of wealth so important, and I say this around the country, because wealth gives you economic affluence. And I'm not talking about rich; I'm talking wealth that you transfer from generation to generation, not that you can even be rich. But the difference between rich and wealth, creating wealth because wealth gives you that unique attribute. It's called choice. If you're economically affluent, you have the ability to choose. And you can choose where you live, where you work, where you go to school, where you send your children to school, how you grow your children, okay, and how you determine and where you're gonna spend your discretionary income. And when your transportation needs require transportation, you have the choice, due to your economic affluence to choose Ford, if you felt that we are worthy and we play a part in the creation of the wealth that you enjoy and the economic affluence that you enjoy. And that's our whole basis. We go beyond the sourcing of the 3.7 billion [dollars] to our minority suppliers. We go beyond just sourcing. We actually challenge them. If we're going to develop you, we want you to give to the community. We want you to be a part of the community. We want you to be a very vital part of the community because it's through you that we have the bridge to the communities to create the wealth because you're gonna hire from the community. You're gonna create the tax base effect in that community. You're going to be the pillar in that community. You're gonna be the place where they look to for the strength in that community. And as long as we keep you strong, that community is gonna grow and become affluent, and the quality of life is gonna increase. And they're gonna have this discretionary income to buy our product. And if they see that Ford is a part of the community because we support you, and you're gonna support them, then hopefully, they'll choose Ford. So therefore, we've challenged our suppliers. It doesn't let you, now, they're gonna get rich. I mean there's no question about it. That's the nature of the beast in the automotive industry, okay. You're gonna be wealthy. If you are a supplier to Ford, in the margins that you make in providing goods and services to us over the year, you're gonna be independently wealthy. That's not our intent. Our intent is getting that wealth that you make into the community. And if you don't wanna be a part of that solution, then you're a part of the problem, and we will get someone else and make it very clear. That comes all the way down from the chairman of the board. Story_ID: 29327 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what do you see at this juncture to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Showing people that you could be effective by being credible and honest. Out in the community, I'm known as "The Colonel" because I'm no nonsense, and I'm credible, but I'm fair. If I give you my word, my word is the only thing I can give and keep at the same time. There's nothing else you can do that with. I give my word, and I can keep it at the same time. And my word is my bond, and I always wanted to be known to individuals in such a way as they know me before they meet me, which means I care what you think, okay. It's important to me that, when they meet me, they say, you know what? I finally got to meet you, but I've known about you. I think I, I believe I've known you for a number of years, but I finally got to meet you because your reputation, and I call it my "brand" precedes me. And my brand is that attribute that I have that appeals to a person's subconscious. My reputation appeals to your senses. You see, you smell, you taste, you feel, you hear. And with those senses, you can discern my reputation. But my brand affects your subconscious. My brand is such a thing that when you say Ray Jensen and you listen to Ray Jensen, you say, there's something about that guy I really admire. I can't put my finger on it. But I admire him because he exudes something that affects me subconsciously, and I really don't know what it is, but I like it. And what they see is my brand. It's what I am, twenty-four seven. I always say if, and it comes from an old engineering situation, that there's a relaxed state, a state where you have zero energy. And for man, it's the prone position. You look at the Pope. He's laying down. When his energy left him, he had nowhere to go but to lay down. If he had energy, he could sit up or roll over or be on his side, but when you're in your relaxed state, that means you are in the lowest energy state of your being. And there's a state that you are in when you are interacting with people which I call the relaxed state. And that's the state that you revert to when you get confused. That's the state when you revert to when you become afraid. That's the state that you revert to when you become overwhelmed, and that's the state that peels back all the levels and skins in an onion, down to the kernel of who you really are. And that's your brand. And that's the thing that really makes you who you are. And that's something that people will see, and you cannot hide it because it appeals to their subconscious and it exudes from you involuntarily. And that's what Ray Jensen is. Story_ID: 29328 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family. Now, do you have-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I have two children. I have a son, and I have a daughter. My son is, works for a minority business. I have a daughter who works for the City, and she's in law school on her own. She has a master's in urban planning from Eastern Michigan University [Ypsilanti, Michigan]. And she has a bachelors in urban planning from Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan]. My son has yet to finish. He's still tooling around, but he has enough self teaching, or self development to be an expert in computers and in information technology and in reliability engineering. So he's working a local minority supplier, and evidently, he's doing quite well. He enjoys it. But he just didn't have that knack to finish. You find some people who learn and they learn by doing, and they're not just really cut out for the academic world. That's a good example. He was a good--my wife is a retired teacher with a Master's degree from Maryland, University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] in education, and she went to Howard with me. We were childhood sweethearts at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia], met at Howard, and married right after we left Howard, graduated. And so we're basically a military family, having spent twenty years around the country. She didn't go to Germany. She went to Germany for a short while, but I came back after one year there, and she came back with me. Basically, that's it. We live in Farmington Hills, which is a little suburb outside of Detroit [Michigan] here. Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Doris Davis] get a chance to see you become a successful-- Speaker 2: Yes. She was alive when I got my doctorate, and very, very, very proud of that. And she was alive when I finished the [United States] Air Force and started at Ford. And, in fact, she was alive when I took this position, back in '87 [1987]. She died in '88 [1988], a year later. So she got to see, and she was very, very proud of us, by the way--my sister and I. My sister is educated also. She has an undergraduate from North Carolina Central [University, Durham, North Carolina] as I said before, and she has a master's in psychology from a school in New York [New York], Fordham, I think Fordham, Fordham University, and she was working the doctorate at one time, but she's sort of given up on that. She lives in New York, Hempstead, New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her husband is retired military, [United States] Army, two daughters, both educated, both with Masters degrees. One is a teacher and one works for AARP [American Association of Retired Persons] at one of their-- Speaker 1: The food-- Speaker 2: No, AARP the-- Speaker 1: Oh, the Association of Retired-- Speaker 2: Right, there you go. And so she seems to be doing very well there. Story_ID: 29329 Speaker 1: There's one thing I wanted to ask you about. It seems kind of contradictory. You seem to have a philosophy of staying away from physical danger, but you seem to be in love with motorcycles. I see them all over the place. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Wooden ones and model ones. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And do you, and you own two, right? Speaker 2: Two Harley Davidsons. Are you a motorcyclist? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Yep. And when I say, danger, I never said I was against danger. I'm just, I'm not one who deals in pain. When I decided that, in fact, I started riding a motorcycle when I was in [Great Falls] Montana, when I was in the missiles; had a motorcycle because--I don't know if you've been to Montana or not, but you've got--well, have you been there? Speaker 1: No, I know that there's-- Speaker 2: Wide open spaces, and you can ride for miles and miles and miles and not see another car. You see animals roaming all over the place and antelope and the like. But when I decided that I wanted to ride motorcycles again and the first thing I did was take three courses. I took the beginners course. And then you have to take that to get your, what they call, endorsement, on your license to actually ride a motorcycle or drive a motorcycle. And then I took an advanced course. And that taught you more like how to avoid instances in which you can come out second best, you know. How do you drive defensively? How do you ride in a way that you avoid situations that could very well be catastrophic. And then the third course I took was the high performance course. And, again, each of these courses progressively hones your skills to be a defensive, safe driver, a safe rider. And so I enjoy it because it's something that, it's a different sensation. Your personality changes. You have all this mass under you and all of this power under you, and you're two more (unclear) long, and the faster you go, the stiffer the motorcycle gets, the more stable it gets. And it's just a sense of control, but you're always mindful that you don't wanna become complacent and do something silly because you can wipe yourself out, okay. And that's why I took the courses before I started really getting into it. And it gives you a sense of sensibility, if you will, okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But as far as danger, I believe in living life, and I'll take a risk, but it's not gonna be an uncalculated risk. It's gonna be something that I'm gonna have like a seventy, thirty percent chance that it's successful. And if it's thirty, seventy, then it's gonna be--I don't do it, okay. And I don't see running out there on a football field waiting to get hit and, you know, one wrong hit and your back goes, and you're paralyzed for life. I mean, but again, there are those people who take the risk. Like someone said, I'll never ride on a motorcycle. People are out there that would kill you (unclear). I have never had the experience where someone deliberately did something to me in a car while I was on the bike, even when I'm by myself, so. And then you learn how to avoid situations where you would come into a situation like that, so, like weaving in and out. You know, you see a guy weaving in and out, you say, that guy there just upsets me, you know, I'll fix him. I'll, I'm gonna see him weaving and go up beside him and start tailgating him and cause him to do something stupid, okay. So, you just don't antagonize, and things you can do like blowing your horn. I don't know how you feel, but when someone blows a horn at me, it sort of gets on your nerves. And in motorcycles, to feel that should go from lane to lane and the perception of the freedom that you are enjoying versus someone in a car, can really upset them if you do something to really exacerbate the difference between being in a car and a motorcycle, the freedom to change lanes or go down the shoulder and take advantage of a situation that a car can't, can perturb the individual in the car. And if he goes off on you, then you're gonna come out second best. So, again, safety, basically that's it. Story_ID: 29330 Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything that we haven't asked you that you wanna address? Speaker 2: Um (no audible response). Speaker 1: Because we have one more question that we always ask. Speaker 2: No, I, the thing that I believe that I have learned is the fickleness of the public. In this job, in this position I have perceived power and perceived authority. And I put that in, and empathize perceived, the word perceived because perception is ninety-five percent reality. If it's perceived, people believe that it actually exists. And there are those who share this type of position in other corporations who see this power as coming from them and they abuse it. I see this power coming from the position, and I just happen to be one in the position. And once I leave the position, that power is gone because with the position comes the authority of Ford Motor Company. And I always remind myself to keep grounds, and, you know, don't get, take yourself too serious that you're so important that people have to come here and kiss your ring, even though they will do it in hopes that they get the rewards of what they are out to do. So I think one of the things that I bring to this job or this position is the sanity that this position, I serve at the pleasure of Ford Motor Company and you wanna respect it and not abuse it. And that's important to me, that they see me as someone who understands that if it has to be, I can do it, but I appreciate the responsibility that goes with this position of authority, okay. And that's important to me. Does that make sense to you? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The last question that we ask is this, similar to legacy, but a little different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That's easy. Someone that made a difference, someone who cared, someone who put others before themselves, someone who recognized that you're here to serve others, and the rewards of what you do is manifested in how well others receive and function with what they have that you have made available to them. Just like with my individuals who report to me, I'm a manager. And my rewards, my recognition, my success is based on how well they perform. I don't compete with them. I don't try to derive, to deny them visibility because the more visible I can make them in showing how well they're doing, the better it reflects on me as a manager. And that's important to me. So, again, I wanna be remembered as someone who put others before them and used the tools of my trade for the betterment of what they needed to do, and how they need to do it...