 Story_ID: 9432 Speaker 1: --your entire name and spell it for us. Your birth date. And we'll go on with-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Alright, Veronica Jones. October 3rd, 1946. Speaker 1: Okay. And today's date? Oh also your middle name. Speaker 2: Purcell. Speaker 1: Can you spell that? Speaker 2: P-U-R-C-E-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay. And spell Veronica for us too. Speaker 2: V-E-R-O-N-I-C-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Your nickname is Ronnie? Speaker 2: Ronnie, yes. Speaker 1: --And today's date? Speaker 2: Is May 20th--Is it? No. Oh it is? May 20th. Speaker 1: 2001. Speaker 2: 2001. Speaker 1: And we're at what location? Speaker 2: We're at Grandview. The (unclear) district of Harlem. 2531 Frederick Douglass Boulevard, New York, New York. Speaker 1: Okay and Grandview is the name of your store? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Store, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And can you give us your profession? Speaker 2: Retail merchandiser, fashion consultant. Story_ID: 9433 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I like exotic food. I like to travel to different countries. When I was a buyer for Gimbel's [Department Sotre] New York, I used to say to my assistant, "What country would you like to visit for lunch today?" (laughs). I try everything. I do like fish. I like vegetables. But there's no particular style that I prefer. I'm very adventurous. Traveling, I think made me more adventurous with food. Speaker 1: New York's a good place for you then. What about your favorite color? Speaker 2: That--being in fashion, you would think I'd have a favorite color. I guess red is my best color for me. But I don't own very much red. And I think I'm--I wear black by design. By the nature of what I do because we travel so much and move about. Black becomes the color I own. But I do love red. And I also like white. Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring, summer, fall. I just don't like winter (Laughs). Too cold. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Do you have a place? Speaker 2: Where I've been is Bali, Indonesia. That I love immensely. Being African American, I've never been to Africa. And that's something that I look forward to doing. Traveling to Africa. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Let's celebrate life." Story_ID: 9434 Speaker 1: Let's start talking about your father's side of the family. I know he died when you were nine months old. But do you know--? What do you know about that side of the family? Give us your father's name too. Speaker 2: Robert Jones. And he seemed to be loved. He was the oldest in his family. And had been rather ill, I think with rheumatic fever or one of those diseases that existed when he was a child. And that's probably why he had an early death. He died of subarachnoid hemorrhage of the brain. I remember my grandparents on his side very much. My grandfather [William Jones] and grandmother [Hattie Jones], they lived in Pennsauken, New Jersey. They had a wonderful Victorian porch front house. And I remember sitting with them on the porch in rocking chairs, which were all the way around the porch. And it was quite nice. I mean I never felt that I was living in poverty or anything like that growing up. Even though probably we were. They had a little vegetable garden in the back. They had grapevines. So I grew up seeing grapes grown and harvest. I guess they made (laughs) their own wine. And I grew up around my aunts and uncles as well. My Uncle Donald, who is my father's baby brother, was probably the most influential of them all. But we visited each other all the time. We were only about ten minutes away by car. My mother [Juanita Ford Jones Blanchard] and I lived in Camden, New Jersey. She remarried when I was three. And I guess they were married 'til I was about--well they were married after I was in college. But they had separated when I was a teenager. My father's family remains in my life. I remember my mother saying my stepfather [Samuel F. Blanchard] wanted to adopt me. And she said, "No, you're--she's born a Jones. She'll stay a Jones. That's who she is." And it's really ironic. Because my stepfather, when he died, he wrote me in his will as (laughs) Veronica Blanchard. Not Veronica Jones. So I guess he felt I belonged to him anyway, no matter what. But my father's family--I had an Aunt Margaret, who was very close to me. And inspired me to take piano lessons. And my mother followed through with all of that. And, you know, we really did a lot of family events on the weekends and at certain holidays. Story_ID: 9435 Speaker 1: I was back in New York before I even found an apartment. So for a month, maybe two months, I was looking for a place to live. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I think in San Francisco, it has a small town mentality. It takes a minute to get to know people. You know, they focus on who's the native San Franciscan and all of that. But I was very fortunate. I met Willie Brown and Wilkes Bashford, who was in fashion. And he dressed Willie Brown. And by me being the first black buyer at Joseph Magnin, I met the right crowd (laughs). So it was an enjoyable time for me. But it was a very difficult time. Because I traveled so much. At that time, I was in Europe six times a year. I was in New York eight times a year and the Orient twice a year. So, took a moment to get settled. Speaker 2: That's what I'm talking about. Speaker 1: That was a great thing about Calistoga and the wine country. I would come back, jump in my car and drive up there and get a mud bath and, you know, just relax and luxuriate very inexpensively in California. It was great. Story_ID: 9436 Speaker 1: So let's go to your mother. Her name was Juanita. What was her maiden name? Speaker 2: Ford. Speaker 1: Ford, okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Juanita Elizabeth Ford [Jones Blanchard], yes. Speaker 1: So tell me what you know about her family and her growing up and-- Speaker 2: Well she actually grew up in Camden, New Jersey also. I think they had some relatives in Delaware. I think my grandmother was from Dover, Delaware. And her mother was Nora Ford. And she grew up with a more educated family. Her father was a minister. And she went to what was then called Dover [Delaware] State Teacher's College. She played the piano. Very petite woman, four feet ten. And she lived to be 97. Her husband Alfred Ford--I remember us have--celebrating their 50th anniversary. So they lived a long time together. He passed when I was a senior in high school. 'Cause I always said, "Oh grandpops gonna see me graduate." But he didn't. He died like a month before I graduated high school. My mother didn't finish high school. And she married very late, which is interesting for her time. She married at twenty-seven. And I was born eight years later. So she was thirty-five when she had me. And she had my sister [Marilyn Blanchard-Washington] at forty. She was a dynamo, great personality, seemed to like a lot of people. People always thought she was educated. She was president of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association]. So everyone knew who we were (laughs). So we were very good students. And my sister was a little more adventurous than me. I never wanted to disappoint my mother. I don't know. I loved her immensely. And, you know, it was a normal childhood. We watched--every afternoon she would come to the door, clap her hands. And we would have to run in the house. She'd pull down the shades. Put on the baseball game. I think the Brooklyn Dodgers were very popular then, which was a [sic] black baseball team. And that's what we did. She didn't want us out in the sun (laughs) after 1:00 [P.M.]. At the height of the day, we had to come in, settle down, relax, have lunch. And, you know, she tried to give us a great deal. We both took piano lessons, dancing lessons and went to 'Punch and Judy' shows. She gave us a very good overall cultural background. I think more unusual than a lot of people that we grew up with. Story_ID: 9437 Speaker 1: What are some of your earliest memories growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, when I was three, they gave me a black doll baby. And I threw it in the fire (laughs) 'cause I thought it was so ugly. Which it was. But then I often wonder now, you know, did I have a problem because it was black? But (laughs) I got one very early and I just threw it in the trash. burning trash. So they were wondering, "What's--what is that all about?" But I think that life was good. Then my sister [Marilyn Blanchard-Washington] came along. My stepfather [Samuel F. Blanchard] was my godfather. So he was always there. So he really was like my father to me. And he was an interesting man. He grew up in Savannah, Georgia. And he was a chef on the railroad. I think it was the B&O [Baltimore and Ohio Railroad] line. And I used to travel with him between Boston and Washington, D.C. on the train. So I've always been sort of treated as a special child in that people always catered to me. You know, when I was traveling with him. Some friends always gave me rag dolls. And I just loved riding the train and having dinner. And so we had a very nice positive relationship, my stepfather and I. Much more than my sister realized 'til, you know, he got sick. And we went to visit him. And I hadn't seen him in a lot of years. And he looked at my sister and said, "Who is this pretty gal you got with you?" And I looked at him. And I said, "You don't know who I am?" You know, and--'cause I hadn't seen him in about fifteen years at that time. Yeah, something like that. 'Cause I was in San Francisco [California] five years. So it was probably about fifteen years. And he and my mother [Juanita Ford Jones Blanchard] had separated. But I think he was always fond of her. And I think he loved her dearly. He used to say, "Where are you going?" When I'd come home from college. "You're going up there to see the queen?" And I say, "Yes, I'm going to see mommy." (laughs) But to him, she was the queen. And, you know, she was a real taskmaster, my mother. And I think that helped us to evolve and emerge in life as we did. She was very active in our childhood. We were in the Girl Scouts from Brownies to Girl Scouts. I was a Girl Scout 'til I was a senior in high school. So I was ridiculed a little bit come Girl Scout week 'cause (laughs) I put on my uniform. And the only badge I never got was my swimmer's badge. But being in the girl scouts was very rewarding. Because we had a scout leader. Her name was Bessie Davis. And she loved Broadway shows. So we ended up doing tap dancing, hat and cane dances. Some girls balleted, if they took dancing lessons. And she made all our costumes. And we would perform. And we did that on a yearly basis. We went away to summer camp at Paradise Lakes near Atlantic City in [New] Jersey. And I think I had a pretty healthy childhood basically. Speaker 1: So what do you think you learned out of the Girl Scout experience? You know, girl scouts are not as predominant today, I don't think among children. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm--to be prepared. You know, to be focused, to have a sense of self and to be able to contribute. To give to others, a love of others. I think I've always had--I think my mother was that way. She helped a lot of people. And she was at home. But she would take care of people's children if they worked and when they came from school. She raised several children in our neighborhood. We lived on a street that was about two blocks long. And you could do a broad jump. Most of the boys could broad jump across our street. That's how narrow it was. We also lived near Campbell Soup. And every summer, the trucks come in August with the tomatoes--loaded with tomatoes. So there was this traffic light at the corner. And the kids used to run--The boys would run down the street and jump the tomato trucks and grab a basket, and bring it back to the girls. My girlfriend and I, we were like the queens sitting on the step waiting for them to bring us the tomatoes. Then we got a little older and decided, "We were gonna jump the trucks." And Melanie fell and got hit by a car. So she got to ride in the most handsome policeman's vehicle. His motorcycle had--I forgot what they used to call 'em. The things on the side. And I was so jealous that she got to ride with Pete Sumkett, who was this gorgeous policeman. And everyone talked about Pete Sumkett. And she went to the hospital. But fortunately she was okay. You know, it wasn't a bad accident (Laughs). But living and growing up with Campbell Soup and RCA in Camden, New Jersey was interesting. Because most of the people were employed there unless they were professional. I grew up in a very heterogeneous environment. They used to call my grandfather, the grandfather of all nations. There were Jewish, Polish, Irish, Italian, Chinese. 'Cause there was a Chinese laundry around the corner and my grandfather used to sit on the step. And all the kids would line up all around him. He was the neighborhood grandfather. And, you know, it was really great, the neighborhood we grew up in. Actually living here kind of reminds me of it. It's just that it's not as diverse as it was. But growing up in Camden, New Jersey was a very diverse experience as a child. Story_ID: 9438 Speaker 1: Now what was that community like? Camden [New Jersey], Camden--how large and--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I think at that time it was a population of about 150,000 people. Most of them worked for the New York Shipyard 'til that closed. Campbell Soup and RCA. There was Esterbrook Pen Company there. And recently--about ten years ago, I had this art deco bedroom set. And I never looked at--there was a little metal label inside of where it came from. It was from a [furniture] company called J.B. Van Sciver , which was in Camden, New Jersey. Which is so funny to me. I said, "Gee, they made furniture like this (laughs)." And I ended up buying it, you know, many years later here in New York. But it was really, I guess what you would call a blue-collar town. Story_ID: 9439 Speaker 1: Tell me what you were like as a child. I know you--You know, you took piano lessons. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm. Speaker 1: But what were you sort of like as a child? Speaker 2: The kids might say I was goody-two-shoes (Laughs) basically. You know, I enjoyed life. I went to church. I participated in Sunday school. We went to Canes Avenue Baptist Church. Actually the minister who baptized me recently was at Friendship Baptist Church here in New York. He died about a month ago. And--Herman Hayes Watts. But I grew up with a Reverend Lee in my younger years who was at that church. And I just loved him to death. He was everything to me. And, you know, I just think that life was good. I wasn't unhappy ever that I recall. My uncles were there for me. My mother's [Juanita Ford Jones Blanchard] sister lived around the corner from us. So I used to go shopping with Aunt Myrtle [Ford]. And that's probably how I got interested in fashion. Because she'd never had children. And she would take me to all the expensive places like--My mother took me to Gimbels. But Aunt Myrtle took me to Saks. 'Cause Saks was right behind Gimbels in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And the women used to call her. And tell her when they had her designer shoes in. Or when there was a great dress in that suited her. They really treated her very royally. So I kind of grew up with that sense of myself and caring about who you are, what you look like. They were women who wore hats. Especially my aunt. She was really the cat's meow. And when she got older--She used to work for the shipyard, the Marine Corps. I guess all of that was going on during the war. And then she became a practical nurse in later years. And did it 'til she retired. And actually went back to the hospital that she used to work in, when she got sick. But she just passed at eighty-seven, about five years ago. Speaker 1: This is Aunt Myrtle? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Story_ID: 9440 Speaker 1: Now Reverend Lee--Is--? Was it Reverend Lee, you said? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, why was the all--? You know, you said, "He was everything to me." Speaker 2: I don't know. Maybe because my mother [Juanita Ford Jones Blanchard] liked him. But he was very well liked at that church. And when Herman Hayes Watts, who recently passed here in New York, came to that church, I remember the transition and how difficult it was. And I just think that was his--He was very charismatic in that way. Very loving. You know, something about him was--I guess very reverent. He was a very reverent minister. And he just had that something special that I was attracted to. And I was very involved in Sunday school. I was an usher in church and all of that. You know, but we weren't in a church like the one next door here. Where they're in there all day. You know. I think I went to meetings once a week. And we were there for Sunday school and service and that was it. I was a debutante. A woman named Gretchen Waples, who owns Waples Funeral Home, she's like Aunt Gretchen. What can I say? I used to take piano lessons at the funeral parlor (laughs). And she was very influential in me becoming a debutante 'cause I wasn't a Jack and Jill or part of one of those social organizations. But she created the debutante's ball. And it was fun. I danced the tango. I didn't wanna do the waltz. And we had choices. We had a very interesting dance instructor who was able to teach us, you know, all the different dances. I think we had three different dances we could do. I still have pictures from that whole time. And some of my girlfriends from that time, we'll still friendly today. We still stay in touch with each other. Story_ID: 9441 Speaker 1: I don't think with your stepfather, you said his name. And it--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Samuel Blanchard. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when he--So he really was your father-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. Speaker 1: In your formative years. So well can you describe your home environment in a lot of respects? Speaker 2: Well we lived in my mother [Juanita Ford Jones Blanchard] and father's [Robert Jones] home 'til I was about three. And my [maternal] grandmother [Nora Ford] became ill. She didn't have Alzheimer's. I guess she had fainting spells or hardening of the arteries maybe. And so we moved into Camden, New Jersey with my grandparents. And my mother really became a caregiver to my grandmother. And she was--I guess lived in the past. So I got to hear about her childhood. She had a horse named Dolly. And, you know, her father was a minister. Her brother was a phenomenal fine artist. And he lived in Westchester, Pennsylvania. And I remember his work being on display in banks and other city agencies in Westchester. And their last name was Blackston. He was Samuel Blackston. So she had a totally different life than my grandfather. His father apparently was from New Guinea [Indonesia]. They said he was very short, very dark, with very straight hair. And that he used to wanna pray at church. And (laughs) they didn't like him to pray. Because he had such a heavy accent. But that's really all I know about him. And I just learned that much about him recently. My mother said she remembers seeing--going to his funeral. But she was probably about eight years old when he passed. So my aunt, who was older than my mother, she told me what little I do know. 'Cause I never knew he was from New Guinea when they said he was Indian. I thought they meant Native American. But, in fact, he was from New Guinea. What else did you want to know? Speaker 1: Well I was asking about growing up in the hou--with Samuel Blanchard. You know, what was the household like? The whole (unclear) like? Speaker 2: It was good until--I think he never felt my mother loved him because of my father. And I think he knew my mother obviously before she married my father. But he was about ten or twelve years older than my mother. So I think when my sister [Marilyn Blanchard-Washington] was born, you know, he was very happy. You know, because this was his child. But I never felt slighted or anything. And I probably had a better relationship with her father than she did. Because I was around for the good years when he and my mother were having a positive relationship. But he was very involved with the Elk's Home. And I think that got in the way of their relationship. She felt like he put the Elks before us. My grandfather [Alfred Ford] was always there. I remember coming home and having cramps. And he was fixing me sassafras tea. And, you know, nurturing me in that way. And he was a very loving male image. So was my uncle, Myrtle's husband, Solomon Jones. He was great. And so I think I really did have good relationships with men as a child. Even though my father wasn't in my life. And they were all very proud positive people basically. You know, I never heard them complain about their station in life. You know, they just lived their life. They enjoyed it. They all tried to improve themselves. And basically, I think I was very lucky. My Uncle Sol [Solomon] had a shoeshine stand on the corner of Broadway and Canes Avenue [in Camden, New Jersey], which he did on the weekends. He worked for--I forget which company. Oh he worked for Whitman's Chocolates. How could I forget? So every Christmas, we got a five pound box of chocolates. And actually, I bought some the other day. (laughs) Because I saw a small box of Whitman's capers in the drug store. And I said, "Oh God, they're still around. Let me get some." And I enjoyed them on my way to Nyack [New York] yesterday. But, you know, he was great. And we would visit him at the shoeshine stand. Sit up there and get our shoes shined. But he was an impeccable man. Reminded me of some of the people photographed by James Van Der Zee. You know, he was always dressed. And walked very tall. And was very proud, handsome man. Story_ID: 9442 Speaker 1: Give me the schools you went to. You know, like where you went to elementary school. Where you went to-- Speaker 2: I went to [John G.] Whittier School in Camden, New Jersey. And it's the same school my mother and her brothers and sister went to as well. I even experienced having some teachers that they had. I went from kindergarten through the seventh grade at Whittier. And my mother became president of the PTA when I was in the fifth grade. So, you know, it was fun. It was a good school. And I had very good teachers, I think. They all knew me. They all knew my mother. So, you know, they definitely communicated about me and my studies. I guess most of them used to say I didn't try hard enough. Because I could do better than what I was doing. Even though I had a good report card. It could be a great report card. I guess they wanted me to get all A's or something. But basically I was a A-B student throughout. And all my friends I mean were the neighborhood kids and kids from pretty much the area that I grew up with. And I went to junior high school, which was Hatch Junior High [Cooper B. Hatch Middle School, Camden, New Jersey]. And that was out in an area called Parkside, New Jersey. And it was down the street from the high school, Camden High. Which Camden High was called the castle on the hill. It almost reminds you of City College over here. It was built like a castle on top. And it did sit on a hill. Not like the one here. But it was a slight hill. But at Hatch Junior High, I became vice president of the class. And the principal of my high school also attended my church. You know, and was friendly with my family. I used to have a few girls who were jealous of me in school. And I remember in the ninth grade, I was waiting for a bus holding my books. And the next thing I know, my books were all over the place. And a fellow had gone by and offered to walk me home. Or he wanted to carry my books. And I said, "No." I waited for the bus. I didn't wanna be bothered. I really wasn't ready for boys quite yet. And--except as friends. And this girl--I guess this was her boyfriend or she liked him or something. And she attacked me after he walked by. While I was waiting for the bus. So we had a fight on the (laughs) corner. And we ended up in Mr. Gordon, the principal's office. And that was pretty amazing. Because my mother felt that I must have done something to this girl for us to have a fight. And I kept saying, "But I didn't. I didn't do anything. I didn't bother her." But I was all dressed up that day. I was really into fashion, young. I used to get part-time jobs so I could have shoes from Capezio. I loved Capezio shoes. And I had a pair tangerine sling back shoes on that day. And a knit tangerine sort of top and skirt. And I don't know if it was that or the boy that made this girl attack me. Anyway, we're in the office. And so Mr. Gordon is looking at my mother. Her mother didn't come. And he said, "Candace, why did you--? Why did you attack Veronica?" And she looked at him and said, "'Cause I can't stand that bitch." And my mother (laughs) was ready to attack her. She couldn't (laughs) believe it. So she got suspended. And I was okay. And they realized that I was not an instigator. And, You know, after that, all that settled down. But even in the sixth grade I had girls who really were after me. They wrote stories about me and my teacher, you know. Sexual innuendos in the sixth grade about me and Ms--In the seventh grade about me and Mr. Cherry. And, of course, his name (laughs) was Mr. Cherry. So you can imagine what they said about me and (laughs) Mr. Cherry. But none of that was true. And so I got through those little childhood altercations that we had. Story_ID: 9443 Speaker 1: When do you think you started taking an interest in fashion though? That's--I mean I know (unclear) Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That young probably. Speaker 1: That young? In sixth grade? Speaker 2: Maybe by birth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember my third birthday party. My mother has a picture of me. The fact that I was a little bit different than the other kids. We shopped at Strawbridge and Clothier in Philly [Philadelphia]. And I had to pick out for my birthday party, my dress. And she said I drove the saleswoman absolutely crazy. Because every time she would bring me something to try on, I'd say, "I don't like it." And she'd bring me another dress. And I'd say, "I don't like it." And the woman said, "Let her pick out her own dress." 'Cause then I think they used to have little stages for you to stand on. And, you know, they'd bring you. And let the mother look at you in the clothes. So I went down and I picked out a forest green pinwheel corduroy dress with a white pique collar. And all my cousins in this picture and friends are in all these little crinoline, pink and blue. They look like it was their party 'cause I was so subdued. But it was the fall of the year. So I had a fall dress on. So I think it began pretty early on. Because I think my mother encouraged me to, you know, make choices for myself. That was part of how she raised me. And then my aunt was a big influence 'cause she took me shopping to Germantown instead of Philadelphia. So that was a special outing with her. So shopping was an event for us. We went out to lunch. When my sister was able to go with us we would have lunch. Even at Horn and Haddocks, it didn't really matter where. But the fact that we went out to lunch and we went shopping. Sometimes we would go to the Punch and Judy shows. 'Til I got older and said, "Mommy, I don't need to go to those anymore. I think I'm a little too old." Speaker 1: Tell us about the Punch and Judy shows. Speaker 2: They were puppet shows. Story_ID: 9444 Speaker 1: What other things are, you know, formulating you as a young person? You know, making you what you are or developing you? Are there other people having influence besides your aunt, your mother and your stepfather and your Mr--Reverend Lee, your minister? Are there other--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And Gretchen Waples, who owned the funeral parlor. Who I spoke to the other day, she's still around. Speaker 1: And it's so funny how I spoke to her the other day. A girl who I know in New York, and I've known her for years. And I always felt I knew her from my past. But I didn't know where. And she walked in the store. And I was talking about I've been visiting different churches in the last two months. And I said, "I haven't gotten to the church that-- My childhood minister is the minister at Friendship Baptist." And she said, "What's his name?" And I said, "Reverend Watts." She said, "I think he died." I said, "You're kidding." She said, "Yeah, I think his funeral is tomorrow." I think it was like a Thursday. And the funeral was Friday. And I said, "Really!" She said, "Yeah, let me call my friend in Camden, New Jersey. 'Cause they're talking about coming up to the funeral." I said, "Your friend in Camden, New Jersey." Speaker 2: (unclear) So you had this phone call about the death. (unclear) Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Right. And so Susan had her cell phone. And she called. And she called Aunt Gretchen Waples. And asked her when was the funeral. And told her she was standing here in my store. And I met Susan maybe twenty years ago. We had a mutual friend who was--had a recording studio. And also was an artist. And she's an art dealer. And I said, "Susan, remember I used to say to you something about your face is so familiar." I said, "You're probably in those birthday party pictures and things." I said, "Because I used to be at Arty Waples-- all his birthday parties." I said, "You know, his mother really looked out for me as a child." You know, I took piano lessons from a woman named Kay Isaac--Now I'm ready to say Kay Isaacson. But that's not her. I forget Kay's last name. But she had gone to the Boston Conservatory of Music [Boston, Massachusetts.] And, you know, I really loved the piano. But the shyness kept me from probably continuing with it. But I took piano lessons there. So she was very influential. She also went to the same church. So all of the women I guess who were friends with my mother and my aunt definitely influenced my life. Story_ID: 9445 Speaker 1: Now you took--started taking piano lessons at what age? Speaker 2: I was five. Speaker 1: Oh you were five when you started? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm. Um-hmm. Speaker 1: So you took--Okay, okay. And 'cause I remember you were saying that, you know, you were so shy about it. You were playing--you had to play behind in high school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Behind the curtain while a friend of yours who was singing. Now okay in high school what are--what things are influencing you? What are you--? Are you an active child in groups and organizations? Are you good in, you know--? Speaker 2: I was still a girl scout. I had lots of friends. I never had a problem, you know, having friends. Boys and girls. We really had a good time in high school. We had an English teacher who was very dramatic. So when we studied English and Shakespeare and all of that, we had to act it all out. So he was great. Mr. Robertson. And I had diverse teachers. They were black, white primarily. Actually I lived in--The school was in a neighborhood that began to change my senior year. And everyone moved to this new community called--Everyone that wasn't black moved out to Cherry Hill, New Jersey. 'Cause Cherry Hill didn't exist 'til then. I think that mall was the first mall in the country in Cherry Hill, New Jersey. But basically I grew up with all different kids. And we all had a good time. All the way through school. Except my elementary school was predominantly black. But junior high and high school were mixed. I was involved in the majorettes. First I was in the band. And I played the glockenspiel. But I fell with that tremendous thing. 'Cause I was very tiny. And so I switched and became a majorette. And I became the lieutenant of the majorettes. I don't remember. Was I class officer? I did something else in high school. But I can't remember right now. I think I was a class officer in high school as well. Story_ID: 9446 Speaker 1: Were there subjects you liked--? Speaker 2: I liked english. I liked history. Basically I guess english was exciting because of this english teacher that we had. Basically I think I looked at school as something that I enjoyed. It was a part of my life. And I was gonna do the best I could do. I didn't get a lot of pressure from my mother. I remember a lot of the Jewish girls in my class had a lot of pressure from their parents to be A students. There was a girl, Audrey Wolfson and Arlene Goldberg. You know, they--Audrey usually got straight As. And if Arlene didn't--and she was always trying very hard. If she got two Bs, she would be upset and crying. And we never felt that kind of pressure. I certainly never did. And my mother was always active with the PTA throughout my school years. My gym teacher was also a very good friend of my mothers. She's the woman who is married to the man from Harper's Ferry. So they were in my life a lot of years. And they still are. They're both pretty ill now. But the mother is amazing. She was the health physical education teacher. And she and my mother became friends. She actually traveled and took my mother to Africa. She taught in Africa and invited my mother to go. And so she went and met her at the end of her year in Africa. Unfortunately I wasn't able to go. 'Cause I was a buyer for Joseph Magnin [Clothing Store] then, out in California. So I paid for her trip. And she got to see Africa before she died, which I was very happy about. 'Cause my mother hadn't been past D.C. [Washington, D.C.], you know, 'til we met these people. Yeah. So definitely I believe she and her husband had a strong influence on the importance of education. And, you know, in having a well-rounded life. He was a nuclear physicist. And he worked in Philadelphia at the Planetarium. So, you know, from being friendly with his daughter, who was in the same class with me and our mothers being close, I was always exposed to their life. Which was totally different. And her parents, of course, were much more educated than mine. And, you know, they took me south first time. They used to tease me all the way to D.C. Then we'd pass D.C. and we're in Virginia. And they'd say, "Ronnie, did you see Dog, Virginia?" I said, "Dog!" They said, "Yeah, "There's a town. You just missed it. Dog, Virginia (laughs)." And then they took me to Dinwiddie, Virginia, which was in the back woods. And we visited a big family there. And they lived in a--like a farmhouse. And there were so many. I remember them having bunk beds and everything. And that was the first time I had major--the best tasting fried chicken in the world. I still remember it, 'cause they had wrung the chicken's necks and all that, that I had never seen before. And they fixed dinner. And we had turnip greens which I had never had before. We had collard greens. But my mother was not a soul food cook by any sense of her imagination. She didn't fry chicken. We didn't have spaghetti and meatballs. We had spaghetti with baked chicken wings. You know, she cooked very northeastern WASP [White Anglo Saxon Protestant]. You know, boiled potatoes, string beans, roast beef, lamb. You know, our breakfasts were interesting probably because of my grandfather. So we had biscuits and baked shad and, you know. Those kinds of Sunday mornings breakfasts. We all sat down at the family table together for breakfast, lunch--I mean for breakfast and dinner every night in our household. And that's something I think kids are lacking today. That whole sense of family. To me it made a huge difference in who we become in life and how we feel about ourselves. Story_ID: 9447 Speaker 1: It's time for you to graduate from high school. And so is there any thought about where you're going? Or--I mean what--? How did it end up at Kent State? What is that whole process? Speaker 2: Well part of the process was I had to think of finances. I didn't want to go to school in New Jersey. I wanted to go away. I didn't want to go to a all black university. I don't know why. Maybe because all the girls were talking about going there to get a husband. And I wasn't interested in that. To me marriage and the family was the kiss of death in my teens and in my twenties. And maybe that was my protection. That was my chastity belt so to speak. Because I had the fear of teenage pregnancy. And I felt all the good girls got caught. And so I wasn't about any of that. I wanted to--When I went to school, I think I had been influenced by my aunt because I was a candy striper. And she was the practical nurse then in a hospital. So I used to work there part time in the summer. So I don't know. Going to school was confusing. I thought, "I don't know. Where do I wanna go?" So I started applying like to Michigan State, Ohio State. You know, all these schools you read about and think about. I think I was into Candace Bergen 'cause she went to University of Pennsylvania. And she used to be in Seventeen. I was an avid reader of (laughs) of Seventeen magazine. So I remember her being on the back of a motorbike and all of that while she was in college. And so I really thought--sort of looked at college from that perspective. Not from having any history. I'm the first probably in my family to go to college. And so I applied to all these schools. And I was getting rejected left and right. And then my mother said, "Well why don't you go to Douglas? You should try to go there." And I said, "I don't wanna be a teacher." In my mind, if you went to Douglas, you were gonna be a teacher. And I said, "I don't think I wanna be a teacher." So somehow I came home one day and said I wanted to be an anesthesiologist. Why, I don't know. But probably from being around my aunt. But I can't imagine me being an anesthesiologist. So two of my friends had applied to Kent State. So they said, "Why don't you come and go with us to Kent? Since you can't make up your mind." And I had been rejected. And now I guess it was like April. And I still hadn't made a choice. And--But I decided to go to school in the Midwest because they were less expensive. And they were much more open to out of state students at the time. So I got accepted at Kent. And a girl named, Karen Beverly and I went off to Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] together. And there we were in Kent, Ohio. Speaker 1: So how was that experience? Speaker 2: Not a good one. Speaker 1: (laughs). Speaker 2: It was interesting. I lived in a new dorm. And I remember when I moved into that dorm, they said that--It was a freshman dorm. That it was gonna become the center of campus. And in fact it did become the center of campus. 'Cause when I went back to visit--Today you need a bus to get around Kent State. And it is the center of campus. And my friend Karen was in a different dorm far away from me. And we had a lot of fun. I had a friend from--Jewish girlfriend from Los Angeles [California] who met me the first day we were on line picking classes where we wanted to go. And she sort of latched on to me and started talking to me. And when she said she was from California, I said, "Oh, that's nice." And I had not been to California yet. And she said, "I'm a take the classes you take. Let me see your card. We'll take the same (laughs) classes." You know, it was like we became friends. We're still friends to this day. Karen Grosslight. Come to find out her Uncle Joe was also a professor at Kent. So we bonded and became friends. And it was okay. But Kent--there were--when was it 20,000 students and 200 black. That included Africans and other minority groups. So that was a problem. And I had never been in that kind of environment. And I never felt prejudice before or anything. And I did feel it there. Speaker 1: What year was it (unclear)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (unclear) That was '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Wasn't it '68 [1968]? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Was it? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, '64 [1964]. Story_ID: 9448 Speaker 1: Kent [State University, Kent, Ohio] was really bad with the riots and all of that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That was the year after. I think it was '69 [1969]. I don't know. That shouldn't have happened there. I think it happened there because it was such a conservative school. You know, because there were much stronger student demonstrations going on at Columbia [University, New York, New York], [University of California] Berkeley [Berkeley, California] and all these areas where that kind of tragedy didn't take place. And I really think it happened because it was the Midwest and it was very conservative. Now my favorite class there actually was sociology because of the professor. He--Dr. Kolar--He was just a funny guy. You know, how some professors have a way with students. And they make you wanna learn because of their personality. And he was a great jokester too, you know. He had a tremendous wit about him. And he used to wear every Friday a big tie that said 'TGIF' all the way across. And he had cuff links and a tie clasp. So TGIF. And there we were on Friday afternoon in his class. You know, but he also dealt with racism in his class. And maybe that was the anthropology class I think that we took, where he brought that up. And that's where I first learned about melanin in your complexion. And all these different things. And I remember him bringing in pictures of fair-skinned blacks. You know, showing the white students. You know, can you tell? This, that? They didn't know who was who. I was able to pick out most of them, I guess. But I think he really stimulated our minds and influenced us a great deal there. But I didn't like Kent. And I--Then I ended up being in a program where I had to do--I decided I wanted to be--sorry. Decided I wanted to be in retailing 'cause I went home for Christmas. And I worked at Lit Brothers in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And I met a woman named Julie Avalon, who I ended up selling clothes to in later years. But she was nineteen years old. So she wasn't that much older than me. And she was a buyer for Lit Brothers. So when I was home that Christmas and I worked there, she allowed me to come in to--behind the scenes. And sort of expose me to what was going on. She took a liking to me. And I think I was curious also. And I think it was because she was so young. And she had this exciting job. And she traveled. And I remember once--I worked there every year at Christmas. I came home. She had been stuck in New York in the black out. You know, that kind of thing. So she sort of really had a impact on me. And when I went back to school, I wanted to get out of, which seemed like Pre-Med, all the science classes and everything I was taking. And I got into--They didn't have retailing. They didn't have merchandising. So I had to take home economics and business. But-- Speaker 2: So those courses weren't really related to what you were ultimately interested in? Speaker 1: No, but that's how they created it. They thought that was-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. Speaker 1: The interest level. But they didn't have it. That's why it's so fascinating that I get invited back there now that I'm graduated and living in New York and have a career in retailing. And they now have a fashion school that's state of the art. It's as good as FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], and some better. Because they probably have a lot more new facilities there. And that was it. I mean it was socially a tough school. Then there were the sororities, the Deltas, the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha] and all of the that. And I decided I didn't want anything to do with them. The AKAs were new on campus. So I helped them. But I helped them by making clothes for them. And instead of that kelly green and pale pink, I made olive green and dusty rose (laughs) outfits for them. And there was a fellow in my accounting class, he used to tease me and say I should teach Clothing 225. Story_ID: 9449 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this; at this age was your concept of fashion all outside? I mean, you know--and who were your--and who were the designers you looked at? You know what I'm saying? Some people say fashion is int--you know. That you have to have that internal thing together. But what was your concept? And why was it so attractive to you? Speaker 2: I think growing up with Aunt Myrtle--I just liked fine clothes. And being exposed to her shopping and, you know. With shoes, they were more designer driven. I think in those days, women were more--It was more brand names that were important, like Kimberly Knits. Things like that were happening then. Evan Picone [fashion designer] existed then. But I just had a sense of style, I think. And whatever I had seemed to impress people. Like to go away to college, I had a wrap coat with a fox collar. I don't even have a coat like that now, 'cause I'm much more casual, you know, with fox all the way down the front. You know, with a belt. My friend from L.A. [Los Angeles, California] she wanted to wear my clothes. I had a culotte jumper plaid. It was pleated on the bottom. The pleated skirt. And guess where I got it from? Korvette's. 'Cause Korvette's had opened. And, you know, they used to have those minute sales, or what have you. And when I was home, I rushed and got all these things. And these things I knew were in 'Seventeen', 'cause I read it religiously. And she remembered that this jumpsuit was on the cover of Seventeen. So I allowed her to wear my jumpsuit. And, you know, we sort of switched off with each other. But she was into fashion because of her grandmother. And I think I was just because I had developed a sense of style in choosing what I liked and what I didn't like by shopping with my aunt, you know, and my grandmother, and reading magazines all the time. I was an avid magazine reader. Story_ID: 9450 Speaker 1: I said you were working. But what was appealing to you? You know. You're working retail--What did you find fascinating about this? 'Cause you're working with a person. You said, "She was young. That's what sort of fascinated me." But--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That got me interested in the possibility. I never even knew that, that career existed, you know, 'til I worked in retail. And usually when you work in sales, people don't give you that opportunity to know what's going on behind the scenes. So I was very lucky, that my curiosity led me to someone who was willing to share, and to expose me to what it was all about. And, you know, that--I just decided that's what I was gonna be. I came to New York and went to the Laboratory Institute of Merchandising here. Speaker 1: After (unclear)--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) After Kent [State University, Kent, Ohio]. Speaker 1: --leaving from Kent. Speaker 2: Right, for a year. Speaker 1: Now why did you want to go there? Was it because-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was just looking for places to learn--to do what I wanted to do. I didn't know of FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]. You know. And so that's what I did. And it was a great experience. That school is still very active today and produces a lot of people who are in the business. Actually, I just saw something about them in 'Women's Wear [Daily]' the other day. But that was great-- because it was located at 12 E. 53rd Street [New York, New York]. So I got to see the greatest people in the world. Any day. Any given day, going to that school--Bobby Kennedy, Jackie Kennedy. Then I had a part time job at Alexander's in the hosiery department. And all of those women came to Alexander's to buy their hosiery. And Alexander's, at that time, had an elitist boutique. Really, they used to have private showings for all the society ladies, before they went to Saks [Fifth Avenue, upscale department store] and all these other stores. They were kind of known for that. So that gave me an early exposure to knowing who designers were, what was going on in Europe, and all of that. I was on the College Board there. And, you know, it was a fun time. And they had opened up a contemporary younger area called The 59th Street Bridge Shops. So I got a lot of exposure by doing that and by working there. And-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) This is 1969? Speaker 2: '9 [1969]. Story_ID: 9451 Speaker 1: So I'm just saying, here you are--you're exposed. All these people are coming in. You're seeing people, you know, put together. How are your fashions--How's your sense of fashion changing at this point? Or is it evolving, you think? Speaker 2: Well I think the knowledge--getting the education in the Laboratory Institute of Merchandising, that's where you begin to study about who the designers were. Who [Coco] Chanel was who James Galanos was. You know. So I began to get into the history of the fashion business. And how it evolved and how it related to retail. But that gave me the fashion exposure, rather than just the retail business end. And that helped me a great deal, I think. In formulating my career path, once I got into Abraham and Strauss [department store] Executive Training Program [in New York, New York]. Story_ID: 9452 Speaker 1: I asked was it Parisian-oriented. You know, I mean--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well Paris [France] was the center of fashion at that time. And, you know, there was Anne Klein--All the famous people were around then. I don't think Calvin [Klein] was. Maybe he was just beginning then with coats. I think he only did coats at that time. So there were American designers. And then there were France. But France was the center of fashion. And I became a buyer very quickly. I moved--what happened is I worked at Abraham and Strauss. Went through the executive training program--buyer, assistant buyer, all of that. But I worked for some very dynamic women who were considered tough cookies. Where most people didn't really want to work for (laughs) them. One woman--She was terrific. She brought my personality out. Her name was Anita Baseer. And I was the assistant buyer in the children's area. And she gave me a classification to buy. And in most instances when an assistant had a classification, it could be a price point in a category or something like that. But she gave me the chubby department 'cause she was the buyer for girls seven to fourteen. So chubbies was like a stepchild to her. So that became my department. So I was able to really plan a small area, you know, by classification, by price, the whole thing. The look. The concept of what I wanted it to look like. And she really guided me through that. And I still had to work as the assistant, you know, on everything else that was going on in the department. She was a character. She had a picture of Clark Gable [actor] to the left of her on the wall, life-size poster of Clark. And, you know, in this business, buyers, they have to yell and scream and argue and carry on with the manufacturer. Who's maybe not delivering merchandise on time and things like that. And I was very respectful of adults still. And, you know, how you grow up Christian. And, you know, you're very respectful in how you deal with people. So she heard me one day on the telephone. One of our manufacturers was late for ad merchandise. So I was calling to check when it was coming in. She heard me say, "Please get that merchandise in. Miss Bester's going to be so upset. You don't want to upset her. Please get the merchandise in as soon as you can." You know, but I was sort of begging them to do it. And she heard me, and she said, "Darling, it's wonderful to be nice to them. But sometimes you must yell! Let me hear you yell!" She said, "Yell Veronica." And I started yelling. She said, "That's it! That's it!" She said, "You must yell at them.," she said, " 'cause they're all not like him." And she would look at Clark and go [kissing sound]. So whenever she went out on one of these manufacturers, what brought her back to herself, and not to be an angry, miserable person was Clark Gable on the wall. But she was really an amazing character. And it's funny; I got to see her recently. Because A & S [Abraham and Strauss department store] had a reunion when they closed. They had a huge reunion. And being at A & S at that time was very important. Because it had the best training program in the country. And--so a lot of major people who moved throughout retailing, I was exposed to. I met. I formed a relationship with Mickey Drexler from the GAP [clothing retailer]. He was at A & S at one time. Michael Jeffries, he and I were on the executive training program together. He's head of Abercrombie & Fitch today. But, you know, the good 'old boy' network. They all made it. I even fought for my salary when I got out of school. Because they were paying boys, I think $10 more than girls. And I fought for my $10. Because I said, "I live alone. I've put myself through school." You know. "Why is there a difference? I really (laughs) need my money." So I got--I was able to get the same amount. Story_ID: 9453 Speaker 1: Now there weren't many other blacks in the program--Were you the only? Speaker 2: The year I came in, there was me and a guy on that Executive Training Program. But they, at that time, unlike today had four entry points a year. You know, like if kids got out of school in June or September, you know. They had executive training programs starting with anywhere from fifty to one hundred candidates. That doesn't go on today. I think they only have once a year, if at all. And A & S [Abraham and Strauss] was very vibrant. And it was like, "Shop at A & S. It's worth a trip from anywhere." Because it was in Brooklyn [New York]. It wasn't in Manhattan. It was a sister store to Bloomingdale's. And at that time, Federated, they didn't have two stores in the same city--trading area anyway. So, you know, A & S was very exciting for me. And I decided to take control of my career path on a certain level. As I learned. This woman was very dynamic and I learned a lot. And I decided, "Now, how am I gonna become a buyer in three years?" A friend of mine, he said to me when he met me--I said, "I didn't come to New York to mess around. I'm gonna be a buyer within three years, and by the time I'm twenty-five." And I was. And I just think from working with this woman, she really influenced me a great deal. Certainly brought my personality out. Where I would communicate, direct, be able to give orders, and tell people what to do. And then, I was going to be promoted to the branch stores as a department manager. And I decided I wasn't--I didn't want to do that, because I wanted to be in the junior sportswear area. Because that's where the fun and excitement was in the business at that time. And so I went--a girl was an assistant buyer in Juniors, and she was a black woman named, Toni Norman. And she came to me and said, "I'm leaving. I can't work for that crazy woman." She said, "But if you wanna be in Junior's, the opportunity is there." You know. "Go meet her and see how you feel." You know. She said, "I hung in there with her for a year. Maybe you can to. At least it'll get you what you want." And so I went up and knocked on the woman's door. And she had her glasses down on her nose, and said, "Can I help you?" And I said, "Yes. Are you Miss Denner?" And she said, "Yes." I said, "I wanna work for you. I hear you need an assistant." She looked at me. And she said, "Well, where are you?" I said, "I'm in Children's." I said, "But I'm getting ready to go to the branches, and I would rather work for you than to go to the branches." She said, "Well that may prevent you from, you know, becoming a buyer." I said, "Well--So I said, "I would rather work for you." So she was tapping [tapping] her pencil, looking at me. She said, "Come in and talk to me." So I talked to her. And she said, "Well you're gonna have to make this happen." She said, "Because I can't pull you from another division. Especially with you going to the branches." She said, "You don't want to be a professional assistant, do you?" I said, "Oh no. I wanna become a buyer one day. I wanna be just like you." So she said, "Well tell them you wanna be a professional assistant. It can always change." And I went back to my divisional merchandise manager, and told him I wanted the job with Anita--Miss Denner. And that I had interviewed with her, and I would like to be released to go to her department. So this man, who I still know today, Zachary Solomon, he let me go into her area. And she was totally eccentric you know. So I had a very interesting, exciting experience being her assistant. Speaker 1: Talk about that. Speaker 2: She the--I wasn't there two days, and she said, "Do you drive?" I said, "I have a license, but I haven't driven really in New York." She said, "Do you know how to get to Long Island [New York]?" I said, "No." She said, "Well I want you to take my car home tonight. And you're gonna come out to my house, and work with me tomorrow." And she drew me a map of how to get to her. Gave me money to put the car in the garage and I drove to Great Neck Estates out in Long Island [New York], and went to her house. Where she had her whole office setup at home. And she would work there. She said, "I can think here. You know. I can't think in the stores. Too much going on, too many interruptions." So she said, "I like to do my planning and writing my orders here." And she had a very strong knitwear background. And we really worked on sweaters. And I began to learn. She taught me a lot about gauges and yarns and all of that. Because sweaters was a big buy that she made when she went to Europe. So she took a liking to me. We became joined at the hip. Then later I found out she was a Libra. Maybe that was why. But somehow, I was able to get along with this woman. And most people--She went through assistants like this [snaps fingers]. But somehow, she and I formed a relationship. And she would travel to London [England], and Paris [France], and Florence [Italy]. She used to spend a lot of time in Florence doing knitwear. So she said, "Why don't you go to Europe on your vacation?" I said, "I wouldn't mind doing that." She said, "Go by yourself?" I said, "I wouldn't mind going by myself." She said, "Well go this summer. You should plan to go. And I'll give you the names of all the buying offices-- the AMC offices in each city. And you can make contact with them." And that's what I did. I stayed in hostels, basically. But, you know, I saved my money and traveled. And I forget my--I remember my mother came to New York to see me off. 'Cause I was flying the first 747 for, I think, it was British Airways, at the time. So she brought everybody up 'cause she didn't think I was coming back. And she said, "She thought that because as a little girl, I used to say I was gonna live in New York. And then I was gonna live in Paris." But, I'd never wanted to live in Paris once I got there. Because I was very career-driven, at this point. I really wanted to become a buyer and work hard. And I said, "I could always visit Paris." You know. And in another year or two, I became a buyer and I was in Paris on business. Story_ID: 9454 Speaker 1: What did you learn by that trip abroad, you know, when you went? Were there things that you learned? Was it valuable lesson there that she? Or was it just you were exposed to some of the fashion houses or? Speaker 2: I was exposed to--you know, the museums, you know. She [Anita Denner] gave me, you know, everywhere to go, what to visit. How those things affect fashion. How they influence fashions. And I just got to see what it was all about which is a great exposure to have. I mean most people who go into retailing, don't get that kind of exposure as an assistant buyer. But she encouraged me to do it. And--'cause I think she saw that I really enjoyed what I was doing. I was good at it. And I guess learning the knitwear; I had a good sense of color. And she liked that about me. And I just think she took a unique interest in me. And probably I was the first one that she could even get to that kind of relationship with 'cause she was totally neurotic. And I remember once, we were taking inventory. And, you know, how important inventory is. And her boss, Zack Solomon said to me, "Get her out of here! She's gonna mess up this inventory, and we gotta take inventory! Get her out of here!" But she was really a character. Knickers, they're showing them again this year. They became a hot item. And we were overbought. So basically, he would not approve orders for her to buy more knickers. But we were selling them like crazy. But she was dead in other classifications. So that meant she had no open to buy. Either she had to cancel, mark down, or do whatever. Happy Legs was a hot company then. And I lived in the city, and she told me to get a cab, and go by Happy Leggs, and pick up those knickers, and bring them into A & S [Abraham and Strauss]. And so, we were doing something a bit illegal, now. But I didn't know. I was just into going to get the knickers, coming to work in a cab. And I would take them into the receiving area. And I had a friend who was a checkpoint down there. And she would make tags for us. And I'd ticket the stuff, and bring it upstairs. And we'd put it on the floor. And we [fingers popping] kept selling like 120 a day of knickers and things like that. Business isn't like that now. It was so much fun. And A & S had done over the junior area. So it was like a big ship. And we had a jukebox. So every morning, I'd get there early. Put on my jukebox, merchandise the floor, and, you know, make sure we were ready to start the day. And one thing great about A & S is the president, the CEO; the vice president walked through that store every day and said, "Good morning." And started the company's day by doing that, floor to floor. And in each department, they knew everyone by name. One man, Ken Coker, he really influenced me. Because he always said, "Always remember something about someone. And if you do, you will remember their name." And I'm very good at knowing who people are, and knowing something about them. And people say to me, "How do you remember all that?" Now I know so many people. There were two black women in the department. One was in sales, and she was like Billie Holiday. Tall, beautiful, red lips every day. And her friend, Hattie, she was in the back. She was a stock woman. And she had a little flask that she kept with her in the back. So I would get there early and commiserate with Mary and Hattie. And Mr. Coker would come by and Hattie'd say, "Look at her. She's standing out there all prissy waiting for Mr. Coker to come by." And Mary was exactly doing that. Saying, [changing voice] "Good morning, Mr. Coker." Then Hattie's in the back. She and I working, doing our work. But Mary was always perched. And Mary taught me how to fry chicken New Orleans style. And--'cause I never knew how 'cause my mother didn't fry chicken. So she taught me how to do that. And they were really fun women to be around. So I had from my boss, to these two ladies there, who were really something. They were special people. Story_ID: 9455 Speaker 1: You wanted to be a buyer. And--but you were getting ready to be shipped out to the field or the region. I can't remember. Speaker 2: To the branches. Speaker 1: To the branches. But-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's to be a department manager. Speaker 1: But that wouldn't be the route to buyer as quickly? Or what? Speaker 2: It would have been. But I wanted to control the area I was in. I did go to the branches. But I went after working for this woman for two years. Speaker 1: Okay. And what field had you decided you wanted to be in? That's what I'm looking--You said, "You wanted to control the field that you were buying for." Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 2: And that was Junior Sportswear. Speaker 1: Okay. And you had identified that field just because you liked it? Or you felt that-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That excited me the most. That was the most fashion driven. That's when--You see the little puckered top over there? Speaker 1: They came out that year. When I was in the junior department (break in tape)--didn't have control of where you would end up. You know. They'd basically put you on executive training program, place you in a department. You have exposure when you're in the training program to hard goods and soft goods 'cause then, department stores had quite a bit of home furnishings. For instance, Allen Questrom, who became the head of Federated and now he's at J.C. Penney [department store]. He was the pillow buyer when I was the assistant buyer. And, you know, most people just went where the departments were open when they finished their department manager-ship job. Then they would interview for the jobs that were available at that time. What happened with me is that Ken Coker went to [E.J.] Korvette's [discount department store]. And he became a board member there. And he left A & S [Abraham and Strauss department store]. At that time, it was the beginning of executives being pirated from various stores throughout the country. That was the first time that people didn't work for twenty-five years, or ten years. Get the ten-year pin and all of that kind of, you know, stability within a job, begin to change. That was a major change in retailing. And a lot of A & S executives moved throughout the country. Coker went to Korvette's. Another man, he was out in--Mr. Stayley. He was head of personnel. He ended up out at May Company, in California. So a lot of the executives went somewhere else. I'll never forget that article in 'Women's Wear [Daily]' about pirating execs [executives]. And Ken Coker took me to Korvette's. And I became a junior sportswear buyer. And I was twenty-five. And it wasn't at A & S, but it was at Korvette's. And I became part of his team. And that's when I first learned how important it was to connect. And, you know, to have people mentor you, and to, you know, have a positive relationship with them. And he stuck by me through it all. And then I left and went to Gimbels [department store]. And I became a buyer for Gimbels. Story_ID: 9456 Speaker 1: You worked A & S [Abraham and Strauss, department store], and then you went with Coker to-- Speaker 2: [E.J.] Korvette's [department store]. Speaker 1: To Korvette's. Okay. Speaker 2: Because I had gone through and I was an associate buyer, now at A & S. I'd gone through the department manager. I used to commute to Manhasset Long Island. I was a department manager in that store, and had been promoted back into the Brooklyn store to become a buyer. So I was an associate buyer until a position opened up. And, of course, I was waiting for--Junior's was never gonna open up, because my boss was still there. So she gave me a lot of exposure as an associate buyer. I worked for another woman, Jill DeMitchell. So I was able to go to the market, get to meet manufacturers, be able to buy certain categories. So people began to know me in the market as well. And when Coker went there, I was recommended to take this junior job. If there was anyone to have it, it was me. Story_ID: 9457 Speaker 1: Can you tell me before we go to Brenda Schofield. I just wondering when that changed, 'cause buying was--'cause I was thinking, was it always female? You know, was it a place that women could always be, or when did that happen? Do you know in history--? Speaker 2: I don't know really when it changed. I think the retail world is a very Jewish-driven community and, you know, there were women who knew what they were doing. They were bright. They ran businesses and you know, they were more career driven, I guess, early on. Because there were many female buyers. I mean a hat buyer in A & S [Abraham and Strauss department store] was older when I became an assistant buyer 'cause they used to say, "She forgot." She would get to the door, and she'd have her hats on. 'Cause, you know, all day she's working and throwing hats on her head. And Miss Kline, every night, they would stop her. Security, and tell her, "Miss Kline, you don't realize it, but you have a hat on," 'cause she wasn't stealing. But she's on her way out the door (laughs) with a hat on. So, you know, I guess women had been in the field a long time. It was tough on a lot of levels for women, as well as race. But I think A & S was unique. Story_ID: 9458 Speaker 1: So, definitely [fashion merchandising] it was a man's world. And on the high end, meaning president, vice president, merchandise managers. All of them were men, at that time. Except maybe in personnel, or in the advertising department, they had a female vice president. Speaker 2: And you say, A & S [Abraham and Strauss department store], even with the riots, they weren't really affected? Speaker 1: No. Because they were always community driven by being based in Brooklyn [New York]. They always had it seemed a balance of sales people of color. And I think they gave back to the community. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) 'Cause other stores were affected, but they weren't. Story_ID: 9459 Speaker 1: Now you talked about Brenda Schofield. And we were getting ready to talk about that and you also were talking about BRAG [Black Retail Action Group]. And I was wondering if you could, you know, talk about that. Speaker 2: I don't know how we all came together. But Brenda invited me. And there were blacks who were in the business. Mostly assistant buyers. I think maybe I--Brenda wasn't even a buyer. She didn't become a buyer actually. When I met her, she was an assistant buyer in the robe department, loungewear. And I just think a group of us came together. I think they were insightful about what was going on with the riots, and, you know, job opportunities. I think they had friends and relatives in other fields that made them question what was going on in the fashion business. Or wanna create something like that, an organization 'cause it was called Black Retail Action Group. Brenda was the president for a lot of years. And they reached out to every major store in the country. Certainly Federated [Department Store, Inc.], because we came out of Federated. And this man, John Stayley, who I said had gone, to May Company, he picked Brenda. She didn't want to be a buyer. She didn't like it. And he picked her. Sent her to Dale Carnegie. She got her masters, I think, at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], and became head of the affirmative ction program at A & S [Abraham & Strauss department store]. So that exposure alone helped BRAG formulate its base. Because she was definitely the one who was making, you know, that whole awareness happen for the organization. Speaker 1: So what was the mission? What was the mission of BRAG? What was the-- Speaker 2: BRAG was to educate and to promote and to support minorities in the retail community. They organized a BRAG dinner. Which they awarded executives from major corporations, how they affected or helped minorities in the business. Federated certainly was a major player in that, at the time. And I think in stores like A & S. Rich's, in Atlanta [Georgia], was a Federated store. Bullock's, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], was a Federated store. They pretty much had a few minorities coming into the business. A lot of men, who were educated in business, took that route as well. And--What was his name? John Wiltshire (ph.). I remember him. He became a black male buyer at A & S. He was probably the first one there. He was also a member of BRAG. So BRAG's early membership, you know, were people in various areas of retail. And most of them were probably with Federated Department Stores. Speaker 1: Now-- But BRAG has it--What has it accomplished over its years of existence? You think that-- Speaker 2: Scholarships. They give scholarships. They had a Retail Math Program. Which was their educational piece, being a non-for-profit. So with the Retail Math Program, that was very important. You know, to help educate everyone so that they would feel comfortable in the world of mathematics. And, you know, a lot of people had issues with that while they were in school. They changed the recruitment colleges that were visited, and they began to visit black colleges looking for candidates. So they influenced, I think, human resources a great deal, at that time. Speaker 1: But it was more--It's been active more within the-- Speaker 2: Retail. Speaker 1: The retail. Okay. Oh, right. Speaker 2: Right. Very retail-driven. Story_ID: 9460 Speaker 1: Now, the other question I have is Federated [Department Stores, Inc.]. It is--What was the culture of Federated? And what did it sort of, you know, if you became part of the Federated thing how--Were you trained a special way? Was there a certain mission? Was it, you know, a certain motto? Or-- Speaker 2: Well, not really. You know, corporately, I was exposed to Federated because they had meetings. Their offices were in 1440 Broadway. So they would have meetings, but really, it was directed towards the buying staff. Not assistant buyers unless your boss exposed you to what was going on. And a man became very famous within AMC [Associated Merchandising Corporation], which was an arm of Federated, which was the buying office. And a buying office, separate from buyers who buy individually for stores, had no store buying power. But they sort of gave buyers information about trends, concepts that were happening in the clothing end of the business. I'm sure they did other things, you know, for different divisions. But that was their purpose. And there was a man named Bernie Ozer. We called him the 'Sidney Greenstreet of fashion'. And he really made a name for himself. He was sort of fat, but he was a dramatic character. You know, like he might wear a red gabardine suit, or a white Panama hat. And he probably took the first Japanese [person] to Sylvia's [soul food restaurant] in Harlem 'cause he loved to eat. But that was also around the time of Andy Warhol, and all of that. So Bernie Ozer sort of united fashion with film, theater, music, that whole culture. Because he was that kind of personality. And he liked me. He took a liking to me. And so through my boss, who worked with him in a major way, I got to know him, you know, very early in the game. And he used to use shows. Beth-Ann Hardison use to be in his fashion shows. And at that time, Beth Ann worked for--Ruth Manchester was a dress company. And they were very hot. With like 'Gibson Girl' kind of dresses. But they were in quiana [fabric], like slinky fabrics like we have now. They were very similar to that. And Beth Ann worked for Ruth Manchester. And Ruth Manchester is Melissa Manchester's mother, the singer. So, you know, being in New York, you get exposed to so much and so many different people. And Mr. Ozer exposed us to Andy Warhol. He would make his fashion shows interesting for Federated when they came into New York. And all the stores would come, and they would have meetings. He would use Beth Ann in the fashion shows. So he probably helped jumpstart her modeling career. You know, just from something minute like that. But these things were very exciting. And, you know, at that time, department stores used to have major in-store promotions. You know. They would go to different countries, and really have a major extravaganza in the fall of the year and the spring. They really did a lot of in-store promotions in ways that they don't do today. Well now they have trunk shows with designers. But then, you know, it was different countries. It could be an Italian promotion. And so they would focus on Italian designers, Italian products and goods. Or it could be French. And he was really an idea person. As well as, someone who could spot trends. So Mr. Ozer--I even--I mean I knew him until he died, you know. And he loved to eat. And he was big, like Sidney Greenstreet. And there's a woman who designs for my store, Nyack. Her name is Toma. She was a designer. And she was about nineteen or twenty, maybe twenty-one. And Bloomingdale's had windows of her clothes. All the way around, Lexington Avenue, as well as Third Avenue. And she had a company called 52 Bond Street. Ironically enough, she was one of the first people to live in a loft that I knew in New York. And she lived on Bond Street. Which now is suddenly a new, fashionable street. But she lived in a loft way back then in the early '70s [1970s]. And she picked up and moved to Paris, and didn't come back, right after this success. And so I used to see her when I went to Paris. And Mr. Ozer used to have her things in his fashion shows, when he was in Paris. And we have pictures of Mr. Ozer walking in the south of France, pushing her son's baby carriage. In white linen Bermuda shorts, and brown and white shoes, and a white Panama hat. So he was a character that certainly showed no prejudice or anything like that. I think by being exposed to people like that in the business that helped me to have more confidence in--to be able to pursue what I wanted to pursue. I remember when I was in school, they said, "I had no competition but the dawn." I think that was from one of Bob Dylan's songs. And I never felt that way. You know, my only competition was myself, to do the best I could do. And I never really thought about whether I was--whether I was going to make it or not because I was black. I just went for it. And I think it was because having the relationships I had with the people I worked for-- Story_ID: 9461 Speaker 1: Let's talk about Gimbels [department store]. 'Cause that's your first buying assignment. And what that whole thing, you know. Speaker 2: Actually, [E.J.] Korvette's [department store] was my first. Speaker 1: Korvettes. Well, I mean--You were a buyer for-- Speaker 2: Korvette's. Speaker 1: Korvette's. Oh. You were-- Speaker 2: I left A & S [Abraham and Strauss department store] and went--I didn't mention Korvette's 'cause I-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah, you mentioned it. Speaker 2: Did I? Okay. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah. You said, "You went with--but I thought you were--Did you go as far as assistant buyer? Speaker 2: I was an associate buyer. And they made me a buyer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They offered me a job. And someone said, "How can you leave A & S and go to Korvette's?" 'Cause A & S was a classy store and Korvette's was a discounter. But they were probably one of the most exciting merchants of that time. And I said, "Because they doubled my salary, that's how!" And I'm a buyer." I was never gonna be the junior buyer at A & S. 'Cause my boss--My original boss was still there. So that's what had happened. That's where I became a buyer, with Mr. Coker. I went with his team. And my boss there, my merchandise manager there, his name was David Love. He was only thirty-three. He was maybe even younger than that. Maybe he was thirty. And he had come from A & S, also. So like I said, that was the time that they pirated executives. So Mr. Coker had brought his team, and I was part of that team. And I think I was at Korvette's about three years and I saw the team was unraveling. And decided now was the time. Since I knew all the manufacturers and everyone. I had built a name for myself in the market, to try to get back into a better store, and that's when I went to Gimbels [department store]. Speaker 1: So you're in juniors still. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 9462 Speaker 1: So you go to Gimbels [department store]. Now what is-- Let's just talk about that. Once again in juniors? Speaker 2: No. I got the new area. What we have here today. Contemporary sportswear. 'Cause there--Most of those junior buyers were in place. You know, they were young women and they were good at what they did. And it was a big volume department. Like at [E.J.] Korvette's [department store]. How I became so well known is because I knew all the people to go to that A & S [Abraham and Strauss department store] used. And I would, for instance, I think-- Who was it? Huckapoo and Wayne Rogers were hot at that time with the stretch shirts. And I would go to them. Because I had such a big pencil. Meaning I had major buying power. I was able to pick my prints and do for Korvette's before A & S and some of them got to do it. You know. So-- Speaker 1: So when you say, "I would pick my pencil." You mean you could? And you would--Are you saying that you would-- Speaker 2: I mean I was responsible for $10 million department. And that was a big pencil. You know, using the retail jargon. Meaning I had major open to buy dollars. So manufacturers were very excited to do business with me. And I was very innovative. 'Cause I learned it from this woman, who I work for all those years in juniors. So they began to use me. You know. Like to say, "Should we do this? Should we do that?" So I became like a consultant. Not--I didn't realize I was. But that's basically what I did. I just did it because it was part of the job to me. And doing the best I could do, and I was around someone who had that kind of energy also. Speaker 1: So you're--Are you twenty-seven when--You're twenty-seven, and you have a $10 million budget? That's pretty impressive. Speaker 2: Yeah. It was. And what was interesting is one man almost tried to--I don't know if I was setup or what. But, you know, at that time, you heard about graft. And especially in a place like Korvette's, when you're controlling that much money. But I was nave, and I wasn't about doing anything illegal because I felt my career was more important to me. And one year, I had done almost $2 million with this one vendor. And I looked up at Christmas, and I was going around asking for markdown money so they could help me have a more profitable year. And there were--I think he put five $1,000 bills in an envelope in my bag. I carried a tote bag, you know. And I got home. And I couldn't even believe that someone would do this. And I got home and I said, "Oh my God!" I was a nervous wreck. I said, "I can't keep this money." So I took it back to him and I said, "Thank you very much, but I would like this in markdown money for Korvette's." And I'm glad I did, because I could have been setup. 'Cause I know one woman who was at J.C. Penney [department store], a black woman, you know, she got fired for taking graft. So that did go on a lot in those days, especially in the men. They wheeled and dealed all the time. But I was basically a straight shooter, played it safe. And I couldn't sleep at night getting involved in all of that. Too much drama. That kind of drama I couldn't take. Story_ID: 9463 Speaker 1: So was Gimbels [department store]--was it expansive for you after the [E.J.] Korvette [department store] experience? Or was it restrictive? Did you have the--What you-- Speaker 2: I didn't buy as much dollars. But I was traveling more to Europe. I began to go to the fashion shows like they have at Bryant Park today. They were in Europe then. They didn't do that here. And, you know, so it just gave me a more cushy job, kind of. And the exposure became another kind of exposure. Korvette's was hardcore volume, you know, major business. This was a fashion driven department. Certainly it helped my creative juices. I kept them going. And I think I liked that the best. And my boss at Gimbels had been the buyer next to my boss when I was a junior sportswear buyer at A & S. So he called me, "Ronny." He didn't even call me Veronica. So one day I looked up at him and I said, "Darling, how do I sign my orders?" And he looked at me. And he was like, "What are you talking about?" I said, "How do I sign my orders?" He said, "I don't know, Ronny." I said, "No. I don't. I sign them Veronica Jones." And he said, "Okay. So what do you want?" I said, "I want to be Veronica." He said, "Okay, Ronny." And he still (laughs) calls me Ronny to this day. But Joseph Magnin came into New York scouting for a buyer for their contemporary department. And I was recommended by several of my manufacturers. So I don't know. I interviewed with them. I was going to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] that summer to visit my cousin. And it was around that time that they come in. I guess they'd come in, in June. And I went to L.A. in July and visited my cousin. And while I was there, I interviewed at May Company [retail department stores], and, you know, different stores in L.A. And I got a call that Joseph Magnin wanted to see me in San Francisco [California]. So I flew up to San Francisco to see them. And interviewed with a man named Harvey Lowenthal, who became my mentor and friend. And he said, "So, what do you want to do? Why do you want this job?" I said, "Well I didn't really want it." I said it-- "I heard it was offered. And someone called me. And I interviewed with your person in New York. And now I'm here." And he said, "So what do you want to do with your life?" I said, "Well I want your job." I said, "I want to be the first black female president of a major retail company." He said, "Really?" I said, "Um-hmm." And the next thing I know, I had the job. I came back to New York. I resigned from Gimbels and moved to San Francisco. That was in 1976. Speaker 1: And so that was--That's when you say, you were really traveling. Speaker 2: A lot. Speaker 1: A lot. So let's talk about that. And what that opened up for you. 'Cause you were traveling, it seems like half of the year? Speaker 2: Half the year, yeah. It was tough. It was stressful. And--But I enjoyed it. You know. But I saw that, you know, that didn't play into relationships and all of that. So I pretty much was, you know, just dating. I didn't have a serious relationship, really, at that time. But it's just I saw other worlds. And especially at Joseph Magnin. They had stores in Northern California, Southern California, and between Hawaii and Denver. So I had to visit all of them. And I tried to visit most of them in Southern and Northern California before I made my first buy. So I was really out of town a lot. 'Cause I would go down to L.A., stay with my cousin. And just drive and visit all the stores down there. I think it definitely made me more international in understanding what really the fashion business was all about. 'Cause that department--I really bought even for other departments when I went to Europe. You know, because everybody couldn't go on the buying trip to Europe. Because of budgets and what have you. So I mean it was one of the best jobs one could have working for a company. I also had a boss who was young, female. And she gave me a lot of leeway and respected me. And I respected her. And she was a good numbers person. So together, you know, we built a nice and exciting business there. I went through some racial problems there. Once I went to Italy. And that year--In Italy, actually the color mustard is always the color when you go to Italy. And Italians don't have a problem wearing that color. But Americans do. As this color also, chartreuse. And so I came back from this big buying trip one of the most exciting. And the colors were, you know, black, red, mustard and green. And maybe one tenth of my buy was mustard. But my whole purpose to go to Europe and to buy from Europe is to bring back what's happening in Europe. And I got called on the carpet. Because the woman who was the store manager of the downtown San Francisco store, questioned if I were buying for blacks or not. So I was called on the table for that. And, you know, I just said, "Look, you send me to Europe to bring back the trends. And that was the biggest new color. And I placed it minimally to all the other colors. And we do have a black clientele. As well as Spanish and everyone else here in San Francisco. So I don't see how you could say that. I just was doing my job. You paid for me to go to Europe. I did the job. And I brought back what Europe had to offer which I thought was the best of what it had to offer." Speaker 1: And they didn't think white people used mustard? Or-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. That's a color in--throughout my career that most white people don't think they can wear. And traveling to Europe, I realized people can wear any color they want. It's just a change of makeup, lipstick color, hair color, all of that. That, you know, people--Remember when they came out with those color charts for people to dress by? I despised it. You know, because I felt that was just too limiting for most people. And it didn't last that long. But so many people said, "Oh I can only wear these warm colors. I can only do this." And that's why American women have so many hang-ups about themselves. So many women come in here. They don't even want to try anything on. Or there's something wrong with some part of their body, or their color, or they can't wear this or that. And you hear it all day long in this business. Amazing. Like a size two could say, "Oh this really emphasizes my butt." Yeah, right. Where is your butt (laughs)? So Joseph Magnin did challenge me on that level. Also I needed an assistant with experience. Because I was traveling so much. And initially they gave me a new assistant. So I requested an assistant buyer who knew the systems. Because I didn't have time to teach or to train. And I requested a girl named Ave Montague, who was recommended by the stores. She was black. So my boss, Diana, who was sort of a womens' rights person, she said, "I need your help so that you can get the assistant you want." I said, "Why?" She said, "Because they seem to have issues with two black people in the same office." I said, "You're kidding. They've got Asians (laughs) in the same office." Because, you know, San Francisco's full of Asians. And they're very much in the mainstream there. And Emily Lee, who is still a friend of mine, she was in town about a month ago. She was Chinese, and she had a Chinese girl working for her. Maybe two of them were in her office. So I had to go see the vice president of personnel. And tell him that I would have to bring in the NAACP [National Association for Advancement of Colored People] down here or whatever, if she wasn't made my assistant. Because I thought it was absolutely absurd. You have two white people in the same office. You have Asian people. Why can't she work with me? This is who I need right now." Because she was like a senior assistant. She'd been at Joseph Magnin almost seven years. And so finally, it happened. Story_ID: 9464 Speaker 1: You were starting to tell a story that, you know, you challenged them-- Speaker 2: With Ave (ph.) and it worked. And my boss was right I guess. It was meant for me to fight that battle, not her. And it was okay. 'Cause when I moved to Joseph Magnin actually they thought I was having trouble finding an apartment because I was black. And Cyril Magnin, the owner of Joseph Magnin, he still had an office. He was about eighty years old. He invited me to his office and said, "Do you think you're having trouble?" Because they were paying for me to live in the Cliff Hotel and I couldn't find an apartment. But I was also traveling a lot. Because I wasn't there one week and I was back in New York. And I was looking. I said, "I don't know." I mean it never occurred to me that I was having a problem because I was black. I just thought it was because I wasn't buying something. And I was renting. And San Francisco [California] had a one percent turnover of apartments. Which is not good. And I really--It never occurred to me that might be a problem. So I don't know if it was or wasn't. But he made sure that it wasn't. He brought me to his office and got on the phone and called Grubb & Ellis and all these other realtors. And told them that, "He wanted them to do him a favor and help this young black woman find an apartment. And he hoped that there was no discrimination going on and blah, blah, blah." But I ended up finding my own apartment. Just by walking up and down the streets of San Francisco, I zeroed in on one neighborhood, Pacific Heights. And I found a brand new apartment, in a Victorian, floor through. And it was brand new. Because the landlord was still renovating the upstairs after I moved in, so his family could move in. So I was in the best neighborhood in town and had a beautiful apartment. I couldn't have designed it better. You know, the way he redid the kitchen, the way he did the bathrooms. Everything was beautiful. Beautiful taste. So I had a nice place to live for only--What was it? $450 a month. So after New York, and making the money, I was very lucky. So I really was able to save for the first time. Then Joseph Magnin went through corporate--I don't know, downfall I call it. We had five presidents in four years. So that was really getting to be a problem. And I knew a lot of us were going to be let go. And I thought eventually I'm going to be part of the group. You know, because they brought in people from Dayton Hudson [department store corporation] which was a very different [sic] headset. But they were Federated. But I was scheduled to be fired along with a whole group of people. And this woman in Los Angeles [California] called me, named Gene Ewing. I never bought from her because I bought Jag Denims out of Australia. But she and I used to talk all the time. And she called me and said she wanted me to move to New York and run her company, in New York. Was I ready to go back to New York? So I went to L.A., visited Gene. Looked at their factory, their warehouse. I stayed at her home out in Tarzana [California]. And low and behold a mudslide happened while I was there. So I ended up staying there for about a week helping them with this mudslide. Driving pickup trucks. Calling [California speaker of the House] Willie Brown, telling him, to tell [then Calfornia governor] Jerry Brown to declare this place a state of emergency (laughs). 'Cause it's a mess down here!" The whole side of a mountain came into their house. We got out just in time. The mud was like--that high because they had a sunken living room. So it filled up the living room. And when we were leaving the house, it was torrential rains. Her phone rang and it was the decorator and she said, "Tell him don't go near the orchid house." She had a hot house for orchids. "It's gonna go." She said, "It's gonna go in this storm." And it did go. And her husband was slightly out there trying to move things around. So it hit him. We had the housekeepers--I pulled the door to the pantry and I could see the mud had already broken through the door--through the wall. And we got out. We went to a motel down the street. And her husband's saying, "Can't we go to the Beverly Hills Hotel?" She said, "Burt, you're just so spoiled of course not. We're going to stay near this house. We gotta stay here and it's fine. We're fine. If you want to go there, you can go." So I ended up helping them out of the mudslide dilemma. But that was something. I couldn't believe it. Speaker 1: So you come back. You do manager's-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. After the mudslide I left California in three weeks. And came back to New York. And that's when I went into wholesale. Story_ID: 9465 Speaker 1: You're happy to be in New York? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was trying to figure out how I was gonna get back. Where someone would pay for me to come back. And they did. Speaker 1: And what--Did they represent? What did this represent? 'Cause you had been--This is your first (unclear) into wholesale but you had also been, you know, on this whole career-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) On retail. Speaker 1: Retail. So--. Speaker 2: Well after going through five presidents in four years, I felt--You're going to laugh at what I used to say. "There's gonna be a demise of the department store in the '80s [1980s]." And it was. It definitely happened. And that's what I saw --you know, all that was going on. And a lot of us talked about it in the industry. How it was changing and that most department stores were dinosaurs. And the way they did business was not the way to do business today. You know, like the Limited was rising in all those stores. And they didn't have as many buyers working for them. They had centralized buying, which department stores at that time did not have. You know. So--Although Joseph Magnin had centralized buying. And it did happen. Every store I worked for, you know, is no longer. Speaker 1: Well Federated is still around. Isn't it? Speaker 2: Yeah. But Federated is the parent--the corporate company. A&S was a profitable store. But they closed it because of the name value. As far as marketing goes Macy's was much more marketable than Abraham and Strauss. That was basically northeast. But Macy's is world renown just from the parade, Thanksgiving Day Parade. So they made that choice. And it's funny. Because those people who made that choice were people who came from Abraham and Strauss. But that was the end of A&S. Story_ID: 9466 Speaker 1: When do you come back to New York? 19--? Speaker 2: 1980. Speaker 1: '80 [1980]. Speaker 2: Yeah. '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you--So you're president of her company? Speaker 2: Vice-- Speaker 1: [break in tape] denim. I don't have any in here. You know, Soft denim. Casual relaxed denim. She didn't make jeans. She [Gene Ewing] made denim sportswear. And I always had a thing about denim. And I still want to do a denim line. And so she and I were on the same wavelength at that time. And we built a nice business. She had never been to Europe. So I convinced her to go to Europe. To shop stores, to look for ideas, trends and things like that. And we began to do that together. So--But she was a real character. And we had the designer Jean Louis. He used to design for film. We stayed at his apartment in Paris [France]. And we traveled and we went to the shows. And some shows we weren't supposed to be in. But we managed to get into them. She did something unusual. To get into the shows, you had to be the press or a buyer. And she created a magazine called, Revolution. And it wasn't real. But she went through producing this magazine. Sending it. She was Countess somebody. She had me as someone else. All these different names. I always say I'm going to write a book about this. Because most manufacturers couldn't get to the shows unless a designer they knew invited them. And there we were in every show. Because we were the press for Revolution. I still have a copy of it. And we got into all the shows 'cause we got tickets. She wrote to Chambray De Syndical. All that was going on. Then one day she befriended a fellow who worked for [Marithe and Francois] Girbaud. You heard of Girbaud? This is before they came to the States. And they had a company called, Layai' 1-2-3-4--or 1-3-2-4-2, something like that. And they made the lot of the casual pants and things that they do today. And he came to New York. And he wanted a job. And I think she may have promised him a job that she didn't have. So the next thing, French television comes into our showroom. And they wanted to interview me and her. But she was in Los Angeles [California]. So I called her and I said, "What do you think about this?" You know. And I told her their credentials and all of that. And so I had the interview. And they had gone to several other companies. I get to Paris that October--This was in the summer. I get to Paris in October. And I walk into Galleries Lafayette, and someone is pointing at me. And they say, "You Bis, Bis, Bis, you copy (unclear) Bis!" And I'm like--"What did they say?" 'Cause her company was named also Gene Ewing Bis. Like Dorithe Bis was a big French company that was very popular, that Bloomingdale's and everyone bought. So I had a scandalous experience with this scandalous woman. And there I was in Gallerie Lafayette. And they think Bis is my company. And that I had copied, you know, all the designers. Because they knew me from being a buyer. So they didn't know her. So then we're going to the shows as usual. And we kept going. And all the shows were fine. And then we walk into a company, who was my favorite designer. Which I said in this interview that this person I thought didn't get their accolades. Because, you know. The French haven't really applauded her. But I thought that she was the best French designer. And her name was France Aunjuvie So we walk into Franz Aunjuvive's show and there it is again. "Bis, Bis, Bis, you copy Franz " I said, "Oh! My God!" I said, "I gotta get out of Paris. I cannot can't stay here!" Because she was with me and her assistant designer. They walked into the show. I'm the one that's being--So someone I ran into from Revion Furs, I said, "Am I on television in Paris, right now?" He said, "Yes." And he said,"You look good and you sound good." I said, "Yeah. But what are they saying? What is that show about?" And he said, "Well what you have to say is very good. But what they have to say is, that they're doing a show about people around the world, who copy the French." So I became a victim. And I got out of Paris and met them in London [England]. 'Cause I couldn't do anything. I was all over the airwaves and didn't know it. I never saw it. But several people told me. So the Americans were telling me how great I sounded and looked 'cause I'm speaking English. And--but the background is the French. They had people who copy handbags, Louis Vuitton and from Brazil. And, you know, they had gone around the world looking for people. Speaker 2: (laughs) but had she copied? Speaker 1: Not really. Speaker 2: (laughs) Okay. But-- Speaker 1: But--but, you know, influences. You know. Like right now their saying--It's a trend. Like they're saying, "Houndstooth, black and white checks are coming up again." Just like it was at that time. Because this was the '80's [1980s]. And the '80's [1980s] are back in fashion. So Franz Aunjevie had a black and white houndstooth jacket. So we got the same type of houndstooth jacket. But this--they hadn't even seen it. Because when they came to the showroom that wasn't there. That happened in the fall. And it really wasn't her same style. But it was similar. And they said, "We copied Franz Aunjevie." But I think it came from me saying that she was my favorite designer. And they thought I owned Bis. Story_ID: 9467 Speaker 1: That's funny. So then you stayed with her how long? Speaker 2: When did I leave [Gene Ewing] Bis? In '80 [1980]--I started my own company with someone in '85 [1985]. I left and went to a company called Jennifer Reed. They do sweaters. And I was backed by them. I had a company with two other girls. An Italian--really she's Greek but she lived in Florence [Italy] and another woman, Eileen Raffo, who was my landlord in New York. That's how I got an apartment when I came back. And she lived in Chelsea. Which is now the hot spot in New York. And we lived on 22nd Street. And we got Jennifer Reed to back us. And we opened a company called, Maria Koosy-Koo for Raffo Jones. And Maria was Koosy-Koo. But it was so funny (laughs) because every American wanted to say, "Coochy Coo." They didn't say, Koosy-Koo, which was K--Called Maria Koosy-Koo for Raffo Jones. We were backed by Jennifer Reed. And it was great. It was fun. It was casual, relaxed sportswear. Sort of like, I don't know if you heard of CP Shades? They're out of California. And they do easy skirts, easy pants. But we were doing it in rayon and linen and different fabrics. Mixing fabrics, texture. We even had organza. But it was very soft. And we opened being in the Neiman Marcus catalogue. So we were on a roll. Having a good time. And then the dollar dropped 'cause we even had an office setup in Florence. So in the last year--I think we lasted about two years. I was going to Florence like every other month. And we had to pull out of Italy because the dollar devalued. And it was terrible. And the company didn't get behind us anymore. 'Cause they had several companies that they were backing that were new startup company. So we folded. And I went to work for Kenar [Sportswear]. And I think he was trying to go corporate is why he hired me. He didn't really have a job for me. So I created the job. He's sort of was saying, "You can run the sales meetings. Why don't you do that?" I said, "Cause she's your sales manager. I can't do that." You know, how people can pit one against the other and play that game? It happens a lot in the garment center. So I didn't want to become part of that. So he opened another division and I became the vice president of that division, which was a sweater division. And then I got involved with my husband [Durward Collins] and got married. Then he got sick and died of brain cancer. And then I opened Grandview. Speaker 1: So that was when he died of brain cancer that was soul searching period, I bet? Speaker 2: Very much so. Yeah. Because my mother also got sick. I was between my mother [Juanita Ford Jones Blanchford] and my husband. She got sick about a year after him. And I didn't know what was going to happen. And he ended up dying before my mother. But I use to drag him down to [New] Jersey to visit her. And then I couldn't take him anymore. 'Cause he had brain surgery. But we made a trip to Italy and visited Maria Koosy-Koo. And we went everywhere. We went to places I had never visited in Italy. And while we were there I could tell the tumor was back because he was losing his left motor responses. So I said, "Don't worry about it. Just leave me alone. And that guy over there, he will come over here and help me put that luggage on up this train. Don't worry about it." And that's how we finished our trip. And then we came back. And, you know, they wanted him to have another brain surgery. And he said, "No." And so I guess that January he decided he didn't want to go back to the hospital. "No surgery." And I decided to stay home and take care of him. So I left Ke3nar and became a caregiver. And did it until he passed. He died in April. Then I didn't know what to do. I couldn't get it together for about three months. I had all this house. Plus my mother was sick. So that sort of kept me going back and forth with her. And I decided to open Grandview. And then a month after I opened Grandview, I was offered a big job as Vice President of a company called Trick Track. And I went there. Because Grandview couldn't afford that big house I had up on the hill and all that other stuff. So I did that. And I got my goddaughter to come and help me with the store up in Nyack [New York]. Speaker 1: So you had both going then? Speaker 2: I was working in wholesale and I had opened the store. Speaker 1: Okay. And how long? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I did the buying for the store. And Carla sort of was there everyday. 'Cause it was almost like this is now. You know, Not that much business. 'Cause Nyack was being revitalized at that time also. Speaker 1: So how long did you work for-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Trick Track? Speaker 1: --Trick Track. Speaker 2: Maybe two years. And then I started reping. That's when I opened my repping business. So I kept going. Story_ID: 9468 Speaker 1: Wait. So you were--You weren't doing all three at the same time? You did repping after you finished with Trick Track. Right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I left Trick Track to start a repping company with another girl who I knew from L.A. [Los Angeles, California] Her name was Toni Jones. So we were Jones & Jones, on Broadway. We had a sign that said, "Never promise what you can't deliver." Remember that was a movie with Susan Hayward. And that's what our first postcard read that we were Jones & Jones, on Broadway. Speaker 1: So this is what? 1987? Or 1980--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. It was--No. It was a little later than that. Because my husband [Durward Collins] died in '87 [1987]. I opened the store in '87 [1987]. It was about '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Okay. And now, who are you repping at this point? Are you still in the, you know, casual sportswear? Speaker 2: I stayed in the contemporary casual area. I did a lot of sweaters. I had a company called, Von Saken, who I launched, who I now do business with today. And he loved me because I got him into Glamour magazine. He thought that was greatest thing. Like--Every time I see him, he tells me--he tells the story. I said, "Joel give up on that story now. We got to have some new stories (laughs)." But I rep a lot of young contemporary designers. And it was a lot of fun and it lasted a while. Then Toni moved back to Los Angeles [California]. And then I was on my own. So I created the Veronica Jones' Showroom. And during that time I'd tried to bring back Stephen Burrows when he and Vy Higginsen had a business for a period. And it lasted. I got them into Saks [Fifth Avenue, upscale department store] and couple of stores, Saks, Neiman's [Marcus] and [Henri] Bendel's, which is where he originally was. But when you have no money and you have a production problem, which we had and it was to Saks, so we didn't ship them complete. And that took us--took him right out of business. Story_ID: 9469 Speaker 1: Now where are you at this stage in your career? What do you feel? I mean you have these--You just opened this store in Harlem [New YOrk, New York]. And you've moved back to Harlem. And so I'm just wondering if you could sort of state where you are. Speaker 2: I thought I had retired two years ago when I closed my showroom. People would say, "What are you doing?" And I'd say, "I don't know. I'm semi-retired." They'd say, "Veronica you're never going to retire." I said, "Well you never know." So I beat--I was president of Fashion Outreach at that time. So I put a lot of energy into Fashion Outreach. And we did African Mosaic and then we did Absolut Africa. And, you know, I'd--It was tough being head of an organization that I took very seriously. And I think a lot of the members shipped--Wasn't like BRAG [Black Retail Action Group] in that they were really about themselves. There were more designers in this organization. More people who need a lot of attention so--And I was president for four years, when really it was suppose to be two years. But no one wanted the job. So I stayed on another two years. But when we had our board meeting I said, "I'm not gonna run again. I'll step down 'cause I don't want to do this anymore." And then I just sort of stayed between here and Nyack [New York]. I lived here and I commuted to Nyack. I worked in Nyack more days then, you know, got involved in--we opened the store up. The store is now lofty like this. It has fitting rooms like this. I sort of updated it and made it happen. My business got better. And then Althea's here next door to me. And there was a lingerie shop here for plus-size women. And this place looked totally different. Actually her sales desk was right here. And the fitting rooms were out to where the floor changes over there. And they were very boxy big fitting rooms. And they said, "They needed it because they were a plus size lingerie store." And I decided to take the store over. When they--They were out of business, I guess about six months, and it became available. And I took the space. But I guess being involved in Fashion Outreach, being exposed to Harlem again--I used to meet with the uptown chamber as a roundtable discussion. So I got to know what was going on here. And I felt that this could work. And it would inspire maybe more people to open businesses here of this type. Because most of the businesses in Harlem are Afrocentric. Be it clothing--And certainly most of the people, who have these stores don't have the kind of background I have. And really my one dream is to probably have a chain of about ten stores across the country. I don't know if I'll get to make that happen. But there are no black owned retail chains. I hear that Ashley Stewart is. But I'm not really sure, which is a plus-size business. But certainly not of this ilk. And I mean I feel like if Eileen Fisher can do it, maybe I can too. Although she was in manufacturing. But my concept is a little more diverse than what she does. And she's done it being one-dimensional. She hardly even has any accessories in that store. And I do know a few people, who I think could help make something like that happen today. Story_ID: 9470 Speaker 1: Now what did you learn from the wholesale experience? And how did that balance off your, you know. Being in wholesale versus retail? How did that-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I enjoyed it. But I felt I wanted to be more creative. I didn't want to be a designer. But I could be a merchandiser. I knew I could create a line and make it happen. And, you know, I have samples at home. I'm just trying to figure out when I'm going to take the time to make it happen. We have some linens here under our own label. But we work with a manufacturer from L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And so Grandview--This dress I have on is a Grandview linen dress. So the key now is to do what I want to do and that's create a denim business. I've trademarked the name, Indigo Jones. And hopefully I can make that happen soon. Story_ID: 9471 Speaker 1: I think it's always changing. You know, The vicissitudes of fashion have prevailed from day one. You know, from being brand names like Evan Picone and people like that to being designer driven. And now you have designers connecting to the music industry. That's changed dramatically. You know, if you have the money, you can have a company. But I wish that people like [Sean] 'Puffy' [Combs] and Russell Simmons would get behind some of the black designers, who are real designers. Who really need support, and need financing. Because most of what they do is licensee, just like Michael Jordan is licensee, which is not the same. And I don't think it brings the same to the industry for people, who have that specific talent. Who study and who learn. You know, It's easy to pull in a team of designers. Most companies today have a team of designers. Donna Karan--For eleven years her top two designers were black. Zera Myra Grossette (ph.) and Edward Wilkerson, who's now designing for a company called Lafayette 148. And I think he has a very good deal. His name isn't on the label yet. But he has everything at his disposal. He has the manufacturing, the production. The production person came from Donna Karan to Lafayette 148 and brought him on board as a designer. And I don't know if you knew, but [Earvin] Magic Johnson had done a presentation of black designers as a benefit on 7th Avenue two years ago. And he did it again last year. But now that's on hold. I don't think they're doing it. It's a very expensive venture. But it gave black designers a place to be seen. But unfortunately, it was only seen in the black philanthropic community. It really wasn't visited by the industry per se. And the way black designers get business is through being able to show their things at the shows. The way other designers do. When the buyers are in town. When the press is in town. And when it can affect their business. And I don't think that, that has happened even with what Magic did. And I'd always said to them-- There's a young woman who claims I'm her mentor, named Eula Smith. She's from Nordstrom's [department store]. When I was in Black Enterprise [periodical] years ago, she came into the showroom. And she says, "You're my mentor. I remember reading about you in Black Enterprise." I said, "You're the first black 'Valley girl' I ever met (laughs)." 'Cause she was very much all of that California stuff going on. [In a high-toned bubbly voice]. "Hi Veronica." And I had her meet me at Jezebel's for dinner. And she got lost getting down there. You know, It was really--She's a great girl. And today, she's pulled out on her own and started a consulting business. She just left Nordstrom's. And she's working with designers. And she is working with the Magic Johnson Foundation, doing their show out in L.A [Los Angeles, California.] But their show is really to raise money for AIDS and breast cancer. Story_ID: 9472 Speaker 1: Do you think that day will come in your lifetime, that you'll see blacks break through in the fashion industry, in the way that you say is necessary? Speaker 2: (pause) I don't see it happening. And I'm really an optimistic person basically. But it takes so much. And unless we create strategic alliances with white companies or Asian companies, where we get a bigger percentage of the pie, we will never be able to emerge as leaders in that world. I think designers hopefully can get more clout. But I don't see it happening. You know, people don't put their stock into black designers. Young people, who I grew up with, for instance the people who worked with me at Bis, they now have a company. They do a lot of business. And I walk into their showroom and they don't have anyone black working in their showroom. And for me to work for the company Gene Ewing Bis, that was a big thing. I remember walking into the showroom and someone said, "How is she gonna go to Dallas?" Well I went to Dallas with no problem. They loved me in Dallas. And, you know, I think if you work for a good company and the product sells, people really don't care. And I thought it was very interesting that these liberal Jewish girls in New York thought that was gonna be an issue for me. And if it wasn't for them, why would it be for me? In Texas of all places. But it is sort of a ma-pop industry. Even though it's corporate and it's big dollars. I think people support each other in what they do. Their families. Like Nadine, who used to work for me. She and her brother own the company today. Before it was her uncle and her father that owned the company. So they kind of grow up in the business and it's passed on in that way. With the empowerment zone, I have an idea about trying to create a cottage industry here. I haven't really formulated it. But I've been talking to different people in the business. Because just like there's Chinatown with manufacturing and production, with all the space up here, why can't it be here? Plus it's easier to get to for people to make deliveries, etc. Because the gateway to New York is all up here with the 'GW' [George Washington] Bridge [New YOrk, New York]. and, you know. All these areas that people can come into Harlem. And just like I think we need more retail establishments. And we need stores that are downtown. Not only the big giant's across the country, but entrepreneurs who are about creating businesses. Like in Little Italy and all these areas now like Soho [New York City neighborhood] that developed. Why can't Harlem develop that way? And I think there's a lot of talent. There's a lot of people who work downtown in our industry. And maybe there's a way that we can create. I think with the Asian community, that we should create some kind of strategic alliance. To have goods and services and manufacturing going on here. But that's my dream not realized. But I've been putting it out there to people. I've met with some Asian organizations and different people. So they are open. I did it under the auspices of fashion outreach. 'Cause I was thinking this was a way for them to make something happen and to make a name for themselves. But since I'm no longer at the helm, they're not going in that direction. There's in the school here on the corner, Harlem Textile Works. And the woman who started this, had these people make t-shirts and do labeling and printing for companies like Liz Claiborne and, you know. Big companies. But they were able to get them some business. But the woman whose dream this was, passed away about two years ago. So they're just re-emerging. They also had a terrible fire. Where all their equipment and everything was destroyed. So they're regrouping. But they're in the Thurgood Marshall School, here on the corner. And I think they're worth getting behind. Like someone was saying, "You know? Who's going to make all the products? Like say, for restaurants in Harlem?" You know, to do t-shirts and caps and different types of memorabilia. I said, "Go to the Harlem Textile Works. Give them that opportunity to do something like that." But then again, we're gonna have to call on our own. Who are able to make those deals and make that thing happen. I don't think I can do it. But, you know, I think maybe I can pull the people together to do it. Story_ID: 9473 Speaker 1: Now who have been some of your favorite designers along the way? I mean that, you know, that you thought were really (unclear). Even if--Like Stephen Burrows. You might say that he--I mean he definitely had-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He was the greatest that America had to produce. He won three Coty Awards. One he shared with Calvin Klein. And Calvin wrote in his book how upset he was about that. But Steven is far more talented than Calvin Klein. And--But he just never had the right business partner. The same with Ralph Lauren. Ralph Lauren really does Americana. They have amazing design team. My new niece from my sister is a designer for Ralph Lauren right now. And so all these companies are so much bigger than they were. When it was just the single designer and they were really doing the work. And everything is a deal. Even to do business with a department store today is a deal. That's why most of the companies I have in here, they're not represented in department stores. Because these people have chosen not to become part of the--[thinking] What do we call that? I call it, highway robbery. For instance, part of the reason I closed my showroom. If Bloomingdale's gave me an order years ago, I could be guaranteed that Bloomingdale's would give me an order 10--25 thousand dollar opening order, without any strings attached. Today if Bloomingdale's comes in and writes with you, they want 8-10 EOM [end of month] plus another 20% off the top--20 to 30% off the top. So most manufacturers don't build that kind of discount into their pricing structure. And consequently a lot of people have gone out of business due to department stores playing this game. You're also hit with unauthorized charge backs and things like that. And it's just not a place, unless you're a major player, to play. Speaker 1: So are there any other models--I mean not models (laughs). Speaker 2: Designers that I like besides Stephen Burrows. I love Byron Lars. I liked Gianni Versace. I actually bought his first collection before he became famous. I like Karl Lagerfeld. I think he's brilliant and very creative. I think Donna Karan is good because I think she's an excellent merchant in what she does. And she surrounds herself with the right people to make it happen. And she's been a great deal maker. She or her husband or somebody is, as far as moving outside of the umbrella. And Anne Klein and emerging. I mean she's someone really to take notice with how she positioned herself in her business. And I think she's been the smartest of most designers in how she's emerged. I think designer collections as we know them are too expensive for the masses. And that's why you have a DKNY [Donna Karan clothing line] and a CK [Calvin Klein clothing line] and all of these people. And what I always said was, "They're marking off--They're knocking off my market," the contemporary market. Because they really are catering to the masses. I try to keep my price points down. But personality, product, price and profit is my motto. And I feel that you can give people style and a sense of the trends and what have you without spending over a $1,000, for an outfit 'cause now most designer collections are a fortune. You know, $2,000 jacket, a pair of pants to me is not for the masses. And that's why they've gone to Hollywood which Hollywood was always a part of fashion. But today it sort of drives the high end of fashion. The designer business. And it influences certainly the hip-hop generation. Story_ID: 9474 Speaker 1: Now what about the dressing down that's occurring also in society? I mean, you know, that--The casualization that is, you know-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well see, I've been in to it for over twenty years. And have always believed that lifestyle dressing is the way to go. I think these dress down Fridays and all of that they're having in corporate America are not women buying clothes like this. They dress down in a way that to me is not even casual dressing. It's just, you know. The weekend. I don't know what to call it. It's no way to dress to me. I was home--my sister is in the mortgage brokerage business. And I said, "What do you have on?" You know. She had on a sweat suit and a pair of sneakers. She said, "Oh it's dress down Friday." I said, "But why aren't you wearing flats?" Which is the linen we carry. You know, "Or Grandview or something?" She said, "Oh, no. They don't dress down like that. That's dressing up!" You know. So I think there's some confusion in the corporate world about what dressing down is versus wearing a suit. In my business, for the last--I would say eight years, I haven't been able to sell a suit. Especially not being in the city. I think in the city where that lifestyle prevails or for women in the corporate world, I've seen them around here. Then maybe I will sell a couple of suits. But I won't price it as a suit, I'll have jackets and skirts. And also it's a big trend this season 'cause the '80s [1980s] are back. And that's when women was like "It takes a suit to get a suit." You know, (laughs) back in the '80s [1980s]. That's how some of my friends felt. And, you know, it's the classic way, you know, to dress. And it's a power way to dress. But this to me is what dress down should be. And I just think that there's some confusion about what that really means in the corporate world. Story_ID: 9475 Speaker 1: Do you have any favorite models that you've had over the years that, you know. I'm talking about African American models that you thought were, you know. Speaker 2: I have archives galore. From the very first issue of Essence to every time there was a black on the cover of some magazine. Other than a black magazine as well as (laughs) all that. Actually I'm trying to get rid of them. That's what I have Hector [Jones' employee] doing for me today. But Peggy Dillard, she to me was a black model, who crossed-over. Iman is an acquaintance of mine. And I've known Iman since she first came to New York [New York] and did the Polish Ambers promotion at Revlon. I think Iman has longevity because she's an object of art. What she is, is just an unusual beauty that now has, like I say she's always camera ready. Speaker 1: I mean she's made a major investment in that. And I think she was smart in going into the cosmetic business. I thought it was interesting the way she went into it. She didn't go as the elite model. She went more mainstream with J.C. Penney. And now she's in like Cosmetic Plus stores. So she really went to the masses with her cosmetic line. And I like her a lot. And certainly she's one of the most and best photographed faces in the world. I did like Naomi Simms. I feel that she broke the barrier. A friend of mine, Jane Hoffman Davenport she was probably one of the most beautiful. She was the first on the cover of Cosmopolitan. And I tell her she should be modeling today. Because for a mature model, she looks pretty incredible. But she just doesn't like the business at all. So, you know, certainly they were my most favorite. I like Tyra [Banks]. How she's carried herself and built her career. I got to meet Tyra 'cause we honored her with Absolute Africa. And I think she's just a dynamic personality. A fun loving young woman. And I think her head is in the right place. You know, about her career path. But models of the past, Stephen Burrows broke the barrier for black models. When he went to Versailles in Paris [France]. And they were surprised that he was gonna be showing at Versailles, along with Calvin [Klein] and Ralph [Lauren] and all of these people. But he was one of the most innovative people, as far as creating techniques in designing. Like the lettuce edge and the zigzag stitch. And he used to stitch everything in red, no matter what color it was. And it was a zigzag stitch. Which he says, he learned on his grandmother's Singer sewing machine. You know, when they came out with all the different components to make different stitches. I remember even making a skirt when I was young (laughs) with a Singer sewing machine. So he's in textbooks--and I think the models that he used changed the face of the modeling industry. As far as black women were concerned. And that was Pat Cleveland, Alva Chin And they were also models for Halston at the same time that they were modeling for Stephen Burrows. And I think models then were personalities. Grace Jones came on board at that time. All these people were modeling when I was in Europe, attending all the fashion shows. And Grace Jones was amazing. It seemed like she didn't have--Her head wasn't attached to her neck. The way she could twirl. And today, you notice all the models are like this. They're like military soldiers. And I think they need to cut back on the girls from Kosovo [Serbia] and come back with some girls who are just more diverse and who reflect this society. You know. We have a very diverse world. And we represent the world in America today. But our advertising does not. And I think there's something wrong with that. And I think America has a lot to change on that level. You know. I noticed H&M [European-based department store] --Most of the European companies have been front runners in using blacks in ad campaigns. Here we have a problem. Tommy Hilfiger does and Donna [Karan] doesn't. She did it once with Iman. But that's Iman. You know. And she was promoting the color brown and you know, her jewelry. So she did a beautiful piece on Iman. But that was a one time thing. Like she did Demi Moore and Bruce Willis for her men's collection. So now even the models have become celebrities, in the fashion business. So it's hard to say what's gonna happen. But I do think when they have these summit meetings, they need to talk about the diversity in advertising. And what they're going to do about it. And if they will affect change. And I think once that happens, that may open the doors for more black designers and other nationalities, Hispanic designers. Some of them make it because, you know, Fame. There's the whole Castillian [Spanish] community. Which is really white like Carolina Herrera and Oscar De la Renta. They don't come across as being part of the diversity 'cause they're part of the society. Because of who they were in their countries. But again, our dilemma is that we don't own anything. So it's very difficult for us to grow in all these industries no matter what they are. Story_ID: 9476 Speaker 1: Do you have an opinion about where Fashion Fair or [John] Johnson [of Ebony magazine], you know, have--What role they've played in it? Or do you see them sort of separate or apart? Or-- Speaker 2: I think what they do is separate and apart. But I think that a lot of us are in this business probably because of them. I certainly grew up going to the Ebony Fashion Fair, and being made aware of fashion. Audrey Small certainly has emerged from the Ebony Fashion Fair, as probably being one of the most recognizable Black fashion people in the white fashion world, worldwide. Because she is such a strong personality. And being 6'1", doesn't hurt her one bit. Plus she was a model in the beginning. She understands retailing. She came out of Bloomingdale's and Lane Bryant, besides the Ebony Fashion Fair. And I do think it influenced a lot of people growing up, who are in this business today. Actually there was a article on it that was really great. If I still have it, I'll send it to you. I gotta find it. It was written by Lisa Jones. Amiri Baraka's daughter, who's biracial. And she also wrote a book about black hair too. But she was working for the Village Voice about two years ago. And she interviewed myself and Audrey in relationship to the Ebony Fashion Fair. And the influence and effect that it had on black America. What I also discovered was that--What's the name of Dorothy Height's organization? Speaker 1: It's called The National Council of--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Of Negro Women. They have a fashion--The National Organization of Negro Women, Dorothy Height. They have an arm to their organization that has been around for many years that I didn't discover until a year ago. That is a fashion-oriented arm. Because as we know, we've sewn for the world. We've designed clothing. And Ann Lowe was certainly a part of this organization years ago. And Eleanor Lambert, who is in her nineties today, and still out there working as a PR person in fashion. She was involved with this organization and helped them get off--get their start years ago. And I think they're still around. But they're women from every segment of America. Every state. They're not--they don't seem to be tied into the industry per se. I'm not even sure where they're based. But they do exist. Speaker 1: Okay. What--okay--(unclear)--Are there any other changes you would hope for? Or, you know, or? Things you would hope for in terms of this industry? And African Americans in the industry? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'd like us to get a big piece of the share that we give. When you talk about $20 billion that we spend on apparel. I'm sure we keep hats alive at Saks [Fifth Avenue, upscale department store] no matter what the price point is. So basically I think it's wide opened. But it has to be people willing to make that change. And I think organizations like BRAG [Black Retail Action Group], Fashion Outreach, we need to partner and make some things happen on another level. Story_ID: 9477 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I never thought of that (laughs). Legacy. Well I think that basically I have been a major contributor and mentored quite a few people. And I think that is my legacy of inspiring and motivating young people to embark on this world of fashion and retailing, and designing, and modeling. And really feel that I can inspire them really to try it a different way than how we started out 'cause the world has changed dramatically. A young woman called me the other day. And she just lost her job at a PR--a fashion PR [public relations] firm. And she said, "They gotta cut back." 'Cause this industry, there's no security in jobs. So I believe that you must become your own boss. And become much more entrepreneurial in the future. But I suggested to her, "Why don't you look into television?" You know, Elsa Klensch opened that door. Elsa Klensch is gone. "Approach BET [Black Entertainment Television network]. They have nothing going on as far as fashion is concerned." And fashion today is a part of the television community. And that may be a way. I said, "You're attractive. You're dynamic. You kind of resemble the girl on Entertainment Tonight." I said, "really take time to think about that." And I think that's important for me to always have my door opened. And to be able to inspire and mentor young people. Story_ID: 9478 Speaker 1: This probably was in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] in New York City [New York]. And I had the opportunity to do an album cover for this gentleman Lou Perez. Speaker 2: Okay. Tell us left to right who the individuals are and (unclear). Speaker 1: I'm on the left. Lou Perez is in the center. And I don't know the other individual. She was also picked to be photographed for this cover. She's not someone I knew. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones (left), Lou Perez and an unidentified woman on Lou Perez's album, 'Of Latin Extraction', 1969. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9479 Speaker 1: This photo was featured in 'Essence' magazine in 1971. I was an Associate Buyer at Abraham and Strauss in Brooklyn [New York at the beginning of my career in retail and fashion industries.] Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones models clothing in an article in 'Essence' magazine, 1971. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9480 Speaker 1: These photographs were taken by Bert Middleton when I was an Assistant Buyer [at Abraham and Strauss department store]. I guess I was about twenty-five years old. And I was pursuing a career in TV commercial industry. Speaker 2: And can you spell Mr. Middleton's name? And tell us if you recall about what year these would have been taken. Speaker 1: B-E-R-T M-I-D-D-L-E-T-O-N. He was a celebrated black photographer in New York who photographed a lot of organizational events as well as entertainers and actors. He had a wealth of black history--New York black history. Speaker 2: Great. Thank you. Do you remember around the time? Speaker 1: The time was probably 1970-'69 [1969], '70 [1970]. Speaker 2: [Fashion portrait of Veronica Jones, ca. 1969-1970. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9481 Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite pictures. It includes my mother [Juanita Ford Jones Blanchard] seated in the center. And Brenda Schofield who is a mentor and friend of mine, who I met at Abraham and Strauss [department store] when I was an Assistant Buyer. I was the Mistress of Ceremonies for BRAG the Black Retail Action Group's awardees dinner. And this was probably in 1984 or '83 [1983]. And I was also--A very dear friend of mine who started out in retailing with me, was receiving an award that night. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones (left) with her mother, Juanita Ford Jones Blanchard (seated) and Brenda Schofield, at a function for the Black Retail Action Group, New York, New York, ca. 1983-1984. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9482 Speaker 1: This is fun and frolic in the park in Paris [France]. My good friend Toma Holley who's also a designer was living in Paris. This was probably around 1977, '78 [1978]. And I was living in San Francisco [California] at the time. And I was on a business trip in Paris. And took a break away from the retail moguls--the presidents and vice presidents and had fun in Paris. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones (right) with fashion designer, Toma Holley, visiting Paris, France, ca. 1977-1978. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9483 Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in 1985, I believe. It was Alvin Ailey's [dance company] twenty-fifth anniversary opening night reception. And I'm with my husband, who was not my husband at that time--Durward Collins, D-U-R-W-A-R-D C-O-L-L-I-N-S. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones with her fianc, Durward Collins at a reception for Alvin Ailey's dance company, New York, New York, 1985. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9484 Speaker 1: I'm being awarded by BRAG, The Black Retail Action Group. J. J. Thomas who was the President of BRAG is on my left. Would that be the man with the glasses? Yes. Speaker 2: Just say to the viewer's left. Speaker 1: To the viewer's left. And [Reginald] Reggie Harris famed newscaster from New Jersey who's unfortunately passed away now is to my right. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones (center) receives an award from J. J. Thomas (left) and Reggie Harris (right) on behalf the Black Retail Action Group, New York, New York, ca. 1990. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9485 Speaker 1: This is from that same dinner. And I'm with Ophelia Gilliam on the viewer's left. And President of BRAG [Black Retail Action Group] J. J. Thomas on the right. What year was this? This was probably 1990. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones (center) with Ophelia Gilliam and J. J. Thomas (right) at the Black Retail Action Group's awards function, New York, New York, ca. 1990. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9486 Speaker 1: This photograph was taken in 1968 I believe. '68 [1968], '69 [1969] at the Laboratory Institute of Merchandising which is the fashion retailing school I attended in New York [New York]. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones models clothing, New York, New York, ca. 1968. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9487 Speaker 1: This is my graduating photograph from Laboratory Institute of Merchandising, which is a fashion retailing school in New York [New York], that's still in existence on 12 E. 53rd Street. And I love the quote they have about me. "I am running in a fair race with no competition--oh-oh, I can't see that--no competition but the dawn," by Bob Dylan [on his album 'The Times They Are A-Changin']. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones's graduation photograph from the Laboratory Institute of Merchandising, New York, New York, 1968. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9488 Speaker 1: Senior prom Camden High School [Camden, New Jersey]. It was at the Latin Casino in Cherry Hill, New Jersey. And my date is Alfred Green, better known as 'Butch' at that time. And he's the nephew to Reverend Wyatt T. Walker [Senior Pastor of the Canaan Baptist Church of Christ in Harlem, New York]. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones with her date, Alfred 'Butch' Green, at their high school prom, Cherry Hill, New Jersey, ca. 1963. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9489 Speaker 1: This photograph was taken the day I was frolicking in the park in Paris, France. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones during her visit to Paris, France, ca. 1977-1978. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9490 Speaker 1: This is Camden, New Jersey. I guess I was about ten years old. Maybe eight years old. My sister I think is four years old. But that's my sister Marilyn Blanchard [Washington]. And--. Speaker 2: Go left to right. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And viewer's left is yours truly, in the center is my baby sister Marilyn Blanchard and to the right of her is Melanie [Hunley] Ways, who is my childhood friend since I was three years old. And we're still friends today. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones (left) with her sister, Marilyn Blanchard-Washington (center), and friend Melanie Hunley-Ways, Camden, New Jersey, ca. 1954-1956. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9491 Speaker 1: This is actually in front of the house I grew up in. It's a street you could leap across. Everyone used to try to broad-jump the street. So we had quite a few athletes there. Melanie Ways is on the left. Oh I'm sorry. Her maiden name is Melanie Hunley. But she is currently Melanie Ways. And that is her brother Arnold Hunley in the center who was the first person I knew to die. He died not long after this picture was taken. And that your truly there on the right. Speaker 2: And could you just spell Hunley for us for us. Speaker 1: H-U-N-L-E-Y. We're about seven years old. Melanie and I. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones (right) with her childhood friends, Melanie Hunley-Ways and Arnold Hunley, Camden, New Jersey, ca. 1953. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9492 Speaker 1: This is me at birth. I was a long time coming. My parents Robert Jones and Juanita [Ford] Jones [Blanchard] were married eight years before I was born. So this was a celebrated birth. Also my mother married late. So she was thirty-five years old when I was born which was in 1946. October 3, 1946. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones as an infant, Pennsauken, New Jersey, ca. 1947. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9493 Speaker 1: In the local newspaper and also the Philadelphia African American newspaper, because everyone was so excited at my arrival. (laughs). I made the press early in life. Speaker 2: [Second view of Veronica Jones as an infant, Pennsauken, New Jersey, ca. 1947. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9494 Speaker 1: Playing in the yard in Pennsauken, New Jersey. I was I guess two to three years old. Maybe just two (laughs). Speaker 2: How do you spell Pennsauken? Speaker 1: P-E-N-N-S-A-U-K-E-N. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: New Jersey. It's outside of Cherry Hill, New Jersey today. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones as a toddler, Pennsauken, New Jersey, ca. 1948-1949. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9495 Speaker 1: To the left is my father Robert Jones who I barely got to know. I was born and he passed away at nine months--when I was nine months old. And that's my mother Juanita [Ford] Jones [Blanchard]. And I'm sitting on her lap. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones as an infant with her parents, Robert Jones and Juanita Ford Jones Blanchard, at their home in Pennsauken, New Jersey, ca. 1947. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9496 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: [Second view of Veronica Jones as an infant with her parents, Robert Jones and Juanita Ford Jones Blanchard, at their home in Pennsauken, New Jersey, ca. 1947. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9497 Speaker 1: To the viewer's left is Jackie Collins my cousin. And we were playing. And I was learning or just put on this tricycle. I think before they put the blocks on it. So--but maybe it was her bike, now that I think about it. And this was out in the yard across the street in Pennsauken, New Jersey. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones on a tricycle with he cousin, Jackie Collins, Pennsauken, New Jersey, ca. 1948-1949. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9498 Speaker 1: In our Easter bonnet. That's Melanie [Hunley-Ways] and yours truly. And we're about six years old. Maybe five years old looks like there actually. And we're all decked out for Easter. That's Camden, New Jersey. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones with her friend, Melanie Hunley-Ways, in their Easter best, Camden, New Jersey, ca. 1951-1952. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9499 Speaker 1: That's me in the photograph in front of our home in Camden, New Jersey. I'm in the fifth grade. Looks like fifth grade bobby socks. (laughs) Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones in front of her home in Camden, New Jersey, ca. 1957-1958. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9500 Speaker 1: That's Easter time again. I guess I'm about eleven or twelve years old. Again in Camden, New Jersey on Baring Street, B-A-R-I-N-G Street. Probably didn't mention that before. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones in her Easter best in front of her home in Camden, New Jersey, ca. 1957-1958. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9501 Speaker 1: I'm in the yard in Pennsauken, New Jersey at two and a half years old. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones as a toddler, Pennsauken, New Jersey, ca. 1948. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9502 Speaker 1: That's me learning to ride my tricycle, out in the park in Pennsauken, New Jersey. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: [Veronica Jones on her tricycle, Pennsauken, New Jersey, ca. 1950. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9503 Speaker 1: I'm about two and a half years old outside our front door in Pennsauken, New Jersey. We lived in a cute little A-frame house, surrounded by wonderful trees, weeping willows. (laughs) Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones at age two in from of her home, Pennsauken, New Jersey, ca. 1948-1949. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9504 Speaker 1: This is my first grade picture. I went to Whittier School W-H-I-T-T-I-E-R, in Camden, New Jersey. And I'm wearing the back-to-school signature plaid dress with ribbons in my hair. They always used to have plaid dresses then. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones's first grade class picture at John G. Whittier Elementary School, Camden, New Jersey, ca. 1953-1954. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9505 Speaker 1: I'm with [cousin] Jackie [Collins] learning to ride my tricycle. I'm on the viewer's left and Jackie's behind me on the bike. And we're playing in Pennsauken, New Jersey. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones (left) gives her cousin, Jackie Collins, a ride on her tricycle, Pennsauken, New Jersey, ca. 1949-1950. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9506 Speaker 1: I'm about two years old. Two and a half in Atlantic City, New Jersey. Camden [New Jersey] is about forty minutes from Atlantic City. So we spent a lot of time there in the summer months. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones in her bathing suit on the beach in Atlantic City, New Jersey, ca. 1948-1949. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9507 Speaker 1: I'm on the viewer's left just coming home from school with Shirley who was my big friend, my older girlfriend on our block on Baring Street [Camden, New Jersey]. And that was a photograph taken after my first day of school [John G. Whittier Elementary School, Camden, New Jersey]. Well that's first grade not kindergarten. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones with her friend Shirley after her first day of school, Camden, New Jersey, ca. 1953-1954. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9508 Speaker 1: That's me snow-bound in our backyard with my sled in Camden, New Jersey. Speaker 2: I think we've got a pretty representative selection of this period of time. Speaker 1: [Veronica Jones with her sled in Camden, New Jersey, ca. 1953-1954. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9509 Speaker 1: This is Easter Sunday morning. I'm on the left. I'm the tallest one. And that's my sister Marilyn [Blanchard-Washington]. I'm about eight years old. She's about three. My mother [Juanita Ford Jones Blanchard] used to love to dress us alike. And at about twelve I said, "Mommy, I don't wanna look like this any more. No more Punch and Judy shows and no more dressing alike." Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones (left) with her sister, Marilyn Blanchard-Washington on Easter Sunday, Camden, New Jersey, ca. 1956. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9510 Speaker 1: This is my wedding photo. I was married in my home in 1987. That was February, 1987 to Durward Collins, Jr. Durward Collins, Jr., who is my husband to the right of me. Unfortunately he was ill with brain cancer. And had a mild recovery. And we decided to get married. To the viewer's left is my father's [Robert Jones] brother and my most favorite uncle, Donald Jones. He gave me away that day. And that's my sister, Marilyn Blanchard [Washington]. It's Reverend Charles from St. Charles [African Methodist Episcopal Zion] Church in Piermont--I'm sorry, in Sparkill, New York. Next to the Reverend is my mother-in-law, Mildred Collins from Houston, Texas and her husband, Durward Collins Sr., also from Houston, Texas. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones with her husband and wedding party, New York, New York, February, 1987; (Seated) Veronica Jones and Durward Collins, Jr.; (Back row, L. to R.): Veronica Jones's uncle, Donald Jones, sister, Marilyn Blanchard-Washington, Rev. Charles, mother-in-law, Mildred Collins and father-in-law, Durward Collins, Sr. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9511 Speaker 1: That's my aunt Stella [Jones] who's from Columbia, South America. She's my Uncle Donald's [Jones] second wife. And my husband [Durward Collins, Jr.] is holding her hand. And his mother Mildred Collins is seated on the sofa to the right. Speaker 2: Okay, next. please. Speaker 1: This was photographed in my home in Grandview [historic district in Harlem], New York. Which is the name of my store Grandview. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones's husband greets a new relative on his wedding day, New York, New York, February, 1987; (L. to R.): Stella Jones, Durward Collins, Jr. and Mildred Collins. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9512 Speaker 1: This photograph is my mother and I when I returned to this area from San Francisco, California. (Unclear)--. Speaker 2: And about what year was that? Speaker 1: That was 1980. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones (left) with her mother, Juanita Ford Jones Blanchard, New York, New York, 1980. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9513 Speaker 1: This is my wedding day. And I'm coming down my beautiful staircase at my home in Grandview [historic district in Harlem], New York. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones descending the staircase of her home on her wedding day, New York, New York, February, 1987. From the collection of Veronica Jones.] Story_ID: 9514 Speaker 1: From a Christmas party that I gave with my neighbor, Eileen (unclear). Featured with me is Ricard De La Rosa (ph.) who is a friend of mine and hails from San Francisco, California. But we're in our apartment on West 22nd Street in Chelsea, Manhattan, New York. Speaker 2: [Veronica Jones (center) with guests at her Christmas party in her apartment in Manhattan, New York, New York, December, 1984; On the left is her friend, Ricard De La Rosa. From the collection of Veronica Jones.]..