 Story_ID: 179877 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers today. Our videographer is Ivan- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Katz. Speaker 1: --Katz, right. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Alexine, A-L-E-X-I-N-E, Clement, C-L-E-M-E-N-T, Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is June 10, 1936 and my place of birth is Sumter, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I call myself a professional volunteer (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). All right. Speaker 2: And you want to know what that is, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, you've been the--I know, know you've been the president of the YWCA [USA, Inc.], you said-- Speaker 2: Yes. I've, I've served in, you know, many capacities on many boards and I volunteer. As a matter of fact, I say, I pay to work instead of the other way around, but it's a privilege for me to be able to do that. I did serve as Chair of the National Board of [Directors of] the YWCA of the USA for a term of five years, and my term ended two years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: All right. What is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is July 15, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're now at the, in Germantown, Maryland, at the Extended Stay America Hotel. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 179878 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we are compelled to ask. They only require a short answer. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh. I think, my favorite kind of food is Indian food, so almost anything that's in the Indian cuisine I like, and my husband [Aaron Jackson] and I both enjoy. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color to wear is probably black 'cause I have the most clothes in that color. I'm also drawn to sort of jewel tone colors, like turquoise and purple. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, I guess, my favorite time of the year is probably summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Vacation destination? Speaker 2: My vacation destination, generally, that I prefer is usually one that is, includes sun and water and a place to watch sunsets. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of. That's kind, that's the kind of question probably that other people could answer because you're not aware of what you say over and over. My children would probably say my favorite phrase was, always think about the consequences, but other than just everyday conversation, I don't know that I have a favorite phrase to use. Speaker 1: That's good advice for anybody. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 179879 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Can--I'm going to ask about your mother and your father. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: First, your mother, can you please state her name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: All right. My birth mother is Frances Lawson Clement, Frances Elizabeth Lawson Clement. She died when I was four years old of breast cancer. She was from Sumter, South Carolina. The mother that I knew for most of my life was named Josephine Dobbs Clement, and she and my father married when I was five years old. And she died five years ago, so that's the mother I knew, so I always talk about my two mothers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, what can you tell us about your birth mother? Where did--when was she born and-- Speaker 2: Let's see. She died when she was, I think twenty-nine years old in 1940, so that would have made her born in when? Speaker 1: 1911, I guess, right? Speaker 2: 1911, uh-hum, 1911. Speaker 1: Okay. Was she, she born in Sumter [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: She was born in Sumter, yes, uh-hum. My grandfather was, he was a minister, and he was also, he had, he was pastor of a church, minister of a church. And he was also principal of the high school in Sumter, South Carolina. Story_ID: 179880 Speaker 1: Are there any stories about what your family was doing in the 19th century? I know your [maternal] grandfather goes back to the 19th century. Speaker 2: Yes, well, the story of the 19th century that we're most familiar with in our family, is from my father's side. My father's name is William Alexander Clement. He was from Charleston, South Carolina, and his family came from North Carolina. His, his grandfather, who was an ex-slave, and that's really as far back as we can document, and no one has really done further research. But outside, near Charlotte [North Carolina], near Salisbury, North Carolina, we know that they were ex-slaves. My great-grandmother and my great-grandfather were ex-slaves. He was uneducated in that he was illiterate. She learned to read because she was with the children of the owners. And he was able to amass some land, buy a farm, and donated part of that land for a school, which was named for him, and part of it for a church, a Presbyterian church. Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the school? Speaker 2: The name of the school was, was the Rufus A. Clement School [later, West Rowan Junior High School, Cleveland, North Carolina]. Now, it, it held that name until the time of integration when the many schools then lost the names of some of the black sponsors because of the whites not wanting to go to schools named after black people. What has happened, however, is that school and that site has now become, I think a YMCA [sic, community center run by West Rowan Neighborhood Center Advisory Council], which still carries his name. And my father and my brother recently developed that land, and put some houses on the land and, and have sold it. And they, they named it Clement Crossing [Cleveland, North Carolina]. It was a development that they, that they did. It was one of the last things my father did before he died. But the story in our family always was that here was a man who was not educated, who couldn't read nor write, but who understood the value of education in that he took part of his hard-earned land, and donated for a school. And the wonderful thing, I think, especially for the rest of us coming along is that in one generation, we went from someone who couldn't read or write to my grandfather who finished college. So there was a--and you can imagine what that leap in education meant for the rest of the family. Story_ID: 179881 Speaker 1: Now what college did your grandfather attend? Speaker 2: He finished what is now known as Johnson C. Smith [University] in Charlotte [North Carolina]. It was called Biddle [Memorial Institute] at that time, but it's known as Johnson C. Smith. Speaker 1: It is B-I-D-D-L-E? Speaker 2: B-I-D-D-L-E, yes, Biddle. And it's a, I believe it's a Presbyterian school, Johnson C. Smith. Speaker 1: Now, so, and, and you say your, your grandfather was a Presbyterian, too, you know, right? Speaker 2: Yes, he was, my great-grandfather [Rufus A. Clement]. Well, the church was, I think it was Allen [Temple] Presbyterian Church [Cleveland, North Carolina] in Cleveland, North Carolina, is the name of the little town, Cleveland, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Now, people are often surprised in the community, in a black community, that's where your Baptist church is-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --and a few Methodist churches, but Presbyterian, you know-- Speaker 2: You know, I wondered that myself--how did that, how did that happen, and how did, how did he become a Presbyterian? I have no idea how that happened. My grandfather also was a member of Presbyterian because I remember my grandfather and grandmother went to different churches. She was Baptist, and he was Presbyterian and, but I never, I never knew why he, why that was. There must have been some influence there somewhere. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause there is a tradition amongst black people. There are quite a few accomplished black people that have Presbyterian background. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Black Presbyterians are very proud of what they-- Speaker 2: Of what they, yes, right, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: So, that probably would have been interesting to research in terms of what the Presbyterian church meant to black people in that community or in any community really. That's part of the history. I don't know. Story_ID: 179882 Speaker 1: When was your father [William Clement] born and-- Speaker 2: My father was born in 1912 and he was born in Charleston, South Carolina. My grandfather was, he worked for North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, now, North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company for many years was the largest black business in the country. It's headquartered in Durham, North Carolina. And in those early years, in the early founding years when they were beginning to build up the company, they had districts in different cities. And so, my grandfather was the manager of the Charleston [South Carolina] district. My father started working for North Carolina Mutual [Life Insurance Company] in the summers of college. And he continued to work at North Carolina Mutual and retired after fifty-some years there as executive vice-president. His brother also worked for North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company as the manager of several districts in the--around the country. So, that was sort of the family, the family pattern. My father had a sister who was a teacher and lived in Baltimore [Maryland], married, and moved to Baltimore. But my grandparents lived in Charleston. And when we moved away from Charleston, I lived in Charleston the first five years of my life, and then after my father married again, he was then, he was transferred to Atlanta [Georgia]. And we lived in Atlanta for five years and then he was promoted and we moved to Durham, which was the headquarters--became an officer of the company, and so I really say I'm from Durham, North Carolina-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause they lived there for more than fifty years. Story_ID: 179883 Speaker 1: Now, what kind of personality did your father [William Clement] have? Speaker 2: My father was a very organized, I guess, is the word that comes to mind. He was very, very neat. Everything was just so--I mean even in his last days, my brothers and sisters and I talked about how he was still working with his files and keeping his files in order, and so he was very, very organized. He was a businessman, and he was, you know, he was an involved father. I would say, you know, he was not, he was not overly strict, but he was, I mean you felt his presence. I used to say that all my father had to do was just click his teeth and I, I knew I was in trouble. I mean, he never, you know, fussed or hit or anything like that, but you always were trying to make sure you did what he said. He was a he was a handsome man and very well-liked. And he and my mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] both were main pillars of the community in Durham, North Carolina, so they had a very distinguished life there. My mother, in her later years, really became political. She, she was on the school board of Durham for ten years, and she served as chair of the school board for five years. And then she went on to be a County Commissioner, and she served in the county [Durham City-County, North Carolina] commission until her early seventies. So she was very--and then, of course, they were on, I think that's where I learned all my volunteerisms from was through her because she, and from them both, because he, he did many things, you know, chaired--he was, I think, the first black to chair the United Way [Worldwide] drive. And he was Chairman of the airport authority for Raleigh-Durham [Raleigh-Durham Airport Authority]. Just about anything that would have been a major position, he and my mother both were very well-known. And he was Grand Master of the [Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted] Masons for North Carolina, so he was pretty well-known throughout the state as well. Speaker 1: That's Prince Hall Masons? Speaker 2: Prince Hall Masons, yes-- Story_ID: 179884 Speaker 1: These other positions [held by Alexine Jackson's father, William Clement] are positions in, you know, being held in the segregated South. Was Durham [North Carolina] like very highly segregated, like the rest of the South or was it? Speaker 2: Yes, Durham was--when we first moved there, which was in the mid to late--I think we moved in 1946 to Durham. It was very much integrated, I mean, segregated, you know, all the schools were segregated. As a matter of fact, when I was in the seventh grade, my father [William Clement] and some other parents, on the behalf of their children, filed a suit against the Durham Public Schools for integration, and he was very involved. There was an organization there called the Durham Committee on, what was then called, Negro Affairs, and he was very, very involved in that. Over the years, you know, as, as segregation and the laws changed, obviously, Durham then became more and more integrated. And by the time he, he achieved these things and these recognitions, of course, it was well integrated on those levels, you know, obviously, and some social situations, but they were--it became a very well integrated community. Durham, even in the segregated days, was a little different from other Southern-type cities because there was a, a college there, which was a black college, North Carolina College [for Negroes, Durham, North Carolina] then. It's now known as North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina], is in Durham and that offered a social outlet. It was a place where we went to see concerts and it offered the cultural basis for the community. Then Durham, as a tobacco town, also provided employment for blacks, which was really elevated many blacks to a middle class statement--status--when you had two people working in tobacco factory--provided a rather stable income. So that was a plus. And then you had North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company. You had a black bank, Mechanics and Farmers Bank, and you had a black savings and loan, so the business community was strong. Speaker 1: Stronger than in a lot of the Northern states (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right, uh-hum, yeah, it was very, it was very strong. And not as strong as, say, as Atlanta [Georgia] 'cause it just wasn't as big as Atlanta. But my grandfather used to say about Atlanta, you know, if you could just pick it up out of Georgia, and put it someplace else, it would be wonderful. And my father used to say the same thing about Durham in those early days, you know, when you pick it up out of Durham, I mean, it was quite--and even in the early days, there were still, there were still relationships that were, that were built, but, but it was still difficult. I know that when my father was trying to, to study and take his--what is known as CLU [The Chartered Life Underwriter] for life underwriting, certified life underwriters, I mean he really had to fight to be in the class to, to, to study, to pass that, pass those examinations. So it was not, you know, nothing was ever easy, but it was just a slow and steady struggle all the time to try to achieve some kind of equality. Story_ID: 179885 Speaker 1: --I want you to reflect back on growing up, and give me some idea of some of the sights, the sounds, and the smells of growing up. I guess--and you grew up in three different places. Speaker 2: I did. I grew up, first in Charleston, South Carolina. And as I think back to Charleston, it was always an exciting place. There were just so many different kinds of sights. And it was the, the washer women with the wash things on their heads walking down the streets. My grand- Speaker 1: They're carrying baskets of laundry on their head? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-hum, they'd walk down the street with the, with the baskets of laundry on their head and-- Speaker 1: You don't, you don't see that in the North either, (simultaneous). Speaker 2: No, you don't see that and it's a very, and it's a bit, it's a, it's a--Charleston is very reminiscent of the islands, you know, I mean of the Caribbean, even the, the dialect and the-- my, my uncle who always lived in Charleston, had a very, very strong Geechee accent--went to Jamaica. And he said that when he started talking, they said, "Hey, mon [ph.], you wanna wee [ph.] (laughter)," 'cause it's, it's very similar, you know, that Caribbean Geechee, they call it in, in Charleston, and those islands that are around the Charleston area. So it was always fun, you know, going to the beach. My grandmother had in the backyard a place for the wash. She had a washer woman who would come and do the wash. And she'd have a big pot, you know, over the fire with the wa-, but she smoked a pipe, like, I guess, like a corn cob pipe. And to us, that just was the most interesting thing to, to see. There was another character around that--was also, it was, it was frightening to me as a child, but he was one of the standard Charleston characters and his name was Hopper [ph.]. He had one leg and one arm, and he would just hop down the street, you know. So, you know, we would say, oh, here comes Hopper, and then we'd all run 'cause then we were afraid. I don't know, you know, as children, that's kind of silly. But it was just those kinds of things that I remember about Charleston. In Atlanta [Georgia] there, I, Atlanta, of course, was a bigger city and had more universities. That, there again, the universities were the center of our cultural activities, the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta, Georgia]. My, my grandfather, who was John Wesley Dobbs, and he was a real activist in the Civil Rights Movement. He was the Grand Master of the Prince Hall Masons of Georgia. He was, he worked as a railway mail clerk through the years. He had been to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] as an academy, and he started Morehouse College and then left to go to work. But that, that was, you know, really, I remember family, lots of family activities. He was very big on reunions, even though many of us lived around in different places. In the summers, we would often come back to Atlanta for family reunions. My cousin who just died [in June 2003], Maynard Jackson, who was mayor of Atlanta, had been mayor of Atlanta, you know, we all grew up very close as cousins because of that, and then we also were in college together. So Atlanta, I remember as being involved in, you know. At my grandfather's house, you never knew who was coming through, I mean, I remember Thurgood Marshall. And, of course, the Kings were, were good friends of the family. [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was a friend of my mother's [Josephine Dobbs Clement] youngest sisters, so those families were around and I enjoyed living there very much. Durham [North Carolina]-- Story_ID: 179886 Speaker 1: What was your impression of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] when he was--or Thurgood Marshall (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Thurgood Marshall at that time had a name through the [NAACP] Legal Defense Fund, I guess it was. Was that what it was he was involved-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: I think it was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], yes, NAACP Legal Defense Fund. And so, you know, my grandfather [John Wesley Dobbs] was a very outgoing, enveloping person and he would, you know, and he would meet or see people--he'd bring them home for dinner (laughter). And so that was--and because we lived in Atlanta [Georgia], we were at their house a lot, you know. Once a week we always went, I think, on Saturdays for fish. And my grandfather had, he had a way--he was an orator, so almost all of these occasions turned into lessons. And he'd end up bringing out the books and the kids weren't allowed to leave. I mean, you had to sit there but, you know, of course, looking back on that now, what a wonderful experience and how much you learned doing that. Speaker 1: What did he lecture about? I mean, were they-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, he, he loved Napoleon [Bonaparte]. As a matter of fact, he had a painting of Napoleon (laughter). And one of the family stories is that my mother's [stepmother, Josephine Dobbs Clement] youngest sister always referred to that painting as my, as "Daddy's good friend, Napoleon." She didn't know he was--is he daddy's friend, Napoleon? But, oh, he--anything, anything, literature, history. Here he was, he was a self-taught person and he just immersed himself in books. And one of my mother's sisters was the only one who dared to really argue with him. And so they would have these arguments about the various historical things and perspectives and points of-- Speaker 1: This is at the dinner table? Speaker 2: This is at the dinner table (laughter), yeah. So, you know, it was just a, it was just a fascinating thing growing, growing up. It was filled with music. The, the aunt [HM Mattiwilda Dobbs Janzon] that I was telling you about was, well, in those years, she was a teen. But then through her college career when she first started singing, she went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And being involved in seeing her career progress was very exciting for our family and we all followed with great interest. Her, her experiences and her breakthroughs, she won a major contest in Geneva [Switzerland] which sort of catapulted her career. And she was the first African American to sing at La Scala [Italy]. And she had a career in Europe and she was very well-known in Europe. And then she, you know, that's kind of how it was done in those days, that people had to go to Europe to make their name, and then come back. So she did a lot of concertizing. She appeared in lots of opera in London [England], Sweden, Australia, you know, all over. And so, there was music. One of my mother's oldest sisters played, Maynard's [Maynard Jackson's] mother [Irene Dobbs Jackson] as a matter of fact, played the piano beautifully so there was always piano. My grandfather played by ear and he could play ragtime stuff, you know, and that was fun, too. So I, I remember those, those years with great deal of fondness. And I have to say that, you know, coming into that family when I was five years old, I was just completely embraced by the family. And so, there was never a difference made that there was no blood relationship. I mean, I was part of the family. I was the granddaughter, I was the cousin, I was the niece, and just fully, fully embraced. So that has been, you know, a wonderful part of my life and my existence. Story_ID: 179887 Speaker 1: You were fully accepted by the [maternal] family and that must have been-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. That was, well, and it was a different kind of family. I was in--when the year after my [biological] mother [Frances Lawson Clement] died, I lived with my grandmother and grandfather in Charleston [South Carolina]. And, of course, I was the only, well, I wasn't the only child. I had two cousins who were there, my father's [William Clement] brother's sons who were really like brothers to me. But I was the only little girl, and I think I was well on my way to becoming very spoiled (laughter). And I guess people felt sorry for me because, you know, my mother had died, and I was beginning to feel like a little princess. But, but it was, but it was very, it, it was very wonderful to, to move into a family that was more people. My mother's [stepmother, Josephine Dobbs Clement] youngest sisters, as I said, were teenagers. They were thirteen and sixteen, so they just took me on like theirs, you know. And with my other cousins, who were the same age, they would tell us stories and make-, give, you know, put makeup on us and do all kinds of things, so we just had a wonderful time. So I remember those Atlanta [Georgia] days fondly. Story_ID: 179888 Speaker 1: Durham [North Carolina], also, was a different time. I was moving then into my own--well, we moved to Durham when I was ten and I was in the seventh grade. So those were my high school years there. And-- Speaker 2: Had, had you skipped some grades? Speaker 1: I did actually. I went from--I started school, I guess, was pre-K [pre-kindergarten] when I was four. And then I was in the first grade when I was in, when I was five years old in Charleston [South Carolina]. Then when we moved to Atlanta [Georgia], I could not go to public school because I was not six, even though I had had half a year of first grade. So my, my parents [William Clement and Josephine Dobbs Clement] put me in a Catholic school, which accepted me, but they didn't have room in the first grade so they said, well, we'll just put her in the second grade. Story_ID: 179889 Speaker 1: We were talking about school when you said you were in a Catholic school for a while. Speaker 2: Yes. Well, when we moved to Atlanta [Georgia], I was five years old, so I couldn't go into the public schools because you had to be six. And I was five, I wouldn't have been six until June. My parents [William Clement and Josephine Dobbs Clement], I guess, had a very good friend who taught at the Catholic school so she, you know, somehow arranged that I would come to the Catholic school. But they didn't have room in the first grade, so they put me in the second grade, thinking that well, if room became available in first, they'd move me. But, apparently, I did well in the second grade so at the end of the year, I was promoted to the third grade. So that put me two years ahead, and so I finished high school, I was actually fifteen. I had turned sixteen that summer and went to college, and so that's why I was saying I was ten when I went to Durham [North Carolina] and I was in the seventh grade. Speaker 1: Now, what, what are the names of the, the, I guess, some of the grade schools you attended. Can you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, I went to, in Atlanta, after that year at the Catholic school because my family was not Catholic. I went to a public elementary school for a year. It was called David T. Howard School [later, David T. Howard High School, Atlanta, Georgia closed in 1976] in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I went to a private school that was part of the Atlanta University System [Center, Atlanta, Georgia]. It was a sort of laboratory school for Atlanta [University, later Clark-Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] called Oglethorpe [Elementary] School [Atlanta, University]. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: And it was really on the campus of Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia]. But I went to that school in the fourth, fifth, and sixth grades, and part of the seventh. And we moved to Durham when I was in the seventh grade, had already begun the seventh grade. And the school that I went to in Durham was called what? Whitted [School, Durham, North Carolina], I think (laughter), I think it was called Whitted School. Speaker 1: Whitted? Speaker 2: Yeah, W-H-I-T-T-E-D, Whitted School. And then the high school, I told you, was Hillside High School. I graduated from Hillside High School [Durham, North Carolina] in 1952. Speaker 1: Okay. Was, was Hillside the only black high school? Speaker 2: It was. It was the only black high school in Durham, and kids came from other part--I happened to live around the corner from it, so it was very easy for me. Story_ID: 179890 Speaker 1: Let me go to grade school though, and just ask you, now what kind of a little girl were you and what kind of a student? Speaker 2: Oh, probably, as I look back, I was probably kind of nerdy. I like to read a lot. I wasn't an outdoors kind of person. That just didn't get me at all. I wasn't much on playing outside although, you know, we did. We played children's games in the evening, but I wasn't one who just longed to be outdoors, but I much preferred to read. I played the piano, you know, I starting playing the piano early. So I took music lessons all through high school [Hillside High School, Durham, North Carolina], all through college actually, too, piano lessons. I had friends so as, as a little girl, like I didn't do much playing with dolls and that kind of thing. My, the activity I remember the most is reading. And I would tell my, I was telling my grandchildren just the other day that in Durham [North Carolina], particularly, the biggest activity for us in the summertime was to go to the library. Every day we'd walk to the library and we'd get books and we'd bring back home and we'd read them. And then the next day we'd take them back. It was almost a, a contest because actually they did a contest on the number of books that you would read in a summer. So that was, you know, I'd walk to a friend's house and we'd go and then we'd get, pick up another friend, and we'd all walk back, you know, back and forth to the library. So that was our big summer time activity in the afternoon. Speaker 1: Now, now did you read out loud to each other or did you-- Speaker 2: No, these were, no, these were just books that we read at home, you know, these were books. I mean, I used to, because I had to be in bed at night at a certain time. I mean, I would just, I'd take the flashlight under the covers and continue, or I had a closet that had a light in it. So I'd go sit in my closet and read. And music, go (unclear) as all, you know, I had a record player--we had records. That was one of the first things I wanted was--we had, they used to call them combinations. They're coming back now actually, the, the phonograph with the radio and the--and all is a part of it. So I played records. And then we swam, you know, we did things like that. But the college [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], because we lived in a college town, we could use the pool at the college. We could learn to play tennis in the summer and, and those kinds of activities. And, and Durham was a big tennis town. As a matter of fact, it had a tennis club, a black tennis club called the Algonquin Tennis Club [sic, Algonquin Club]. And they had a big tennis tournament every summer, and that was always sort of a highlight of our summer. You know, Althea Gibson, Arthur Ashe, and all of those people like that came and played in the tournament as they started young. Arthur Ashe started as a young boy coming around. So that was a big social--big thing for us in the summer was the tennis tournament that was at the Algonquin Club. And my father [William Clement] played tennis, and I would like to go with him to watch him play tennis with his friends so that was kind of my life growing up. Story_ID: 179891 Speaker 1: Now, were there any teachers in grade school that took a particular interest in you or that you saw as a--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I think so. You know, I was a very good student. It came easily to me and, you know, I finished first in my class in high school [Hillside High School, Durham, North Carolina]. And I finished first in my class in college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, so getting lessons was not--and, of course, you know, teachers love that. Story_ID: 179892 Speaker 1: I remember my fifth grade teacher. Her name was Beulah Lewis and she was an older woman, I guess, because her hair was gray. I assume she was older, but she was a very thorough teacher, very loving teacher, so I remember, I remember her. I think that's, she's the only one of my Atlanta [Georgia] teachers whose name I would even remember. In high school [Hillside High School, Durham, North Carolina], we had really wonderful, wonderful teachers, very--I remember a Mr. Gadis [ph.] who was, he was a history teacher, but he was a musician and he played the organ for our church. And so he was a big influence in the school, I mean, for other students. He was always a big influence. And my English teacher, I think her name was Dorcas Reeves [ph.]. She was a very, very strict English teacher. I'm, I'm forever grateful to her for that, you know. And I feel sorry--I don't think that kind of thing exists in public schools now in terms of the, the teachers being so very strict about English and grammar and speaking and, you know, the usage and all of those things. I think, it's, it's lost to a great extent from what I've noticed among a lot of public school kids. And my French teacher who really, I think, gave me a good grounding in French. And when you, you know, just thinking back to the era, it's amazing that we had the privilege of having such wonderful teachers. But there's an, an irony to that, which I'm sure you've heard, is because that many of those teachers who might have taught in colleges, or some other place, were teaching in high school. And so, the quality of that was really quite high for those of us. And that was that, that's one of the pluses if there is a plus in the segregated South. The other plus, I think, was understanding that there were role models in the black community because you grew up in the black community and you saw these role models. And in college at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], we had people who would come to speak at our chapel and our vesper services who were the big names of the, of the African American community and so, that was an advantage. And so, I think that that part of it in having the self-esteem. Story_ID: 179893 Speaker 1: And the part too, that in my family, and I think other families did this, too, but I know in my family, it was an unbroken law that you did not go to segregated facilities. I mean, we couldn't go to the movies. It was always said you don't pay for somebody to discriminate against you. So we were never allowed to go to those movies or any kind of segregated facility where you had to pay to get in. So only those things that you had to do, like ride the bus or go to school or, you know, whatever, that you just had to do for your daily existence, did you live with that segregated life. Speaker 2: Now, did you agree with that when you were young? Did you, could you see, see the value in that or did you-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I think, I think I did, I think I did. I mean, it's hard, it's hard not to understand that there were two, two worlds, a black world and a white world. And what your parents tried to do is to protect you in that black world. I mean, you saw that. Interestingly enough that when I go to Durham [North Carolina] now, I can hardly find my way around town because the area that we went into was such a small area, you know. As I look back now, it was just a very small prescribed area in which we, in which we moved. So other parts of Durham are completely foreign to me. I, I, have to get a map out to go and look because I, I'm not a part of that time when integration occurred and, you know, parks and things that you can go to now just were completely off limits for, for me growing up. So I, I, I remember, you know, I remember very well. And you ask, "Why can't you do this and why can't you do that?" and you were told. And, and the political figures were big topics of discussion in Georgia, you know, [Eugene] Talmadge, Gene Talmadge was the governor [from 1933-1937 and 1941-1943]. And Hum-, Hummon [ph.], as everyone called him, Herman [Eugene] Talmadge [Sr.], his son, was known. I mean they were just big racists and, and so those were the people that were kind of the big bad wolves around. Now you knew who those, you knew about all of those people who had control of the laws. Story_ID: 179894 Speaker 1: Tell me about high school. Speaker 2: Uh-hmm. Speaker 1: You went to Hillside High School [Durham, North Carolina]. Speaker 2: Uh-hmm. Speaker 1: What was Hillside like? You had the same quality of teacher (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes, I think we had a very good quality of teacher. Now the facilities, I think, probably, although we never had direct comparison, our parents knew which was the, the impetus for the lawsuit. You remember that I told you when I was in the seventh grade, my father [William Clement] and some other parents filed a lawsuit in our behalf because of the unequal facilities. Those were the grounds that they, you know, filed the lawsuit on. They obviously weren't the same. I mean, the books weren't, we probably didn't get the newest books and, and that kind of thing. Hillside, however, was a new school. It was built, or it was, it was renovated and new parts of it were, were built while I was in high school. So essentially, it was, it looked good because of the newness. It had the new gym and a new auditorium and new classrooms, and it had been, you know, very well renovated. So it was not a run-- a rundown, dilapidated school, but I saw those kinds of schools. As a matter of fact, we often, my music teacher used to often have us go to other schools to play, to give little concerts. And so, I saw some of those rural, schools of some of those other places that were more typical of what you would expect black schools to be. But, you know, Hillside was fun. We did the, you know, I was co-editor of the newspaper. I sang in the choir. I was in the theater group. I performed in the plays, you know, I did all the usual (laughter), kinds of things that you do in high school, participated fully, and I enjoyed. But the thing is that I remember, too, the socially--was because I was so young. My parents [William Clement and Josephine Dobbs Clement] didn't let me do a lot of--I was never allowed to go to mixed dances, for instance. I couldn't go to parties where there was dancing. Speaker 1: You, you were a freshman when, when you were twelve, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so, as you see, I was thirteen. Now, that I looked back, I can see (laughter) why, but in, when you're thirteen and everybody else is going, it's kind of hard to not do that. So there were only maybe two or three of my friends whose parents had the same rules. And I was not as daring as some of them who just did it anyway. I was too scared to--and then, of course, when, which meant that I was fourteen for my junior-senior prom. And my father took my date and me to the party. You know, he drove and he came back and he got us (laughter), and brought me home, you know, that kind of thing. And fifteen, same thing. So it wasn't really until I got in college [at Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] that I was able to, you know, branch out more socially in terms of guys. Story_ID: 179895 Speaker 1: And then Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] was a very, very strict school (laughter) in those days, so there wasn't a whole lot you could do. My husband [Aaron Jackson] and I met in college. He was, we were in the same class. He went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and as a matter of fact, Maynard [Jackson] always takes credit for introducing us. And we started dating when we were seventeen and, you know, then all through the rest of college. So, but Spelman was very, very, very strict, yeah, in the beginning years. So I came in on the tail end of that earlier time, the last of the white presidents [Florence M. Read]. It was a white woman president. And then my sophomore year, actually, my father's [William Clement] very good friend from North Carolina Central [University, Durham, North Carolina] came to be president. Albert [E.] Manley came to be president of Spelman so-- Speaker 2: So this is a man as president of (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yes, so this was a man. This was the first, first black, but, but a man, not but a man, but, you know, (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: --in the context of the, of the women's college, yeah. And he was there for many years. And then, then another man, Donald [M.] Stewart, came. And then, finally, a woman, a black woman, Johnnetta [B.] Cole, who was there so-- Speaker 2: Johnnetta Cole was the first woman to be president? Speaker 1: She was the first black woman-- Speaker 2: Black woman (unclear). Speaker 1: --to be president of Spelman, yeah, so she was there for about ten years. And then following her was [HM] Audrey Manley who was in college with me, but married to, she married Dr. Albert Manley who had been president when we were in college. And she became the president of Spelman, and she retired a couple of years ago. And now, there's a new president and her name is [HM Beverly Daniel] Tatum, I think Daniel Tatum. So now we've had three black women, so I don't think--as presidents of Spelman. Story_ID: 179896 Speaker 1: You said earlier in high school [Hillside High School, Durham, North Carolina], you graduated number one and you-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Did you know you were going to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] when you-- Speaker 2: Pretty much. You know, as I told you, my mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] came from a family of six girls. They all finished Spelman. I don't think there's been, that record hasn't been broken, I think, at Spelman, so Spelman is a tradition in my family. And then growing up in Atlanta [Georgia] and participating a lot in those college activities. The Christmas carol concert, I always loved that concert. And then, you know, my aunts were there in, at Spelman, so I always felt that I wanted to, to go there. And at that time, you know, going to other schools was a remote possibility. Some of the Seven Sisters, you know, liked Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and, you know, the black kids were going to those schools, but it was pretty rare. But I really wanted to go to Spelman, and then I'm glad that I, I'm glad that I did. I enjoyed those years there. Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers and personalities and, and at Spelman? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Spelman, at Spelman, I remember my freshman year. And I'm trying now to think of her name, but she was my philosophy teacher. And I had never had a course like this, it was a course on ethics. And it was a wonderful, it was a wonderful course and she was a very good teacher. Actually, our paths crossed here again in Washington [D.C.]. After I moved to Washington, she lived in this area and we saw each other fairly frequently. She also played the violin. We had an orchestra, the Atlanta Spelman Morehouse Orchestra [later, Atlanta University Center Symphony Orchestra]. And it also, at many times, had faculty members in it, in the orchestra. And so, she played the, the violin in the, in the orchestra so I would say that she--I felt her influence. There was a Shakespeare teacher who was a wonderful teacher of Shakespeare. I think everybody, everybody loved taking--his name was Dr. [Nathaniel P.] Tillman. And then a history teacher, Dr. Bacote, Samuel Bacote [sic, Clarence A. Bacote] was a history teacher, and I remember his joy in coming into class when the Brown v. the Board of Education [of Topeka, Kansas 347 U.S. 483 (1954)] was passed by the [U.S.] Supreme Court, you know, the decision came-- Speaker 1: Yeah, this was '54 [1954]. Speaker 2: This was '54 [1954]. Speaker 1: Yeah, you were a sophomore-- Speaker 2: I was a sophomore, you know, and he came in class and announced that this ruling had come down from the Supreme Court. But he was also a wonderful history teacher, you know, the kind that can make it come alive. Literature, I was an English major in college. So, and we had a poet once, who was a residential faculty in residence there for a year, who was very, very, very good. And he was a friend of--his name was Snow and he was a friend of Robert Frost (laughter). So, but Robert Frost, he had Robert Frost come down to Spelman and, and so we had really wonderful exposures there. Speaker 1: It was really cool (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had cool (laughter), pretty cool exposure. So I, you know, and, of course, as I said, my husband [Aaron Jackson] and I met, and so that really made it very special for me. I'm glad that I went to Spelman. Story_ID: 179897 Speaker 1: Now your husband [Aaron Jackson] became a doctor? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-hum. He, after we graduated, he came to Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] to medical school. And I went to the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] and I got a degree, a master's degree in speech pathology and audiology, and then I came back to the Washington [D.C.] area. Speaker 1: Why did you choose to go into that field, speech pathology? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was one of those (laughter) things. I have to say, you know, in my family, your, your education wasn't complete until you got at least a master's degree. So I was trying to think, what am I going to do, what, you know. It's always, and, and in those days for a woman, it was more or less being able to have something to fall back on, you know, if you ever had to work. So on the campus, we had a speech and hearing school that was started by one of the graduates. I guess she had been away to study and she come back. And there was a little building on campus and she started a speech and hearing school for children. And I used to go down there. I, I don't know whether it was a part of a class or but, but I got interested in that. And I thought, well, you know, this seems as interesting as anything. And so I was able to--I was accepted at the University of Iowa. And a lot of the Big Ten schools were the leaders in that field. It was a new field, I would say, maybe no more than about twenty years old at the time that I went. And Iowa had one of the outstanding researchers in that field of speech pathology. So I went to University of Iowa, and then I came back and I found--I got a job in Baltimore [Maryland] that was the closest I could get to Washington. And then my husband and I got married between his sophomore and junior year in medical school. And then I came to Children's Hospital to work at their speech and hearing school. So my career in that lasted about a year and a half because then I got pregnant, and I had twins and that was the end of that. And so I haven't really, you know, done that since. Speaker 1: Okay. So you haven't worked since that time? Speaker 2: I haven't worked to get paid (laughter) since then (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: No, I haven't worked really, you know, or been employed by somebody in that capacity since that time, no. Story_ID: 179898 Speaker 1: So you had twins and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we [Jackson and her husband Aaron Jackson] had twins. It was very unexpected 'cause that was back in the days before sonograms and all that sort of thing. And my doctor was actually the chair of OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] at Howard [University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] and he always did the medical students and, you know, their wives. He did them for free. So he never got over the fact that he still talked about that, that he didn't, didn't diagnose these twins. But they were, and they were both full term twins, full size, but not until the second baby was coming (laughter) did I know. I heard them say there's another baby coming and that was it. So you can imagine the shock of realizing that you had two babies. And so, this was his senior year in medical school. And so, I had pretty much myself 'cause he was gone a lot, you know, he was gone a lot as a--'cause he had an externship so he was working. The, the day my mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] left--she came and stayed two weeks. The day she left, he went on a month of nights and so, I had the night time shifts all to myself and that was fun (laughter) if you can imagine. You have children, so you know what babies can be like sometimes at night. Speaker 1: Now, now a lot of people would have--now, I know this is 19- Speaker 2: It was '50 [1950], '58 [1958], '59 [1959], I'm sorry, they were born in '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: Okay. A lot of people that we see, they have (unclear) all the time, and they would have babies, like go right back to work-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --work in some intensive career and so forth, and then they, they-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, I guess we just sort of, at first, unconsciously, made the choice that I would be home with the babies. And that was kind of what you did, if you didn't have to. We had one more year. He was actually working as an extern so he was getting some income. When I found out I was pregnant, we started trying to save a little money and we did, so it wasn't quite--and then after that, it wasn't so necessary for me. After his internship, he went into the [U.S.] Navy. And so, we, you know, we felt like we were rich then with that the, the Navy Lieutenant's pay. We were in California for a couple of years. And then he went into general practice in Mississippi because he had gone to school on a loan from the state of Mississippi and this-- Speaker 1: So he's from Mississippi? Speaker 2: He's from Jackson, Mississippi, uh-hum. And it, this was not so much race-related, but it was an effort by Mississippi to bring doctors back to rural areas of Mississippi. So the requirement was that you come back and practice for at least five years in a small community in Mississippi. So that, that helped us through the medical school. It helped him through his medical school years because it paid for all his medical education. And, I think, we, we, got a stipend, you know, a small stipend. But also, he'd always told me though that he wanted to practice in Mississippi, and that had been his hope so that was not a shock to me that we went back to Mississippi. The shock was that we went to this little town in the [Mississippi River] Delta area of Mississippi called Greenwood [Mississippi]. And it was 1963 in the midst of the Civil Rights, and Greenwood was the headquarters for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], so that was an interesting era of our life as well. Story_ID: 179899 Speaker 1: --I was saying that he [Jackson's husband Aaron Jackson] went into the [U.S.] Navy and then, you know, then we went to Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we had you at Greenwood [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: --and Greenwood, yeah. So then we were, you know, we were in our twenties, middle-twenties. We had three children when we came there. And as I said, he was the only black doctor for a fifty-mile radius. And so the people would come from outside of town. They'd walk into town, they'd come by, they signed their name on this book. They go do all the shopping and then come back for--by that time, their turn would have come 'cause he would get to his office, and there may be twenty, twenty-five people already on the books. And it was also, the college was there, Mississippi Valley [State College], which is now called Mississippi Valley State University [Itta Bena, Mississippi], but it was in Itta Bena [Mississippi]. That's where [HM] Marion Barry is from, Itta Bena, which was a little town on the outskirts of Greenwood. But he was a physician, college physician. Speaker 2: That's where [HM Reverend] James Bevel's from. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, right, uh-hum. Speaker 2: Because the, the name means little bitty (laughter). Speaker 1: Little bitty, yeah, Itta Bena (laughter). It little bitty and it is little bitty. But, but here again, having a college was sort of the, the source for us because it was--it provided that cultural outlet. And Mississippi Valley State had a president [Dr. James Herbert White, 1950-1971] who was very resourceful. He seemed to manage to get a lot of money from the state and they had beautiful facilities. They had a bowling alley. They had a movie theater. When we used to go--I mean, we had, we belonged to a bowling league and we'd go out and bowl at the college; the concerts that were at the college. And, and our kids went to the nursery school that was there. My sorority was there, and so I was able to participate, you know, in my sorority. So that was, you know, that gave you kind of some outlet in this, in this place that was just unbelievable of shotgun houses. And the day that I, the day that we came, that my husband took me there the first day was right, it was right after Medgar Evers had been shot [Evers was assassinated June 12, 1963]. And Byron De La Beckwith, who was from there, had just been let out of jail. So as we're driving into town, over the highway is a big banner that says "Welcome Home De La Beckwith". And I thought to myself, "Oh, where are we going?" And I never told my husband until really after we left Mississippi just how disheartened I was when we first moved there. And when we first moved there, I was pregnant. So the first year I just kind of sat and it was just depressing 'cause I had just never been in anything like that. We were fortunate, however, to find a very nice house to live in because we rented a house from a man who had built this house. And his wife died within a year or so after he'd built the home and he'd been renting it out to teachers. And so, he was very happy to rent it to a family so it was one of the nicest houses in town. So we were fortunate in that part because most of the houses there were, you know, just shotgun kinds of little one room behind the other houses. You've spent a great deal of your time trying to just be respected. And, you know, I'd go downtown--people want to call you by your first name. I got, and this I got from my mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement]. And she always had on her checks, Mrs. William A. Clement, so I had on my, you know, it's Dr. Aaron G. Jackson, Mrs. Aaron G. Jackson, so they couldn't call me Aaron 'cause that was his name. So rather than call me anything, they, you know, they'd call me nothing, but they would say, "Well, what's your name?" And I'd say, "Mrs. Aaron Jackson, Mrs. Jackson." So you know, you'd--it was those kinds of games all the time that you were trying to play. I would go downtown the middle of the day. And they couldn't figure out how I could be not working, you know, they would want to know, "Well, what do you do? Are you a teacher? Are you this? Are you that?" They just couldn't figure that out at first. Story_ID: 179900 Speaker 1: My husband [Aaron Jackson], interestingly enough, everybody called him Doc, but Doc was like a first name so that was (laughter), that was fine. But, you know, there were things--for instance, in order to belong to the American Medical Association, you had to belong to your local association. So, the way they had gotten around this was to say that they had scientific membership. And so he could be a scientific member and come to the meetings and participate in the meetings. Then when the meetings were over, they'd to the country club for the dinner and the social part of it so, you know, it's just like you don't exist. And I think that was the thing that was the most hurtful about that experience. I remember also another, another thing that stands out in my mind during that time is that one of our--well, two of our children were born there. But the first one--the hospital was still segregated, so they had a little wing, had about four rooms that were designated for black patients. So I'm lying there listening to the radio. In the middle of the day, they announce all the babies that are born, born at the hospital so I'm waiting for them to say mine. It was nothing. It was like you don't even exist. You aren't a part of the, the mainstream world. By the time our last child was born, the hospital was integrated. And so, we were one of the first ones to integrate it with the, you know. He was always treated very well by his colleagues. I think people were, they were embarrassed by what had to happen and, and-- Speaker 2: Well, when was the hospital integrated? When the (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: The hospital was integrated in (unclear), when the, you know, the segregation laws were brought down. I would say that would have been about '65 [1965], '66 [1966], about '66 [1966] 'cause he was born in '66 [1966]. So by that time, the restaurants had to be integrated and, you know, we had just started going, say, to the Holiday Inn restaurant which was, which had to be integrated. So it was accommodations, when their accommodations laws were passed. And so that was a little bit of a change there. Story_ID: 179901 Speaker 1: It was, you know, it was--I felt like I was living in the middle of a novel (laughter) during those years that we were there. But after, you know, I began then to start to put down my roots and do things in the community. We started a daycare center there as part of our church, which ultimately went into a Head Start which was the first Head Start there. And so I spent a lot of time on that, working with--this was a Methodist church, so other, it, it was interesting because other white Methodist churches were also involved in this. And so I, you know, worked with those women. But whenever we had to have a meeting, it was always at my house because, you know, and even one apologized. She said, "I really wish that I could have you at my house but I'm just not able to do that, I can't do that." And it dawned on me then that they were more victims-- Speaker 2: But they would come to your house? Speaker 1: They would come, they could come to my house, yeah, they could come to my house because, you know, white people could come to a black person's house. But to invite somebody to come in your front door and sit down in your living room, that would have been really heresy for, for a white person to do that and, and make them object of whatever. So that was--but, but the lesson from me there was that they were more victims than we were because they didn't have the freedom to do what they would like to do, and they were bound by these racist laws as well. So, that was kind of an empowering feeling. Speaker 2: Yeah, it cuts both ways and (simultaneous). Speaker 1: It cuts, yeah, uh-hum, cuts both ways. And in a sense, I was more empowered than they. Story_ID: 179902 Speaker 1: I think off-camera, we were talking about some of the personalities that populated Greenwood [Mississippi] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, during that time, uh-hum. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) During '63 [1963], '64 [1964], '65 [1965] when the voters registration was going on in Mississippi. I think '64 [1964] was the culmination of what, what they called Freedom Summer? Speaker 2: Yes, there were. The Freedom Summer, the buses coming in to Mississippi for the voter drives--that was when people were then rounded up and put in jail for trying to vote. You know, it was interesting that they, they did everything to intimidate you. My, my husband [Aaron Jackson] loves to tell the story. When he went there, of course, he had to get a license to practice medicine. So he went down to the county clerk and, you know, they filled out, he filled out the thing and he got his license to practice. So when he went back to register to vote, now the same county clerk that gave him his license to practice medicine, gave him this literacy test, you know, we have to read this, the constitution of the Mississippi and interpret it to register to vote. So, I mean, it shows you how stupid all of it was, all of it was just-- Speaker 1: You can be a doctor but you may not be able to (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah, but you can't, 'cause you have to prove that you could read in order to vote. Speaker 1: Or if you're literate enough to vote in Mississippi-- Speaker 2: In Mississippi, but not only just literate, but you had to sometimes interpret what you read. So, and not only--the other intimidation, intimidation was that they put in the paper all the people who had registered to vote. So if you registered to vote, your name would be listed, so that was another way of your employer finding out that you had dared to try to register to vote, plus the poll tax. The poll tax was fifteen dollars and so, you know, that was a lot of money. That's a week's wages for a lot of people was fifteen dollars. Speaker 1: In those days. Speaker 2: In those days. Story_ID: 179903 Speaker 1: The first house call he [Jackson's husband, Aaron Jackson] made, he said that he, when he told the lady how much it would cost, he was going to charge fifteen dollars. And she said, well, Dr. Jackson, I can pay you if you cash my paycheck. When he looked at the paycheck and it was only twenty-five dollars--she was a domestic worker. And he said, you know, there was no way in the world I could take fifteen dollars out of her paycheck. So I think he then started charging five dollars for house calls and things like that, but we made, you know, he made a very good living. And it was an interesting, it was an interesting period because I was home. I was often called by the high school to come and judge, you know, music contests or oratorical contests. The girls would come by for the--when the proms and I'd help them with, to get the jewelry. I'd let them use my costume jewelry and stuff like that. So, you know, I was, I really did become a part of the community and, and I enjoyed it. So we left when he wanted to go into a specialty and was not accepted at the University of Mississippi [Medical School, Jackson, Mississippi] in their surgical program. So, I say that's their loss 'cause we probably have still been there (laughter) in Mississippi had he been accepted there 'cause that was his home and he always wanted to be there. Speaker 2: Well, how long was he-- Speaker 1: We were there for about five years because, remember, he had to come back, you know, and stay for five years, so a little short of that because we had to pay a little bit of that money back. But about four and a half years when he decided he wanted to go into urology, and he was accepted in a program at the University of Iowa [Roy J. and Lucille A. Carter College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa], so we went back to Iowa City [Iowa] and we lived there. But we had all five of our children when he went back to do his residency. And we were in Iowa for five years. He did the residency and a fellowship. And then we moved to Washington [D.C.] from there, from after he finished the residency. Story_ID: 179904 Speaker 1: So Iowa was another experience on the other end where you were like flies in buttermilk kind of situation 'cause there were not a lot-- Speaker 2: There were not too many black people. Speaker 1: --not too many black people there. I changed the whole demo--when we moved from Iowa City [Iowa], we changed the whole demographics of their school because I think there were about eight kids in the school. And five of them were mine so when we moved, that just decreased it. But, interestingly enough, too, my kids, having lived those years in, in, Mississippi, which was in a very protected environment, never were called nigger until they got to Iowa where you had the, the interrelationship and the integration and, and the subtle kind of racism that they felt going to school there where, you know, kids wouldn't want to sit next to them. Kids wanted, you know, tease them about the hair and all those kinds of things that they had to go through there. So it was different in that respect. In the voting respect, the difference was they had registration bands that come into neighborhoods to sign you up to, to register, so there was none of that intimidation that you found in Mississippi. So that was, that, those were two extremes. Speaker 2: Now, in which place did you feel the most com-, comfortable, Iowa or Mississippi? Speaker 1: I think I felt more comfortable in Iowa, but only because Mississippi was so different from anything I ever grew up around because living in cities like Charleston [South Carolina] and Atlanta [Georgia] and Durham [North Carolina], you didn't see that kind of poverty that you saw in Mississippi and that lifestyle of just, you know, just the, the social strata being so divided, even among blacks where you got very, very poor, and you got kind of a middle class, and a very few middle class. It was just, it was just different for me living there, that kind of rural bit, things revolving around the cotton, and the schools opening late 'cause the kids had to go pick cotton. And, you know, that--it was just that kind of thing that was different for me. So, it was different from my, my upbringing, my socioeconomic upbringing as well--I mean not that we had a lot of money but it was just a different culture for me. Even though Iowa City was more white, I was among people who had--we were in sort of the same intellectual--our friends were mostly my husband's [Aaron Jackson] colleagues from the hospital. And the wives of--mostly they were wives, that's also a sign of the times, who were the spouses of these residents. We had a, we had an organization that was made up of about three or four hundred residents' wives, so I became very involved in that. They had interest groups and book clubs and things, so I would say that I felt more comfortable in Iowa City. It was just that you felt sort of bereft of other blacks so there were very--it was very few blacks in the community. Story_ID: 179905 Speaker 1: Now did you get involved in civic activities in Iowa? Speaker 2: Not so much other than the residents' wives. I think that, that was my total outlet there and, of course, the schools, you know, PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and, and that kind of thing. So it was--my kids were young, they were, ranged from a year to about eight when we first went there, so I was still at home with kids. I didn't do a lot out in the community really until we moved here, but because they were young, but I did participate a lot in the residents' wives' group. And I actually became president of the residents' wives' group while we were there. So that was our social outlet. I, I learned to play tennis there. Tennis became a big part of my life from that point on. And so, you know, it was a kind of typical thirties (laughter), thirties life with kids. And my husband [Aaron Jackson] was gone a lot, too. He was, because of the residency, and he was just really gone a lot, so the responsibilities for the kids' activities and all mostly fell to me. Story_ID: 179906 Speaker 1: When you moved back to [Washington] D.C.-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --it was 1960-- Speaker 2: We moved in 1973, January of 1973 to Washington [D.C.]. My husband's classmate, who had gone straight through urology and had become chairman of the urology program at Howard University [College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], invited him to come and, you know, partner with him in the practice. So he decided that he would come to Washington, and he became, you know, teaching at, at the medical school and what-not. Then, ultimately, when that, that guy retired--well, he didn't retire. He built a building, an office building, and then they required that the chairs and the full time faculty be at the hospital--that the chairs of the departments have their practice in the hospital. And he chose not to do that. So then my husband became chair, so he's been chair of the department of urology for more than twenty years now there. So we've been here longer than we've been anywhere, here in Washington, and I really love living here. Story_ID: 179907 Speaker 1: A lot of things to get involved in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You're--this is basically your career (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: This is my--this is true, that's true. Speaker 1: Volunteer, super volunteer, and-- Speaker 2: Yep, that's true. It's been since here, you know, I always say it's been a privilege. And my husband [Aaron Jackson] has always encouraged to do this. And when we first moved here, he said, you know, we decided that a lot of the social things that we would do, we would do through our charitable, you know, our charitable giving. And I did, once the kids were about--my youngest was maybe third or fourth grade and in school all day, I started getting more involved. I started getting involved in arts organizations. And then I started getting involved with the YWCA [USA] here. And, you know, ultimately through, with, through that path, I became president of the YWCA of the National Capital region [sic, area]. Then I was elected to the national board, and then, ultimately, became the National President of the--we call the president, now we call the Chair of the Board [of Directors] for the national organization. Speaker 1: Now, now, your, your family has a long history with the YWCA (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, it does actually. Both my grandparents were--my grandmothers were both involved. My grandmother Dobbs [Ophelia Thompson Dobbs] in Atlanta [Georgia] was in, in those times, the YWCAs were segregated in the South. But even at that, those segregated facilities gave women, black women, an opportunity to develop leadership. And my grandmother in South Carolina also was very much involved with the YWCA in South Carolina. So I always used to say, I'm third generation. And my mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement], too, because my mother in Durham [North Carolina] was on the board of the segregated YWCA. And then when the integration came about, she was one of the first members of the integrated board of the YWCA. And she always had me involved in the teen activities, Y-Teen [Y-Teens Youth Program] and that kind of thing. So I kind of--it was natural when I was asked to, to be a part of it that I, you know, that I join. And I have to say that I, I always attribute any leadership qualities that I've gained had come through my activities with the YWCA. And it's been a wonderful personal experience for me. Much of the travel and the people that I've met has really enriched my life through that experience. Story_ID: 179908 Speaker 1: We were talking about your volunteer activities and the YWCA [USA] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Well, the YWCA is certainly high on the list and especially in terms of time and energy expended. I was on the National Board for twelve years, and then I was vice president for four years, and then I was president for five years of the National [Board of the YWCA]. And there are, oh, more than three hundred associations around the country, so there's a lot--I did a lot of traveling within the United States, a lot of traveling. Outside of the United States, which were wonderful experiences in terms of the kind of travel that I did for the YWC, they were mostly travel--what we call travel immersion experiences where we--because we were looking at women in poverty around the world. We would go into a community and just really live at grass roots level. So you--it's a different perspective from seeing a country that way. So, well, you know, I was able to visit the Philippines and Kenya and Palestine, Mexico, Korea, you know, just lots of places that I wouldn't have had the opportunity to visit had I not been a part of the YWCA. So that has always, that will always be very high on my list. Locally, I, I, I currently also chair the board of another national organization. It's called the Intercultural Cancer Council [ICC] and it's an organization that addresses the unequal burden of cancer in minority populations, racial, ethnic populations, and the medically underserved. We include rural poor 'cause the conditions are often the same. The issues are usually the same. But it's a very diverse group of people. We--it's one of the most diverse organizations I've ever been a part of. And we have, you know, Native Americans, Pacific Islanders, African Americans, Hispanic, nearly all the racial ethnic categories that, you know, the general ones are, are a part of this council. And we do, you know, trying to raise awareness, bring the issues to, before Congress. We do a symposium every other year by biennial symposium where we bring together grass roots organizations together with researchers and clinicians and government officials around the issue of disparities, cancer disparities. So that is another organization that's taking some time. Speaker 1: Why are there disparities in the cancer rates in minority communities? I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, the, the first one that usually comes up is around just the inequality of the care and access to health care. That's number one. You find in these racial ethnic communities there are some, sometimes some cultural things about who, who goes to see the doctor. A lot of times, it's not the women or the children. And it's around money, costs of health care, access, getting there, getting to a doctor, getting to a facility. So what you find, for instance, in the area of breast cancer in women is and, and African American women is that the incidents of breast cancer in African American women is lower, but the mortality rates are higher. So there are two things that are considered to be in (unclear). First of all is the access issue, that women come later to the diagnosis. They wait until, you know, it's, it's larger, the tumor is larger. Then the second issue is whether or not the cancers themselves are different in African Americans, and there's not been that much research. The issue of getting these populations included in clinical trials is a major piece of it so that there's a better understanding of what cancer is like, in, in, in these populations. So those are the sort of parallel issues around the disparities. And so it, it comes down to more money for research and, you know, the byline is always money around most of this, funding of research, inclusion of the, the populations in clinical trials. Blacks, I think, will carry for many, many years the history of the Tuskegee [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male, 1932-1972] experience. And so you find that people are a little bit reluctant often to become parts of that. But there's an education program that needs to, and a process that needs to be developed around, around that, making the health care more accessible in communities so that people can get to that care. Patient Navigator is another issue around, particularly cancer, because when you go and you hear this devastating news that you have cancer, and you know suddenly you can't think of all the questions you need to ask and trying to make the appointments you need to make, and negotiating the system is difficult. So there's a bill now that is, as a matter of fact, there's a hearing on this bill coming up this week called patient navigator bill [S.453 Patient Navigator, Outreach, and Chronic Disease Prevention Act of 2003], which is that everybody who has, is diagnosed with cancer, would have a patient navigator who then helps them negotiate the system through their care. And so those are, you know, those are the main issues about cancer disparity. Story_ID: 179909 Speaker 1: Yes--(simultaneous)--can you tell me about the historical significance of the YWCA [USA] in the black community, black communities around the country? Speaker 2: Yes, around the country. The YWCA is an interesting organization because it was begun around the time of the Industrial Revolution. And it came about because young girls were coming into the city to work and the housing conditions were very, very poor. So some of the women from the churches became very disturbed by this and decided that they would open boarding homes. And so in New York [New York] and Boston [Massachusetts], which started around the same time in the--I would say, the 1800s, about the 1850s, these boarding houses were started as YWCAs. They had started one in England and so it was patterned. The YMCA [of the USA] also grew up about the same time, but the YWCA always had an advocacy component. It wasn't just that they would provide the housing but they always wanted to advocate for better housing and for equal treatment for the women. And soon, it, it sort of became an all-inclusive kind of thing. They understood that all women needed it, whether they were black or white, and those were the two groups that, in those times. So as early--before the turn of the century, there were YWCAs that were opening up to other racial and ethnic groups. And the YWCA around 1900 had its first black--what they call staff person who worked in the YWCA in New York and started focusing on the, the Harlem [New York, New York] area. When [HM] Dorothy Height came now, in, in, the YWCA, it was, it's very interesting that in 1940, I think about 1942 [sic, 1946], in one of the national conventions, they decided that they, there would be no segregated YWCAs in this country except those YWCAs where the law of the state required segregation. And those were the Southern cities, but that they would work for full equality and they would lobby for civil, civil rights. And, and one thing that always struck me was that in--for the trial of the Scottsboro Boys [1931-1937], which was in the 1950s [sic, 1930s], the National Board of the YWCA sent a team of women to observe the trial to report back to the organization about the fairness of the trial, how it was run, you know, and the fact that they would designate those resources in that time. Story_ID: 179910 Speaker 1: [HM] Dorothy Height came to work in the 1930s in the [Harlem] YWCA H right after she finished her school, I guess, graduate school and college. About that time, they were getting more of a focus on racism and civil rights. And, and that really--she, she opened up an office for the YWCA called the Office of Racial Justice [in 1965]. There was something passed that we call our one imperative, one imperative, and that is, To thrust our collective power towards the elimination of racism wherever it exists and by any means necessary. And that still exists as part of the mission statement today--causes a lot of consternation along, among (laughter) a lot of people because they can't deal with the by any means necessary. And so you'll constantly explaining that the YWCA has no history of violence, so what, that, you know, does not include any violent behavior. But you do whatever you have to do to eliminate the racism. She developed a lot of, of curricula and a lot of materials on racism. She wrote a lot about how you address it, how you attack it, how you change it, racism being institutional. It's not, it's different from discrimination and all of those kinds of things that she introduced among the training into the YWCA. So that has always been a central focus. Now I mentioned that my grandmothers were involved in YWCAs in the South, both in segregated branches of YWCAs. But even in those segregated branches, women were developing their leadership skills there, and the national organization was working on changing the laws. So you've got a real history of, of the YWCA and the elimination of racism and the, the work towards eliminating racism throughout the, the South and throughout the country. And for many people, including myself, the YWCAs offer their first interracial experience. I remember when I was in North Carolina as a teenager, going to a camp that was one of the--it, it was really, now I know it was kind of an experimental thing where they were, they had just passed the, the resolution in the national convention that there would be this focus on integration. And so they started trying to bring these young people together in an integrative experience. It's meant a lot, I think. In many communities, the YWCA is seen as an organization that has provided those opportunities for all women and it's been very important. And as I said, Dorothy Height is, she's an icon, you know with the YWCA. As a matter of fact, I'm going tonight to a reading she's doing for her new book as she's one of my favorite, favorite women, yes. Speaker 2: Dorothy Height is how old now? Speaker 1: Dorothy Height is ninety, is she ninety-five? She's, she's well into her nineties, but she's an incredible--I always tell her that whatever I feel tired, I think about her and I think, well, if Dorothy can do this, so can I because she's everywhere, she's indefatigable. And we had a dinner, the YWCA had a fundraising dinner a few years ago, about three or four years ago here in Washington [D.C.]. And she had to go to Italy for a meeting, and she flew back here because she wanted to be here for the dinner 'cause we had named the Racial Justice Award for her, so she went on Monday to Italy for that meeting. She came back on Wednesday, got in at 3:00 [pm], came to our dinner that night. So I just, you know, I just shake my head and marvel at her perseverance and her--she, she's blessed that her mind is still wonderful. I mean, she speaks with no notes still, just as clear as a bell, and still looks beautiful, so she's a very special lady. Story_ID: 179911 Speaker 1: Okay, now, in terms of women's issues, The Y [YWCA USA] has been at the forefront of not only the race issue but the--women's issues-- Speaker 2: The women's issues, yes. Well, that's been the mission of the YWCA. I mean the mission of the YWCA is, has always been the empowerment of, of women. And it has been always to provide that experience for women's leadership, growth, and power. And that's why we say we exist is to provide that. So it's not just a matter--and, and we, we've, we've really worked very hard to preserve that single sect stat-, status within the YWCA. When the, the laws, the Title Nine laws [Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972] were changed, there were some organizations that were sort of grandfathered, grandmothered in, the YWCA, YMCA, Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, you know, to maintain the single sect status. The Girl Scouts still do. The YWCA still does. And we feel that it's very important for our mission because part of it is experiencing leadership. And so, I always used to say, we don't have a space to give up, you know, there's a--men have other venues and other ways in which to, to experience leadership and, and power. Women don't have that many so it's really important for us to preserve that. And it is pretty much, we feel that we still have a pretty good legal basis for it. It's not been challenged. Story_ID: 179912 Speaker 1: I'm very proud of the YWCA [USA] and what it stands for and I'm very pleased that I was able to have a role in that and trying to bring the national awareness to some of the communities around the country about what it means to be a YWCA. And so, what we've done now--it, we've, we've restructured the YWCA a little bit. Now, it's more, has more of a regional focus and, you know, works more from the region. But we've decided that we have two--every YWCA has to do have to have two hallmark programs. And one is on women's economic power and empowerment, and the other one is on racial justice. So in order to be a YWCA, you've got to really concentrate on those two issues. Speaker 2: There's something that you say about the economic status of women, black women. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: A number of articles have, have been about you or written by you. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You, you know, what I'm talking about? Speaker 1: About the economic status of women. Well, I think that we all know that there's a difference in pay for equal work. I mean those are documented. The lack of women who are on corporate boards, the lack of women who are in main line positions in corporations. There've been a number of studies around the pay, pay issues where you find that women who are doing the same job as men are being paid less. So I think those are still very real issues for, for women. More and more women are coming into, into the workforce at, at higher levels but it still isn't, it still isn't where it ought to be. I mean, even, even if you just take something like corporate CEOs [chief executive officers]. I think, you know, there's less than ten among the Fortune 500 who have women CEOs. Now one of the things they say is that women often don't get into those line positions that have where they get the responsibility for the profit/loss. You know, women often get into a vice president for corporate relations or public relations, and those don't always translate into dollars, you know, into the company. So, and then women sometimes drop out to have children and so that interrupts their, their progress. But one of the things I did learn is that one of the fastest growing areas for women is women owners of their own businesses. And so that's an opportunity because then women are able to control the culture of their business. They can do it, more family-oriented for their employees and, you know, so it makes a big difference. So that's an area that is steadily growing, women entrepreneurs. Story_ID: 179913 Speaker 1: You've said a number of times that women only control like 1 percent of the-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter). Where'd you get that from (laughter)? One of the things that I saw once, and it may not be precisely true now, but it's pretty generally true, that women have 100 percent of the babies. They constitute more than, a little than 50 percent of the world's population. They earn 10 percent of the world's income, and they own 1 percent of the world's resources. So, you know, as long as those kinds of statistics exist, there is still the opportunity to address the issues around women and women's equality. In traveling around the world and visiting various cities and communities, you see even more that it's the women who do the work in most of these communities. They, they do the hard work. They do a lot of the heavy lifting in the villages and in the communities. And they're often the ones who get the least care. In many, in many situations, you find especially in poverty, women feed their families first before they eat, or women and the girls, they feed the men and the boys, and then they, then the girls, then they, themselves. So it's always sort of--women haven't been allowed to learn how to read. I mean, that's a big, big focus is to try to raise the literacy rate among women because even organizations like World Bank, IMF [International Monetary Fund], they're coming to-- Story_ID: 179914 Speaker 1: We were right in the middle of-- Speaker 2: I'm talking about-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): The YWCA [USA] and statistics with-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, about that, yes, I was talking about the, the-- Speaker 1: The economic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the economic disparities, yeah. Speaker 1: --and the (unclear) coming around the world (unclear) the cultural-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum, that's true. That's what I was talking-- Speaker 1: --(unclear) and the strengths that make it difficult to-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum, make it difficult. And the YWCA--and also I was also talking about the efforts now to, to educate women and girls because it--many of the, the major funding agencies like World Bank and IMF [International Monetary Fund] have realized that the way to development is through women. You know, if you get the women educated, they're going to raise the level in their communities. The whole issue around health and, and AIDS, and all of things that need to be addressed can start with educating women so it's, it's a major issue. The World YWCA, which is made up of about almost a hundred countries, national associations around the world, has launched a twenty-five million dollar campaign to raise money for leadership development around the world, a global campaign to help in those, in those efforts. And, indeed, YWCAs around the world are already initiating programs along that line. Story_ID: 179915 Speaker 1: What are some of the other organizations you volunteer-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm now the Chair of the Board of The Community Foundation for the National Capital Area [sic, Region] [Washington, D.C.]. And the Community Foundation here is--well, it's, it is the same concept as the Chicago [Community] Trust [Chicago, Illinois], you know, it's a community foundation. I wish we had the assets of the Chicago Trust but we're doing very well. We have about $250 million in assets. And the Community Foundation is an interesting animal. It's about building philanthropy in a community and pulling together a community of donors and trying to get the, those donors to concentrate on the needs of the community. And it often serves as a catalyst for the discussion around very delicate issues or issues that are not often addressed. For instance, here in the YWCA [USA]--I mean in the Community Foundation--we just had a conference on day laborers and around the whole issue of day laborers here in the area and what life is like, what obstacles they face, what, what are the-- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are some of the obstacles that--? Speaker 2: Well, most of them are around not getting paid. For instance, many of them congregate on a corner. A lot of 7-Elevens have allowed the day laborers to come and congregate. And people who need, particularly in the gardening industry, you know, they come by and they get the people to work in the--cut the grass. Speaker 1: So a truck of (simultaneous). Speaker 2: So, yeah, yeah, or any employer who's looking for somebody to help him do something for a day. They can come, but because they don't have any protection about actually getting paid, many of them don't get paid. They're promised the wages and they are not often, you know, some of them are here illegally. Interestingly-- Speaker 1: So they have no rights to sue or anything-- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They have no rights to, they have no rights to sue. Then, of course, there are health issues around that. They have--then the ones who are even here with the day laborers, another major issue is even about trying to get their checks cashed or get--sending money back to their family. It cost them sometimes a big portion of their paycheck just to get a check cashed. So those are the kinds of issues. It was an eye opener for me. And, interestingly enough, this county, Montgomery County [Maryland] is really addressing a lot of it. I was very happy to hear there's an organization here called CASA de Maryland that is a, a support organization. It's a place where day workers can go and they can get help in various areas. The county executive is very much involved. And what he said was interesting to me, that they don't really care about the, the illegality of the status of the immigrants who are here because that's an INS [later, U.S. Department of Homeland Security] problem. They're concerned as people in the community and trying to provide services for the people who live here. So I thought that was interesting because you would think that they'd also be trying to get the illegal aliens and trying to send them back, but that's not a focus of the, of the local counties. That's a federal issue, they say. Story_ID: 179916 Speaker 1: The Community Foundation [for the National Capital Region, Washington, D.C.] is, as I've said, I've just assumed the chairmanship of that board so that will keep me busy. I also serve on the board of the women's museum, the National Museum of Women in the Arts [Washington, D.C.]. I serve on the board of two other arts organizations, the Washington Performing Arts Society [Washington, D.C.]. I was chair of that board for two years several years ago. And I've served on the board of Strathmore [North Bethesda, Maryland], which is an art center in Rockville [Maryland] which is building a world class performing arts venue that I'm really proud of. It's going to be an unbelievable performing space. So, that, I'm still involved to some extent with Wolf Trap [National Park for the Performing Arts, Vienna, Virginia]. Wolf Trap is a performing--it's the only national park for the performing arts. I'm also on the board of the, the Cancer Research and Prevention Foundation [later, Prevent Cancer Foundation, Alexandria, Virginia]. It's an organization that is focused on cancer prevention, and I serve on, on that board. And I'm on the board of an organization called the Black Women's Agenda [Inc.] [Washington, D.C.]. It, it grew, it's an organization that grew out of the international conference for women [The National Women's Conference] in Houston [Texas] back in 1970 [sic, 1977], I think. When the women got together in an international conference and they came out with an agenda, and there was nothing in there about black women. So [HM] Dorothy Height and many of the other kind of women leaders, black women leaders of that time, pulled together what they felt should be an agenda that included, and, and all of--they got all of the other minority groups to support that. And so, after they did that and it was passed, they decided they needed to, to establish an organization to monitor the agenda, and to make sure that a lot of these things happened. So I'm, I'm on the board of that organization, and probably some more that I have (laughter), have left off, you know, in terms of advisory. But I'm also on the board of an organization called Vehicles for Change [Halethorpe, Maryland]. It's a group that provides cars. It's a welfare to work-- Speaker 2: Actual Vehicles (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Actual Vehicles for Change, yeah. So, what this organization does, it's to get donated cars or, in some instances, buys cars and they picks them up, and they sell them for about $750. We, we partner with the local social service agencies to screen the people and, but it comes with a pre-approved loan so that when they pay it off in the few months that they have to pay it off, they've also established a credit record. And it's amazing what a car can do for a family, and not even just getting back and forth to work 'cause people don't often live where the jobs are. So that's number one, trying to help families get to their jobs, but also the recreational activities of the kids to be able to participate that way and have some kind of family life. So that's a very wonderful program and I'm proud of that, too. Story_ID: 179917 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think that there are a lot of issues that we've talked about are the same still. I mean we're still, we're still working for the equal chance, you know. Just look at all the affirmative action issues around affirmative action and the division that has come around affirmative action because people, I don't think, understand really what affirmative action--we've allowed other people to define that issue for us. And I always say that affirmative action is not an end. It's a means to an end. And if we believe in the diversity that this country represents, then there are certain things that you have to do to make sure everybody has an equal shot, you know. If you want to, if you want to reach into a jelly bean jar and pull out a handful of jelly beans with a lot of different colors, you got to put those colors in the jar to begin with. So, you're not gonna be able to reach in and pull out if you don't have it already filled with many different colors. So, I think that's really what the affirmative action--it's not about quotas, it's not about having unqualified people be a part of anything. It's just leveling the, the playing field. I mean, nobody has a problem with it in golf, you know, with a handicap score, or bowling to bring people to a level that when it comes to race. So the concern that I have is that we will continue-- Everybody can continue to have an equal chance to do what this country promises which is to have life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. And I think that's what our country is built on, and I think that's what we all need to try to work on. I'm concerned about the education of our intercity and black kids because I feel that's falling through the cracks. And I think that if we want to have our kids at the college end, we've got to make sure they're prepared in the elementary school, and beginning with elementary school. So somehow, we've got to support schools with more money, teachers who are qualified and, and ded--, you know. I think teachers are dedicated, but I'm not sure they're always qualified. We've got to admit that our kids are not always ready. I think we've not to admit that our kids are not always ready. White people have to admit that they have a privilege of just their skin. So I think once they--if, if those two admissions could be made, I think we could move to a different level of discussion. Story_ID: 179918 Speaker 1: Do you have any ideas about reparations? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm really, I really have a lot of conflict about that because I don't know how you can implement such a thing. I think the reparation comes in the affirmative actions that can be taken now. I don't know that it can be done in a dollar amount at this point because everybody's too mixed up. You see, that's the other issue for me. I think race--this whole thing around race and color is a ridiculous thing because we're all too mixed up to know what--I mean, it's just how you self-identify. It has nothing to do with your racial mixture as to what you call yourself. You call yourself what you have, what you want to identify with so-- Speaker 1: Well, that's true for, that's true for most white people in the United States, but not necessarily true for colored people-- Speaker 2: Well, that's what I'm saying. I mean we identify as African American because, or black, or whatever. I--frankly, I really have always preferred black, black (laughter), but I've always preferred, you know, African American doesn't really describe me. I've never just embraced it. I use it because that's the common usage. Speaker 1: Well, what, what is about it that-- Speaker 2: It doesn't speak perhaps to my entire heritage which I'm not sure, you know, it doesn't describe me as an American. I mean, I have an African part of me, but I also have an European part of me, and I also have a Native American part of me. So, you know, it, it, so that's, that's the issue for me around the term, African American. I mean, I use it, I refer to myself as African American because that's what's how you communicate. That's what you communicate these days. You know, it's changed from Negro to--with a capital "N", to black (laughter), with a capital "B" and, but I felt that somehow, I liked the political nature of black because I think that's more how I want to describe myself as a political force. It's interesting because I've never tried to articulate this until now (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 179919 Speaker 1: You prefer black? Speaker 2: I actually do. I think I actually prefer to identify myself as black because it has more of a political context than a racial ethic. And it, it ties the ethnicity into it because especially as, you know, and my, and my cultural heritage has definitely been, been black, whatever that means in this country [United States]. However, it has played itself out through slavery, through Reconstruction, through whatever has happened within my family and my, my environment. And I don't know that's that, that's African. I don't know if that's American. I know that when I go to, when I've been to--I haven't been to West Africa. I was just talking about that. I've been to East Africa, North, and South Africa. And other than the color of the skin, I don't feel that cultural pull. I feel more of a cultural pull obviously--I mean, interestingly enough, in the West Indies. I feel like in another life, I lived in the Caribbean. I mean, I have that--I seem to have more of affinity there. But because of what I studied in school and learned, when we went to Scotland, you know, I enjoyed seeing Robert Burns, where Robert Burns lived. And, you know, so there's that, there is that cultural pull to the Western culture because that's what I learned in school in America. So it's--that, that's what I'm talking about. You--how do I describe myself is a very difficult one. And I'm not sure it's necessary, you know. I'm not sure that we need to go through all this angst about who we, you know, where we came from and all of that, but to know you are, you know, know who you are, know what you appreciate in life, and find that center core of your being. To me, that's more important. And I know that all of these other influences have come to bear on making me who I am and who I'm trying to--and what I'm trying to do with my own family. Story_ID: 179920 Speaker 1: Do you think that volunteerism is on the rise or in black community or you think it's on the-it's waning? Speaker 2: No, I think that volunteerism is probably on the rise. I think, you know, the United States is very unique as a country that volunteers. I, I was a part of an organization that's called The Hospitality and Information Service [THIS for Diplomats] which provides that for diplomats and their families residing in the Washington [D.C.] area. And they often didn't understand the concept of volunteer--that, some that word sometimes doesn't exist in other languages--this idea of working and giving back to the community. I think black people have always done it through the churches. I mean, we've always done it through our churches and our schools, and that's been the basis of our philanthropy. I am, I'm trying also to expand that understanding of philanthropy through the African American community a little bit more because I don't know that we always step up to the plate in the bigger picture and in the mainstream. And I believe that part of your empowerment comes through giving, and giving, giving money, giving time, giving resources because when you do that, you become a part of the decision making process. And when you become a part of the decision making process, then that's what makes you feel empowered. And you can't do it unless you step up to the plate and you're willing to give, and give in the mainstream, and be at the table. So I think that, that's important to expand the notion of who is a philanthropist. You know, many of us think of philanthropist as being the wealthy, wealthy families, the Rockefellers, and the, you know, whatever. But philanthropy, to me, is plugging in wherever you can and giving back whatever you can, and addressing the broader community that is beyond your own little world. And so, on the one hand, I know that Black people are very involved in volunteering for their school and their kids and, and their churches. And, you know, another thing is that volunteerism also has changed because women don't have, particularly women, 'cause they were the core of the volunteers, don't have that kind of time. I always say, I know it's a privilege for me to be able to give the kind of time I give 'cause I mean my working day is often longer than my husband's working day. And that's a privilege for me to be able to do that. And so, we've had to change how we used volunteerism in organizations so we don't use them the same. We can use them the same way so we have to figure out ways that people can become more involved as volunteers 'cause most people want to. So we have to figure out how to use people's time a little better. I'm a big one now for telephone conference calls, so this idea of going into town, you know--it's a four-hour process for a two-hour meeting. It takes me an hour to get there, two hours of meeting and an hour back so if I can participate by telephone conference call, I think that's much more efficacious. Story_ID: 179921 Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh (laughter). My legacy, you know, I haven't really thought about that but I think that if you, if you mean, what I hope people will remember is that I always gave it my best shot. You know, no matter what I do, I try to give it my best shot. I just wrote that to my little grandson yesterday. He was instant messaging me. He's almost ten so he just got a--he was in a basketball camp and he was named in his age group the best basket. So I said, you know, that shows you really gave everything you had and always give it your best shot. So maybe that's one of my favorite phrases, Give it your best shot, because I always do. I mean, I always try in everything that I do to do the best I know how to do, and also I've, I've done that and even my kids always talk about my dressing. You know, I always try to give it my best shot when I go out because when they would go to the store sometimes, I would say, "Gosh, are you going out looking like that?" And they say, "Oh, I'm just going to the store." I said, but you know, that's--people see you when you go to the store. I mean, your impressions--impressions are made in fifteen seconds, and so sometimes that's all the time you have. But I think that my legacy would be that I was involved, I cared, and I did the best I knew how, how to do. We have a wonderful family, and I hope that my kids--one thing that we are very proud of is that our children are very wonderful parents. I think they're far better parents than we were (laughter). And, and, of course, the grandchildren are, are just superb (laughter). They're the most wonderful. And I think that's part of our legacy is our, is our children. And some of the things that I'm working on and for, I hope will--our grandchildren will reap the benefits, you know. As I've been an advocate for cancer and particularly breast cancer, I talk about that because my mother [biological mother, Frances Lawson Clement] died of breast cancer. And my father said she never even said the word, cancer, during the time because you just didn't even talk about it. To me, as a cancer survivor--and I'm hoping that my daughters and my granddaughters won't even have to deal with that, with breast cancer in their lives. So I think that that legacy kind of passes on of advocacy and adding whatever efforts I can make to issues that I care about. Story_ID: 179922 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently looking back on your life? Speaker 2: If I, you know, I talk about that. I probably would do something different in my education. I think I would--I seem to have an interest now more in business and I think I probably would have gotten an MBA if that had been even among the array of things that I would think about doing. I mean, women just didn't even think about that. Even though I went to a woman's college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and we were, we majored in everything, it was always really towards being a teacher of that subject. It was not so much, you know, doing. And I think I've become more fascinated by business and business governance and corporate governance as, even as it relates to not-for-profit. I'm very much interested because I'm--the thing that's important for me is accountability. And I think that accountability comes through proper governance. Story_ID: 179923 Speaker 1: One last question. It's slightly different from legacy but the way you answered legacy, it may be, almost be the same thing but-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I guess it is the same thing (laughter) because I think I answered it. Speaker 1: Yeah, you --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That I answered it, I answered it like that. You know, I think that people, people re-- remember me, I think, more for my style because that's the comment that I almost have people under--I guess I have a distinct style. I have a distinct way of, of doing things so that's what people often comment about. Speaker 1: In what way is that? Speaker 2: Well, a fashion style, I think. Many times people come and they say, oh, I just saw something and I--when I saw it, I thought of you. And so, I feel that if that, when that happens, that's because your, your, something--this happens to me all the time. And it's just usually something that's kind of exotic or whatever (laughter). And so, so I think that--but not only just in, in the fashion, but how you act, how you behave. I've always tried to be a mediating force, I know, in the, in the YWCA [USA] and with--when we've had factions, I've always tried to, you know, be able to bridge. And I think I've been able to, to, to do those kind of things, to be the mediator, mediator in the family, be--try to be the one who listens. You know, so those are, those, I think, are things that probably--I would hope that people would remember about, about me, that I wasn't aggressive or confrontational or that I got the job done. And I carried whatever organization that I led, that I carried it forward to a different place. Story_ID: 179924 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You can go and talk now. Speaker 2: All right. This is a picture, one of the earliest pictures I remember of me when I was about two or three years old. I just like it because what I see is my grandchild--when I see my granddaughters now, I can see how much the family resemblance is there 'cause I have a few who look like that picture. Speaker 1: Okay, about what year is this? Speaker 2: Well, let's see, if I was about three, that'd be about 1938, '39 [1939]. I was born in 1936 so I don't remember if I was two or three. It looks like I'm about two maybe. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I'm not sure of the year of this, but I think I must have been about eight or nine on this picture. And it represents four generations at that time. There is me standing in front of my father [William Clement], who's standing next to his father [Arthur Clement], who's standing behind his mother [Emma Clement]. So that represents the four generations. I remember my great-grandmother. Speaker 1: What, what, what are their names? Speaker 2: Emma Clement is her name. My father is William Clement, and his father is Arthur Clement. Speaker 1: Do you know what was happening that day? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I believe we were in Cleveland, North Carolina. And we used to go there sometimes in the summers just to visit. And it was a farm and that was a different kind of existence, you know, to go and visit for, for a couple of weeks or a week or so at the farm. So I'm sure that's what that was. That was just a family visit there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: This picture is taken with my parents, my mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] and father about--oh, I guess, about eight years ago. I was chair of a large fundraising event for the American Cancer Society here in Washington [D.C.]. It was a fashion luncheon that featured the designs of a French designer and these were the designs that were shown for the first time in this country by this designer, Ungaro. So it was a, it was a fashion show and my parents came up to support me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Let's see- Speaker 1: About, about what year is this? Speaker 2: About, if that's about, it's seven or eight years ago, that would be what? This is 2003. That'd be 1995, somewhere in there, 1990-- yeah. Speaker 1: Yep. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my husband [Aaron Jackson] and me taken actually in 2002, last year. It was at an event that I chaired and for the Intercultural Cancer Council and we were sitting, I guess, at a table or something. Speaker 1: What city was that? Speaker 2: This was in Washington at the Omni Shoreham Hotel here in Washington, D.C. It was the Biennial Symposium of the Internati-, Intercultural Cancer Council that was held in February of 2002. And I was chair of the symposium and we had a big dinner. Have you all- Speaker 1: Okay, yep, okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yes I think we did, we ate it for breakfast the next morning. This is our wedding day which is almost exactly forty-five years ago. We were married in June of 1958, so we've just celebrated our forty-fifth wedding anniversary. And as you can see, neither of us has changed much (laughter), so that was a- Speaker 1: Where, where were you married? Speaker 2: We were married in Durham, North Carolina in my home in Durham on Pico Street and we had a, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is my engagement announcement that was in, I believe, the Pittsburgh Courier, a newspaper which was the major, one of the major African American papers at that time. So it was, just announcement of our engagement and our wedding plans. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I've chaired a lot of social events over my years in Washington. And this is one that I chaired for the Wolf Trap [National Park for Performing Arts, Vienna, Virginia]. It's the Wolf Trap, the National Park for Performing Arts at Wolf Trap. And I--the salute was to Morocco, and so all the decorations and the whole thing was around Morocco. And the woman, Mrs. Benaissa is the wife of the ambassador [Ambassador Mohamed Benaissa] at that time from Morocco, and so that is a picture of us sitting together. The, the ball is held on the stage of the Filene Center [Wolf Trap National Park for the Performing Arts]. And so this--and I, I made this caftan that I wore that night when--sewed all these jewels and stuff on them, so that's, that was my outfit for the evening. Speaker 1: (Unclear)? Speaker 2: I just--yes, he is. I just--he just spoke at my cousin's funeral. This is at the White House. It was a reception that the Clintons had for the Wolf Trap, for their thirtieth anniversary, so I was meeting the President [Bill Clinton]. Speaker 1: Okay, and where was this? Speaker 2: This was in, this was in one of the rooms--may have been the East Room of the White House 'cause they hosted a reception for the Wolf Trap Board and donors and all that. And this was--I don't know what year, somewhere between '90 [1990] and--it probably was in his first term, so I just don't remember. Is that the same? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Is that, it's the same time, doesn't it say? Speaker 1: It didn't put the year on it. Speaker 2: It doesn't put the year- Speaker 1: Yours is (unclear). Speaker 2: --1998, '99 [1999], somewhere in there. Okay. Well, this is, this is a reception. And, and my husband and I are standing with the President and Mrs. Clinton [Hillary Clinton]. Speaker 1: Same event? Speaker 2: Same event, same event. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That looks like the Blue Room actually 'cause I see the blue rug and the blue chairs, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I'm rolling on that. Speaker 2: All right. I think this was about 1996 or '97 [1997], somewhere in there. But I--here again, I was chairing a fundraising event for the Howard University Medical School [Washington, D.C.]. It was their 125th Anniversary and Bill Cosby was the entertainment for the evening. And I'm standing with my husband and two of my daughters. On my life side is my oldest daughter, Celia, and on my husband's right is our daughter, Emily. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It probably was like a Brownie Camp. Speaker 1: (Unclear) out of focus on- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I'm on a roll. So this picture is out of focus. Yeah, it's not just me, okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Yeah, it probably is. Speaker 2: As tight as you can get is, that's it, yeah, okay. Go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture taken at Y-Teen Camp near Durham, North Carolina. I used to go there, and then also I was a counselor there after I got older, but I must have been about twelve years old then, so this would have been about 1948, somewhere in there. I don't remember the--who the friend is in the middle, but the friend on the right is named Julia Margaret, Julia Wheeler [Taylor], and Julia is now the President of the Mechanics and Farmers Bank in Durham, North Carolina. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken in 1985. I remember it was a trip to Taiwan that was sponsored really by the government of Taiwan and their women's--the woman who was in charge of their women's affairs here in Washington. And she invited seven women leaders. At the time, I was president of the YWCA [USA] here in the National Capital Region. And this is a reception that was given by the Minister of Foreign Affairs in Taiwan. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right. This picture was made, I guess, about 1964, I think, '64 [1964] or '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: (Unclear) --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't know the, the people. The occasion was--I, I was at that time the president of the chapter of Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority, Inc.] there in Mississippi at, at Itta Bena [Mississippi] in Greenwood [Mississippi] at Mississippi Valley State College [later, Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi]. The little boy holding the pillow is my son, Gordon [Jackson]. And we were crowing this girl who raised the mon-- most money. It's an event that the Deltas used to have a lot called Jabberwock. It was a fundraising event, so that's a picture from that era in my life in Mississippi. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: All right. This is a picture that was taken during the same trip to Taiwan. And all of these women were women who were presidents of organizations and who were invited to go. And we were really hosted--while it was sponsored by the, the government of Taiwan, we were hosted by women leaders in Taiwan. So we visited Taipei [Taiwan] and other countries, Guishan [Taoyuan City, Taiwan], and other countries, other cities in Taiwan, so that's a group picture of us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right. This is a picture that was taken in our home in Atlanta [Georgia]. My mother and father and my brother, who looks like he's about a year old, so that would make me about seven and a half or, or eight on this picture. And so, this was in our house that we lived it in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: This was taken in front of my dormitory at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]. And the guy on my right is now my husband. We were dating and going steady then, Aaron Jackson. And this was his roommate and our still good friend, Peter Shirtark [ph.] who's now a plastic surgeon in Seattle, Washington. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Oh, this is me with an armful of babies. These are our twins at the--they look like they must have been less than two. I know they were about a year and a half maybe on this, about a year old--if I was still able to hold them both, in front of our apartment building in Washington, D.C. so this was in 1960. It was probably the spring of '60 [1960] or the fall, summer of '60 [1960]. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Okay, all right. Speaker 2: This picture was taken in front of Sisters Chapel on Spelman's campus. It was my graduation from college. And my mother is standing there and two of my brothers. My brother, the smaller one is Arthur [Clement], and the older, the taller one is Wesley [Clement]. And standing right behind my mother is my cousin, Sandra Jackson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So this was in 1956. Here, the Afro. Speaker 1: '72 [1972], huh? Speaker 2: (Laughter), why sure, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, we're rolling on this one. Speaker 2: All right. This is a picture of my handing over the gavel to the new President of the Resident and Intern Wives' Club at Iowa City at the University of Iowa in Iowa City in 1972. I was president. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. This is one of these moments in time pictures in a family because this was at a wedding of my oldest son. And in India, he married a young woman from India. And my husband and I went to the wedding. And she wanted me to wear a sari so in about two days, they made a sari for me and I wore it. And everybody was amazed that I wore it so well. They couldn't believe that it was the first time I'd had on a sari. Unfortunately, they are no longer, they're no longer married, but we stay in touch with, with her. She lives in this country, and my son lives in California. Speaker 1: Okay (unclear). Speaker 2: All right. This is a picture that was made in Kenya at a village where I had gone with the YWCA and the YWCA of Kenya to visit the women that they support in income-generating projects. And so, these were the women in that village who welcomed us that day and showed us some of the things that they were doing. This was in 1990-- I would say 1997, or maybe 1998, in the spring of 1998. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the people's names (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: No, I don't, unfortunately. But there was--they lived way, way off the main roads. We drove for an hour and a half on dirt roads to get back up in that village. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, tell me about it. Speaker 2: All right. This was at a reception and I don't remember the occasion. It must have been something for [HM] Dorothy Height. She has on a flower. But that, the woman on the far left is Camille Cosby. Next to her is Ann Stallard who was then, I think, the National President of the YWCA before I was. And then the picture of me and a picture of Dorothy Height in the blue. So this was here in Washington at the Four Seasons, I do remember that, the Four Seasons Hotel. Speaker 1: Good. Speaker 2: All right. This is a picture that was taken of the four recent National Chairs of the Board of the YWCA of the USA. So those are the, yes- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) left to right. Speaker 2: Yes, from left to right, there's Glendora Putnam who is from Boston [Massachusetts]. Then there's a picture of me as outgoing chair. And then there's a picture of Ann Stallard, who was the chair before me, and a picture of Lettie Piaz, Leticia Paez from El Paso [Texas] who was the incoming chair at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: All right. This picture was taken in the Philippines. I was coming out of a hut which you can tell, like it was hard for me to even stand up to come through that door. But it was a part of a visit that the YWCA--I went with the YWCA looking at women in poverty in the Philippines. I'm trying to think of the year. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: 1994-- Story_ID: 179925 Speaker 1: This picture, I guess, was made about 1995. I don't remember exactly. Would it have been that long ago? I don't know. But this was held at--this was a press conference, after a press conference that was held in the Senate caucus room on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]. And the young woman in the black on the left was from South Africa. And she had, she had been a part of the women's groups that had helped to write the constitution for the new South Africa. And so, this con-, this press conference was just to honor that occasion of the new Constitution and the women's role in it. [HM] Dorothy Height in the blue. I'm standing there with the leopard scarf. And the woman is Navase Louie [ph.] who was the mother of my then daughter-in-law from India. She was visiting from India. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture of just my family group at my parents' [William Clement and Josephine Dobbs Clement] fiftieth wedding anniversary in 1991. So there were a lot of us then. There are even more of us now (laughter)--near twenty-two in my family group. So this was in Durham, North Carolina at the hotel where they had their fiftieth anniversary celebration. Speaker 2: Did you say year? Speaker 1: 1991. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. Speaker 1: Her back is to (laughter). Speaker 2: That's okay. We'll--okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken at the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court had musicals, musicales where they would have, they had a beautiful Steinway piano and they would often have concerts. And so, this is a picture taken with me and Justice Byron White. His wife and I were friends and he was always, you know, was a very affable man- Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: So, saw him often. Speaker 2: (Unclear) I'm sorry, about what year is this? Speaker 1: Oh, gosh, I don't know. Probably around, between '90 [1990] and'92 [1992] because I think I was Chair of the Board of the Washington Performing Arts Society at that time. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: All right. This is a picture taken at the Care Ball a few years ago. Mary Kennedy and I served on the committee together. And that's a picture of her and her husband, Justice Arthur Kennedy [sic, Justice Anthony Kennedy]. Is it Arthur Kennedy? Yeah- Speaker 2: Yeah, Justice Kennedy. Speaker 1: Justice Arthur Kennedy. It's on the back of there, and my husband and me. I, I'm pretty sure it's Arthur. Speaker 2: It's Anthony actually. Speaker 1: Is it Anthony? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, too. Speaker 1: It is Anthony. But, see, I thought it was, oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Anthony Kennedy, 1995, good. Speaker 1: Yeah, Anthony Kennedy. Speaker 2: He's covered it (unclear). Speaker 1: 'Cause his mother forgot- Speaker 2: We're rolling. Speaker 1: Okay. The fun thing about this picture is that we were all in a meeting in Seoul, Korea. And we had just gotten a lot of African clothes and we were trying them on. The African women, who were delegates from their countries, brought these wonderful things to sell. They always bring things to sell to the meetings, so we all bought clothes. And I came home with African clothes from Korea (laughter). Speaker 2: Right on. Speaker 1: This was in 1991. It might be on the back of the picture. Speaker 2: Okay. This is real Seoul to soul conference. Speaker 1: Yeah, Seoul to soul. That's great. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right. This is a picture of my step-mother, Josephine Ophelia Dobbs [Clement] who is class of '37 [1937] at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. The occasion was my receiving an honorary doctorate from Spelman. And so, in my remarks, I paid tribute to my two Spelman mothers. And this is the mother that I knew most of my life, Josephine, and the--are you going to do them one at a time? How are you doing it? Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, you want to go here? Speaker 1: Okay. And this is a picture of my birth mother [Frances Lawson Clement]. This is from her yearbook picture. She finished in the class of '33 [1933] and was actually a classmate of one of my other mother's sister, so they were classmates. She died, as I have said earlier, when I was four years old, and she died of breast cancer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this--are you ready? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. This is another picture during that event. It's actually in the home of the president, who is [HM] Audrey Manley, who's handing me a pewter platter which is something that is presented also to various honorees at Spelman. And this was following the, the convocation where I received the degree. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And this was in 1998 that my mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] had just been dead two weeks when that happened. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: All right. This, this is an ad that I did as an volunteer for the Pharmaceutical and Manufacturers and Research Association. They had a series of what they called faces ads. This is not the face of--and so, on my picture is, This is not the face of cancer. This is the face of Alexine Clement Jackson, and it goes on to talk about survivorship. So it appeared in, in several magazines for a couple of years and that was about four years ago. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Can you lean it forward also (unclear) it's getting a glare, a little more (unclear) less, sorry. We're go ahead and talk about it. Speaker 1: This is a, a photograph that was part of a photographic essay that's--it was in the Washingtonian magazine which is a magazine published here in Washington. They did a series--I think there were five women. And they was highlighting women who were in their 60's who still were active and doing things and hadn't dropped by the wayside yet. So this picture appeared about two years ago, maybe three years ago, 19-, 2-, I mean, 2000, in the year 2000 probably. Speaker 2: (Unclear). It's 'cause the page is curled actually. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, at the bottom. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll get it (unclear)- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That's good actually (unclear). Speaker 2: Put the rubber band- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, if I'd do a rubber band, I gotta turn, turn it this way. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: This picture is a part of an article that was in Ebony magazine in their women's issue, I think, in 2000-- 1999-- Speaker 1: Yeah, '99 [1999]. Speaker 2: 1999. And they highlighted the, the--the title of the article is the Diversity of Today's Black Women. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm sorry (unclear). Speaker 2: "The Diversity of Today's Black Woman" and it showed several women who are doing different things--the opposite page from me is Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee from Texas. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: All right. This is a picture that appeared in advertising supplement in a magazine for, also for the pharmaceutical industry. And my husband [Aaron Jackson] is proud 'cause he took the picture. They were supposed to send out a photographer. And the photographer didn't show so he--we just took pictures. And so they, they took the picture and used it, but it's a picture of me and my grandchildren in our living room around the piano. It's not all the grandchildren but it, there was some of them. That was some of them who were there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Maybe it was all at the time...