 Story_ID: 9307 Speaker 1: So I'm just going to start out. First I want you to state your name, and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Okay. Emil Jones Jr. that's spelled E-M-I-L J-O-N-E-S, Junior, J-R. Story_ID: 9308 Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Jesus, I don't have any favorite time. I like all times of the year really. But usually the spring basically. Because that's when things began to blossom, life and everything. So, I like spring. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I've got a lot of--I've got lots of those, you know. Speaker 1: Your favorite one? Speaker 2: A lot of quotes from [William] Shakespeare, you know. Speaker 1: Cool. Speaker 2: "To be or not to be," you know, I like that. From 'Hamlet.' That's a phrase, you know. And I really tell you when I deal with issues and so forth and everything, but I usually except it or go ahead and try to get rid of it. Speaker 1: And your favorite food? Speaker 2: Spaghetti. I love Italian food. Speaker 1: Good. Okay. Speaker 2: Lots of pasta. Story_ID: 9309 Speaker 1: I'd like you to just talk about growing up. You were born here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So I'd like you to talk about your family. Who your mother and father were, and, you know. What, what it was like growing up. Speaker 2: Now? Okay good. Well I grew up in Morgan Park which is the far South Side of the city of Chicago. It's out there around 113th and Aberdeen. There were eight children. I was one of eight children. I was the fifth child, the oldest of the boys. My mother and my father lived there with us. We--my mother never worked. She was always at home. We had our own house that we lived in. We were poor. Even though my dad worked all the time. We were poor and so it was like suburbia more or less. And way out that far mostly residential homes. We had all extremes. We had some of the wealthy individuals living in the community and then we had the poor like myself. Speaker 1: Where did your father work? And, I mean--you know. Can you just sort of describe your family life? Speaker 2: He, he--my father drove a garbage truck for a number of years. Then he became a bailiff to one of the judges, Duke Slater who was from the Morgan Park community. He played football at [University of] Iowa . He became his personal bailiff for a number of years. And then, in the community, a small community, they all called my dad 'Judge.' And so he was involved politically and everything. And we went to the public school out there John D. Shoop Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], all my sisters and brothers. They went to Morgan Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] and I--but I went to [Edward] Tilden Technical High School [Chicago, Illinois] which was an all boys school. And my mother was always home when we went to school. She'd give us our breakfast, lunch, and dinner. She, she never worked. She was there for her children. Speaker 1: What, what I would like to know-were there--do you have any favorite childhood memories that you know you think--think you--you know you think that you would just like to share or you know--. Speaker 2: Well we had fun as children. We were poor, but we had fun. It was a very adventurous sort of life. It was like the rural area predominant homeowners and we did everything. As a matter of fact, we even--I tell people we raised chickens. We'd get chickens from Montgomery Ward and Sears. So we always had plenty to eat. We had gardens that we--on the vacant lots. We raised vegetables in the gardens. So we had fun as children and I, I'd--I really didn't realize that we were really poor. You know, when we talk about welfare today--I recall one day at school they bought me a box of clothes at school. You know this was--these were--I guess they felt I was a child who was in need and they would give children who were in need clothing and things of that nature. I had a fun life as a child because there were so many things that we could do. The games that we could play, people would leave their doors open, you know. Even though it was in the city of Chicago, it was a very fun life. Speaker 1: Now, with your siblings you said you were the fifth child. What type of child were you? Were you, you know--. Speaker 2: I was mischievous. In school, I was very mischievous. I had--it was fun, but I was more or less a jokester. I played tricks on people and do various things. As the oldest of the boys, we had a coal stove and my job in the winter time especially was to make sure that the house was nice and warm before my dad got up to go to work. And so I had to go to bed thinking about waking up the next morning. I didn't have an alarm clock. I only overslept one time during that period of time, but when he got through with me I would go to bed at night thinking about waking up in the morning. And 'til day, I can wake up. I don't need and alarm clock to wake up in the morning. And these were various chores I had as the oldest of the boys. My dad always said, "You got to set an example for your brothers," you know. So I had paper routes. I always had an odd job working when I was a kid. I had a morning paper route, and an afternoon paper route, and then I did all my chores, and then I went to school. And again, it was a lot of fun. Story_ID: 9310 Speaker 1: Your father. Can you describe him a little bit more, what type of man he was, how he influenced you? Speaker 2: Well, he was very--he was a disciplinarian more or less, you know. And we kids, we did receive what you call corporal punishment. And I received that in school equally as well. I recall one day I had done something at school and I got sent home. My dad had to take off from work, to come to school and I must have been in about sixth grade or something. When he got through with me I--he never had to come to school anymore. That lasted me all the way through grammar school and high school and everything. But he was a strict disciplinarian more or less. And out there anyone that grew up during that period of time you know--they would send you out and--out in the yard to get a switch was something. They were gonna give you--they call that co--corporal punishment, cruel and mean. But I think all those who came along during that period of time you know were--. And my father--I don't, I don't--he didn't have a high school education nor did my mother you know. And--but they had different philosophies that they often espoused. You know what I mean. "You make your bed hard you're going to have to lay in it." You know all of those different things, "A hard head makes a soft tail." That was their way of trying to get you to do various things and I believe it worked. Speaker 1: Were they from Chicago [Illinois], or where were they from? Speaker 2: They had lived in that community since around 1919. They originally came from of--my mother came from Selma, Alabama, and my father was from Columbus, Georgia. And they moved to Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois neighborhood]--they lived on the South Side briefly on around 43rd Street. And then they moved to Morgan Park. And that's where I you know. Since around 1919 or somewhere along in there. Story_ID: 9311 Speaker 1: Can you describe Chicago at the time that you were growing up. And, describe Morgan Park. But also try to provide a (unclear) Speaker 2: Well, Morgan Park for an African American--. Speaker 1: One thing, when I ask a question, you just need to stop a little bit before you answer so I--I'm not--I won't be--. Speaker 2: Okay. Morgan Park at that time was a very isolated community. And for African Americans, it was like a pocket. And having contact with the South side of the city of Chicago--wWest side was sort of strange. Because due to transportation we didn't really come in contact. It was like a suburbial, suburban, rural community at that time. I didn't know too much about apartments and things of that nature. My grandmother lived at 46th and South Park at that time. It was always an adventure when I was a kid to go down there. Because then you'd see all the apartments, the bright lights, and stores and things of that nature. So we were sort of isolated from the rest of the city of Chicago as far as African Americans were concerned. And in the '50s I believe then there had been a big migration. There was movement of people from the south, as well as moving out further south. Eventually we came in more and more contact. When I started high school, and went to Tilden that's when I became more aware as to the South side. Because a lot of individuals who went to school with me lived in those areas. But it was just like an isolated community more or less. Just like some parts of suburbia. Which is--everyone in our community knew each other. And so it had its checks and balances. You go out and you're doing something wrong the parents of those--Other parents would discipline you more or less. And the parents supported it. So, we all knew each other. The teachers at our school most of them lived right in the community. Right on the block where I lived a couple of the teachers lived. So, therefore, your parents would come in contact with them at the store, or in the community, or at church. That's how I basically grew up. Speaker 1: I mean you were taught--. Speaker 2: --So we'd walk and we'd go back to school. And nowadays kids have to be bused that distance. You know. But one of the things--I had a paper route early in the morning. I would leave home some times around 4:30 or 5:00 in the morning. To pick up my newspapers at the Morgan Park or Beverly News Agency and deliver the newspapers. And it was safe. Can you understand what I'm saying to you? And my sons today, I couldn't let my sons go out the house that time of the morning to do those types of things you know. But there was no worry. But again, it was fun. And we had so many eggs from the chickens that my brother and I used to throw eggs at each other. You know. But the snakes in the spring under the rocks that we would find, the garden snakes. And I recall one of my friends at lunch time we found this snake. So we had ace caps. He put the snake in my cap. He put the cap over--his cap over my cap. We went to class. That was the social studies class. And as he got up to go to the wastebasket, and he passed my desk and handed me my cap with the snake in it. I held it for a while until the snake started to wiggle and I dropped it. The snake hit the floor and all the girls hit the top of the desks. But it's those type things. But that was all fun. I didn't realize girls could run so fast. And those were the fun, fun things we had as children growing up, you know. Story_ID: 9312 Speaker 1: Now what teacher--you were talking about Barbara Sizemore earlier. I mean what teacher had an influence so that you were--. Speaker 2: Miss Evelyn Jackson. That was my eighth grade teacher. And what's so amazing about her, she told us we were Africans and all this other stuff. She explained all that stuff at a very--when we were there. But she was a disciplinarian as well. But she taught us to respect adults. She--whenever an adult would come into the classroom, everyone would stand. The person who was seated closest to the door would get a seat and that--for that person. They'd get a chair so that person could sit down. And we didn't sit down until we were told to sit down. She was one of those teachers, I found out later, was an FTB (full-time basic teacher), but a very good teacher. And that's the person I look back on. As a matter of fact, I got elected to office in 1972. In 1976 all of our students who had her, had a big party for her. And we honored her. Of course, she was alive then, Miss Evelyn Jackson. But she had a profound effect on me. Teaching us to respect adults--And to show you how it carries on, I was at an elementary school to speak. This youngster had her, I guess, fifteen years after I did. And I, I began to tell this very story. He said, "Come to my classroom. I want to show you something. " As soon as I walked in the door, every one of the children jumped to their seat, and another youngster at the door went and got a seat. She passed it on to the children. She was dynamic, tremendous influence on all of us. Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, I want to go to your high school. A time at [Edward] Tilden Technical High School. And you said it was--. Speaker 2: --It was an all boys school. Tilden was at 4747 South Union. My father wanted me to receive a technical education--and which we had a lot of math and a lot of science. It was required that you have those courses in order to graduate. And it was fun. You know it was--it was--it was a long trip. It took an hour to travel from Morgan Park to get down to Tilden high school. And, but when I did this I lost contact with many of the children that I originally grew up with. Because most of them went to Morgan Park. But at Tilden, it was required you have, I think three years of math. I had four years of drafting, architectural drawing. I had two years of science, which was physics and chemistry. And all these subjects were required plus shop as well. And many things I learned at Tilden, anything happen around my house, be it electrical or plumbing or anything of that nature or just repairs, I knew how to do it. So it gave you a good sound basis for a lot of technical stuff that we deal with today in the world. Speaker 1: As a technical school, was it--was it--was it all--was it all black? Speaker 2: No, no it, it--it was not all black. It was--at that time it couldn't have been no more than about 20 percent black at that time. We always had a lot of fights. There were a lot of fighting going on at the games that we would have. And even after school, racial fights. Those things did take place. But it was an integrated school. And those who went to Morgan Park, you know--Morgan Park was an integrated school. It had, had been integrated for--since I guess around the teens. And Tilden was an integrated all boys school. A technical high school, not vocational, technical. Story_ID: 9313 Speaker 1: Now, what was Chicago [Illinois] like during those times? I mean, can you--I mean Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I didn't learn really about the separation until I guess when I went to college I found out more about it. I just didn't--it wasn't--We wasn't exposed to it. Do you understand what I'm saying to you? We were not--at [Edward] Tilden [Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois] we had racial fights and everything, but the real segregation aspect we didn't--I didn't find out about that. I knew in elementary school all of us were all black students at the time. But in high school, it was just the opposite. And I believe during that period of time, you had more integrated schools than you have now. See? But I only found out later in life about the segregation as far as community. How people's real attitudes--how people really felt about one another, yes. Speaker 1: Now you graduated in 1953, then you went on to Loop from there? Speaker 2: I went to Roosevelt University at first. Speaker 1: Which was--Okay. Speaker 2: I went there and stayed there a year and a half. Then I got, got--I started making a little money when I went out to the work force. I had wanted to become an accountant. But I didn't like that. You know, so I began working. And then I went back to school and I went back to Loop College. I said, "I gotta--I must complete my education." And I went back to Loop College [Now Harold Washington College] to study and everything. Speaker 1: Now, who was influencing you at that point? I mean, why did you think that you wanted to be an accountant? Was it your father who was--? Speaker 2: No--it wasn't he. Just associations being around with what field endeavor that you may choose. In high sch--I mean in high school, I had four years of drafting. This is architectural drawing. We were trained. And at one point in time, I thought perhaps I wanted to be an engineer or a draftsmen and everything. So I--when I went off to college, when I went to Roosevelt University, I got more into the business aspect of it. And I--and I, I said, "Perh--" I like numbers. So that's the reason I chose a field of accounting. However in our community that I grew up in as a child, I wasn't exposed to a lot. I was not ex--had the exposure of various occupations and professions. Next door to me a family, they were dentists. And but we didn't socialize with them. I guess we were--they felt that perhaps they were too good for us. And--and all so that--the daughter Beverly was not permitted to play with us. And they were very fair complected and so forth. But these are things I remember. And--but as far as being exposed to the various occupations and professions, I did not have that exposure as such in the social setting in our community. And so I found out more about that when I went to college, yes. Speaker 1: What--I mean there were a lot of black people going to college at that time. And I know--when I've done reading Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I'm not from Chicago but-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But Roosevelt University was like a unique place. Also--But what made you even want to go on to college? Speaker 2: Well it just seemed like everyone--a lot of students at school were going to college, in those days. And so I said, "Hey I want to go to college. " And so I worked and paid my way through college. I paid my way. At that time, the counselors at school didn't give us any information about college. The--it didn't come from my parents. And so as a result, a lot of my classmates were going to college so you began to seek these things out. And that's what I did. That's how I ended up at Roosevelt University. As a matter of fact, Carl McCormick who was at Tilden with me graduated. And, and I looked up and we were both at Roosevelt University. He, he graduated and went on to law school, became a lawyer, became a judge and went to the Appellate Court. But those, those kinds of things happen. So our backgrounds may have been a little different you know, but--I was, I was more or less a self-starter, eager to learn. Speaker 1: What do you think made you a self-starter and (unclear)? Where do you think--Where did that come from? What, what do you think--where it did that, from? Speaker 2: Well partly from my--from my early childhood. My parents more or less. You must get out here and you must work. You must do these various things. And my desire to want to achieve. And so I guess that came from my parents more or less. Pushing me and pushing me and pushing me. Not that they had the exposure, as such, but I felt that you could do much better if you went on to receive a higher education. And that's what I did. Story_ID: 9314 Speaker 1: I want you to really describe the years between 1953 and 1973 when you were, you know, elected to the legislature. What were you doing? What was happening? Speaker 2: Well I went into the insurance business. First I started working at the post office. And I worked at the post office for--I became a carrier. I did that for about one year. And then a friend of mine who was in the insurance business said, "Hey, come on, I want you to be an insurance agent." So I said, "Nah, I don't want to do that." So I was a sub. I was working long hours and making a lot of money. And when you become regular they cut your hours. So one of the guys working with me became a regular. He showed me his paycheck. He had a $118 for two weeks. Two weeks later I was gone, 'cause I was next to make regular. And I became an insurance agent, a double agent for Chicago Metropolitan Insurance Company. I sold insurance and collected insurance, and I did that for almost five years. Then I got involved in the political aspect of, of life. My father was involved but I was not involved. And--(Pause). The insurance gave me the exposure of dealing with people one on one. When you're an insurance man, you know everything about the individuals that you dealt with. And you really knew their habits, you knew what they liked, what they disliked. And so, it gave you an opportunity to be exposed to all different forms of life and people and their habits and everything. And I was watching television in 1960 and they had a debate between--a presidential debate between John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon. That was the first televised debate. And I was watching that and I said, " I really like that guy Nixon." You know, he had a common air about himself. And so I--I became a volunteer in the campaign. And I said, "Heck I like this! It's fun" You follow me? The insurance gave me the exposure I needed to deal with people. So I became actively involved in it. And I would read everything that had to do with politics. And so a friend of mine, Wilson Frost, they had redistricted and they were running for office. So I--we put together that campaign, worked like heck, and he won. And at that time, I was working for the water filtration plant. I was a chlorine-operating engineer. My job there was to put the chlorine in the water at the south district filtration plant. That was one of the most interesting jobs I had. To see how the water is purified from the lake before it comes out the tap in your home to drink. But the chlorine was the most important chemical that went into the water, because it purified it. So that was my job. But I quit that to become his aldermanic secretary. And when I became his aldermanic secretary, he had me--He was a lawyer. He has law offices right here on 134 N. LaSalle in Chicago. And that was a whole new exposure to me. When I got on LaSalle Street, then I realized that all the action evolved right around this little area. The major decisions that made an impact on all the individual lives. And that's when I decided I got to get back in school. I got to--so, I went to school full time then. I was going in the morning, late in the afternoons. I carried twelve to fifteen hours and at the same time, running the aldermanic office. And made the--I was on the Dean's list 'cause I wanted to get myself together. And so, I did that. And in 1972, they redistricted. And it was my opportunity, 'cause I wanted to become a lawyer then. And I had an opportunity to run for the legislature. And there were a lot of folks who said, "Nah you cannot win this district." and then I said,--cause at that time the district was only about 20 percent black out there. And I said, "I can do it." They had what you called 'bullet voting'--cumulative voting for state representatives. And so I went out and purchased twenty little sample voting machines. And my staff and my campaign staff they went door to door educating people on how to give the state representative the three vote which is called the 'bullet vote'. And all the newspapers said, no I cannot win. All the endorsements were not there. And everything. But I won by almost ten thousand votes. And--it's an interesting thing. My father was involved in Morgan Park and Beverly. He was involved in the old 19th Ward Democratic Organization at the time. So he was saying, "Well I know all those white folks there which you didn't connect with they're going to vote for my--" had a hard time testing, said, "No, they're not going to vote for (unclear)--definitely knowing them in that context. But also to know them--that I would be there representative in Springfield [Illinois]. And that's why I got the bullet--this, this race. And that's how I won. Story_ID: 9315 Speaker 1: I want to go back to your father [Emil Jones Sr.] and his involvement. Did that really--I mean, you said the fact that you had worked on--Who, who really started you out? Was it your father's role that he played? Speaker 2: His role--the--his role, he was already involved with perhaps opening the doors. But nothing was given to me. I started out just a volunteer. A political volunteer going, a gofer going door to door. Knocking on people's doors and encouraging them to come out to vote. But also, I read all the material. When I say read the material, anything that had to do with government. How the pieces meshed together. And you got federal, state, and local government. How these three pieces worked together. When I became secretary to an alderman, I had an insight as to even more in depth of how all the funding mechanisms--How it actually worked. So when I, so when I went to Springfield, it was just another place. I already understood how the pieces fit together. Too often a person come into your office and want to see you about something. They usually come right to the alderman. But in many instances it's not the alderman's responsibility. And there's nothing the alderman can do about it. But just to know the responsibilities of government and so forth I, by having read all the material--And one thing I appreciated about school is civics. The civics that I had in school--Unfortunately they don't do that now. I understood how it actually worked. And that's the most important thing. My father, my father was involved. But I knew, I knew he knew--I knew he was not gonna go where he would have liked to have gone. Due to education discrimination. He was not gone make that. No question about it. I guess he, he'd be very--he, he passed in 1980 but I guess he'd be very proud to see his son become the leader that he did in the Illinois Senate. But the driving force here is what you call a strong work ethic. I had chores to do. I had work to do around the house. I had to do all those things. And so it doesn't bother me to go out and do it. I love meeting people. I love going knocking on doors. Nowadays, you know, people who want to seek public office they want to come out here. But, they don't want to do this other piece. But if you think you're too good to do that piece, you're not going to be effective as a leader. Story_ID: 9316 Speaker 1: Joe Robichaux became the ward committeeman. And in the race in 1967, Gus Savage was running, Jim Montgomery ran, Wilson Frost and it may have been someone else. So I was with the political organization. Gus Savage I guess and Jim Montgomery they were running as independents. But we won. And I recall one day--had a big snowstorm in '67 [1967]. And, and looked up and there was Gus Savage on TV getting all the exposure. 'Cause everyone was locked in, due to the snow. But we worked hard. We went door to door, door to door. I recall going to a lady's house. She said, "Why are you out here in all of this snow?" I said, "I'm out here because it is that important. That--I want you to understand why you should participate and support this person." And so we worked and we won. And he was re-elected every year thereafter until he left and became a member of the--He ran for the Board of Tax Appeals of Cook County. And then Gus Savage in later years around '78 [1978] or '76 [1976] ran and he became a [U.S.] Congressman. I guess Jim Montgomery I don't think he ever ran again. But when Harold Washington was elected mayor he became his Corporation Counsel. And I became a State Representative. But out of that political organization Wilson Frost built, we elected a state representative. We had two state representatives out of our organization. We elected a county commissioner. We elected a member of the Board of Tax Appeals. We had all phases of government, except the congressional office, out of our organization which--When a person would come in the organization, whatever that problem was, there was someone there who could deal with the problem initially. And that's the background from which I came out of and everything. And it was a rewarding experience. When I came down LaSalle Street, Wilson Frost was the alderman. I was one of the youngest what you call secretaries. I think Alderman Shannon was there at the time. And the youngest secretary--they used to call me 'The Kid'. "You don't know anything." But see while they was--While they were around here doing, I was studying and, and reading. Studying and reading because I wanted to achieve. And so when an opportunity came in '72 [1972] that's when I, I moved on. But [Ralph] Metcalfe was an alderman at the time. Claude Holman was an alderman. I used to go sit in the City Council meetings. I recall one day Wilson Frost voted against the administration which was Mayor Richard J. Daley at the time, on the appointment of school board members. And Metcalfe was like the leader of the blacks in the City Council. And I recall coming out of the counsel meeting. Metcalfe was so hot at Wilson Frost. And I, I asked Wilson, "Why'd you do that?" And he said, "Well, sometimes you have to do those things to make people respect you." Which is true. And that's what happened. Story_ID: 9317 Speaker 1: Describe Wilson Frost and his, you know, his-- Speaker 2: Okay. You know he became--Wilson Frost became the Chairman of the City Council Finance Committee. And he served in that capacity for many years. In 1976, I believe it was, [Chicago, Illinois Mayor] Richard J. Daley died, and all the talk was for Wilson Frost to become mayor of the city of Chicago. He was at that time, the President Pro-Tem of the Chicago City Council. But there was no written rules as to who the successor was. The laws which set this up come from the state and there was no succession rules there. A lot of African Americans and so forth were trying to push Wilson to be the mayor of the city of Chicago. But the city council members had to vote for this. And Wilson recognized that he did not have the votes in the city council to become Mayor. So he, he, he opted to become the chairman of the City Council Finance Committee. And as a result of what took place then, we in Springfield [Illinois] changed the laws as it relates to successors. So it is clearly spelled out who should be the mayor. A lot of folks in the African American community believed because you were the Pro-Tem, you, you, you become the mayor. It was not spelled out that way. The law was silent as it related to--While I strongly felt that he should have been at that time. But you still need the votes to get elected. You saw what happened after Harold Washington passed. You still, you still need 26 votes. So he became chairman of the powerful Finance Committee. And he was able to do a lot of things for a lot of communities in that role. And of course, I was already in Springfield at the time. And Eugene Barnes also was a member of our organization. He was a State Representative. So we were able to really do very good. But it, it was a--a hell of an experience to see the attitudes of people as they relate to--But it gets down to the basics. The rules of the game prevail. You must understand the rules. Michael Jordan may be a great, great basketball player. But if he didn't understand the rules of the game that he was playing, he would not have been a great basketball player. So, the rules of politics, the rules of government, the laws that are set forth, the rules that your gov--of, of that you work under as a elected official. You must understand that world more importantly than any of the aspects. Because you will not be able to function and prevail if you don't understand the rules. When Harold Washington died, and this is a clear example, everyone was saying, "No deal! No deal!" They had buttons running around. But what they did not say, you need 26 votes, out of the city And if you only got 25, you gotta cut a deal with somebody to get that 26th vote. You understand what I'm saying? And so this is how government sometime in its actions impact on people. But they should be knowledgeable about these particular factors. I've seen and I've witnessed it all and everything. And we who serve in public office have two roles to take. You could take one role of being--trying to be everything to everybody: Or you could take another road and you're going to work hard to bring back resources of government to make the quality of life better for people. Speaker 1: I want to go back to Wilson Frost. Was he your political Chinaman? Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. You can't get any rice if you haven't got a Chinaman. Well, I was his secretary. And one thing he said to me. He said--That was his first public office. I became his secretary. He said, "We are a team. We're going to learn it together." So it was not a boss-employee type relationship. We were a team. And he said that and--And after he said that, we became long friends. We stuck together all these years. Usually in many political organizations, those persons who get elected end up fighting each other. You know. That never happened between he and I. We, we worked together as a team. Speaker 1: And what do you think that he accomplished during his which was a long, long pro tempore (unclear)? Speaker 2: What do you--What are the things that you, you think he accomplished? And what has been his role here in Chicago? Speaker 1: What we accomplished in the ward, especially the world that he represented. At the time we had a live movement of residents buying homes and moving into new areas which overcrowded the schools. We were able to in one stroke dealing with the segregation that was taking place different communities fighting. We, we went after one high school, but we ended up getting two high schools which was Percy Julian High School and Corliss High School. He was able to get that done. He was able to get us new parks in our, in our community. By being chairman of the Finance Committee, he was able to help many of the other aldermen get many of the things that they wanted done. And so in the role as a leader, everything would come through him. And lot of all the revenue flowed through the Finance Committee such as road funds. So he was able to tell aldermen, "Okay, we're going to put these X amount of dollars in your ward to take care of certain projects." And things of that nature. So he was able to do that being the Chair of the City Finance Committee at that time. Speaker 2: So, since you had a front row seat, could you tell us the behind the scenes story about really how he got--I mean, you know. There was a push that he, you know, he be the black--, Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, that he be the next mayor. Can you tell us the bla--you know the behind-- Speaker 1: Okay. That was a push. But again I was getting back to the rules of the game. You can push and go out being a martyr and end up with nothing. Or you can recognize what the real picture is and see what you need to do about it. And Shakespeare said it best in Hamlet, "To thine own self be true." Never lie to yourself and go out and pretend, "Oh I got these votes to go up there." And you end up and you will lose. Do you know what I'm saying. So even though he wanted to be, he needed 26 votes in the city council. He did not have the 26 votes. So he said, "What is the best thing for me to do in this situation?" "Well, I'll go ahead and negotiate, okay, you make me Chairman of the Finance Committee. And then we'll go down without a squabble and a fight.'" But to go up--go to just have a roll call and end up with eight or nine votes and you lose, well they'll say, "Well, you were a great martyr." And you end up with nothing. You follow what I'm talking about? And he recognized that one particular point. And that's why he chose the route that he did. Story_ID: 9318 Speaker 1: Was there any more of a story about that? I mean the Finance Committee. There had never been a black person in charge of the-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Finance Committee. Speaker 2: And look at [Alderman Edward] Burke's been in charge of that Finance Committee for a long time since then. Speaker 1: 'Cause it is a powerful--because in that role, you're able to open many, many doors for many, many people. And so that's what he was. See in that particular role, he was able to help so many people. And it's not some'n you read about in the paper every day. See a--one thing I learned from my Dad [Emil Jones Sr.] and my grandpappy growing up, they said, "An em--empty tin can makes a lot of noise." And so those folks you always see out here doing all the talk'n are not doing anything of substance. And so, in that role as chairman of the Finance Committee, he was able to help many of the newer aldermen coming in with resources to help their constituents. At the same time, making sure small business and folks did contracts and things of that nature. So it was a very powerful, powerful position. And you cannot always be a tree shaker, and at the same time grab the apples. You understand what I'm--you understand that? So as a result, what happens is you have folks who want to do both. You can't always, you can't do both. And you cannot, you cannot serve your constituency well, if you're constantly hitting everybody in the mouth so to speak. You attack this person, you attacking this person, and you attacking that person. And that same person that you're attacking some time may be the person you gotta go to, to help some of your constituency on a problem. So, he was the type--He was the type of person that was more or less conciliatory. He was low keyed. Yeah, yeah--Yeah--You never saw him out calling names and this here attacking this person. Even though he may disagree. But there's an intelligent way to disagree. You can disagree without becoming enemies. And that's the approach that he always took. Speaker 2: Now who--how did you get into the, the leg--I mean you, you worked as his secretary. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. And then. For how long a period? Speaker 1: For about five years. And see, I got in--I got involved--Every ten years we must redistrict. And so right after redistricting, after the '70 [1970] census they redistricted it. Gene Barnes was a state representative out of our organization at the time. So, Gene Barnes looked at that district and he said, "I can't win that district." So the laws are set up that you can run in any district that was part of your original district. So he decided to run in the other district. Which left a seat open. It was three people running at that time. And new ones and one incumbent. So the--Wilson Frost got together with Tom Fitzpatrick who was the committeeman of the 19th Ward. Fitzpatrick had a person he was pushing. So Wilson Frost said, "Well, I gotta, I gotta have my guy." So the two joined in and that was enough votes for me to get the nomination from the committeemen. And I was slated. And when that happened, a strange thing happened. Once I got slated, then some of the other black committeemen Claude Holman and a few others, and Shannon said, "Oh! He got two. Wilson got two." And I said, "Well what do you mean?" "Well he got Gene Barnes." Which was true, we had Gene Barnes. "And he--And he--Now he got Jones." And do you know they went all the way up to Mayor Daley to try to get me off the ballot so I would not be. But Wilson stuck behind me. He said, "Well Jones is not a promise. 'Cause you know, that's a tough district." He didn't think I could win that district. So it was not a promise. But they didn't want us to have--This is petty jealousy within the political organization. But I won big. Because in Morgan Park where I grew up, being a closed community as it was back then, the people are very clannish. They're, they're still that way today. And whenever I go to a meeting, be it a block club or community meeting, I know somebody's cousin or I know the mother, I know the father. Growing up out there, I know three and four generations in one family. So once I was on the ballot and everything, all the support was there. That's the basic. A person having a political base. I had what you called a solid, strong political base. And few African Americans running for office come from that type of a base, especially in the city of Chicago. My base was one where, where I knew the people when I was an insurance man. But also I knew them growing up. So I knew the parents; I knew the cousins, I knew the grandparents and we just knew everybody. And, and it was a--it was a--it wa--It was a heck of a campaign. And the people being clannish, you from that community, they're gonna support you. And that is what gave me my strong, strong vote in my first election, and it has carried me through to this day. Story_ID: 9319 Speaker 1: What was that whole experience like? 'Cause you had cut your teeth here in Chicago. But then Springfield [Illinois] is a different entity. Speaker 2: It was a different entity. I recall prior to my running for election, I had gone there. 'Cause we used to have what you called "Democratic Day" in Springfield. We'd go down on the trains. Everybody would go down. And I had never been to the capitol (pause). And I went to the capitol, and I looked over there and I said, "Dang!" And it, it was--Again, your eyes are constantly being opened to things that you were not exposed to. And I said, "Dog! I wouldn't mind being one of those guys." I ran in '72 [1972]. Joe Robichaux came to me and Wilson and said, "We'll run you for State Representative in 1970." And I refused. I refused because I felt I had become so aggressive in moving, thinking oh, that he was trying to get rid of me. And the best way to get rid of you, they run you for office, you lose, and you out of the way. And I refused. And so they went to Gene Barnes. Gene Barnes ran and he won. And he won because Everett Dirksen died, who was the U.S. Senator. And the Democrats grabbed Adlai Stevenson III, I think it was, and ran him for--I forgot what office it was, and he was leading the Democratic ticket. And, and we had a landslide. That was U.S. Senator. He led the ticket and we had a landslide. Everett Dirksen died. Had not Everett Dirksen died, and Adlai Stevenson ended up at the top of the ticket, Democrats would not have had that landslide in 1970. And well he did. And then I, I was going around kicking myself. I said, "Dag I could have been elected." But opportunity came once and opened up a second time. I wasn't gonna make that second--mistake a second time. And so that's how I won. So I got to Springfield. And I had a good working knowledge of government already. Story_ID: 9320 Speaker 1: When I got to Springfield [Illinois]--elected [in 1973], that was a new picture all together for me. You know, because I had the opportunity to meet people from all walks of life whom I'd heard about. But I never even associated with. And there were many African American legislators already there. Harold Washington was there. Corneal Davis was there. We called him the Dean. The--and Gene Barnes, Ray Ewell, Louis Caldwell and Fred Smith, Senator. It was quite a few already there when I arrived. And--but we were close-knit. And Corneal Davis who was the Dean, he would educate us younger legislators. He would, he would tell us about the time when he first was elected. And he rode the train from Chicago to Springfield as a elected state representative to go to be sworn in and no hotel would admit him. And he spent his first night as State Representative sleeping in the train station. You know. So he would educate us. He was the father of FEPC. That is the Fair Employment Practice Commission. I learned a lot from Corneal Davis as how to deal with the process. And so Harold Washington was part of our group then. We used to give him the bills to read. He liked to read. So he, he gonna read all this legal language (laughing) and whatnot. But Harold wa--Harold Washington was a great debater see. And , of course, Ray Ewell was a great orator, and at the same time also an attorney. And so it opened up a great field. Ray Ewell I guess, gave me my (pause) best experience in dealing with the different types of people. He said, "When you pick your seats--" They used to let you pick your own seats. He said, "Don't pick a seat with no--next to another black le--legislator. You pick a seat with someone downstate, or some other area, because you in turn can possibly influence his vote. And you'll learn about their particular area. And that's what I did. And, and, it, it--and that little advice was some of the best advice I had, because I became friends with a lot of downstate legislators. And even to this day, I can pick up the telephone and call one of them with a problem someone may have, and so forth. And--but--the process--the process, you know. Corneal Davis and someone has always said that you may have heard it before. When he first started out with his Fair Employment Practices Commission, he started out with just a little piece. He wanted the whole pie. But since he could not, he said, "You get a piece every year." Keep, keep on trying and get a little bit, a little bit. And eventually you get it all." That's why I ended up being so strong as it was. And the downstate legislators, these are people from different walks of life. They could be a farmer. They could--Some of 'em are lawyers. But they're living an entirely different environment. And you get to know that person. They get to know you. You learn about his constituency and things that impact on them. And he learn about your constituency. I have one fellow now. He's an attorney from Rock Island. He got the best civil rights voting record because I sat next to him. And we would talk about those things and he's a--he, he became a judge. Now he's in private prac--Clarence Darrell. And we were seatmates. And we learned from each other. And that's why--the way Springfield was. That's how I ended up being where I am today. Story_ID: 9321 Speaker 1: let's talk about--a little bit more about (pauses)--. Speaker 2: Corneal Davis? Speaker 1: Corneal Davis. Speaker 2: The Deacon. Speaker 1: The Deacon. Speaker 2: What--How long had he been, you know, there from when you started? And why do you think he was such a good mentor? Speaker 1: He was a good mentor because he--It's so much he had seen. He was--he was a colonel, I think in the [U.S.] Army. A lieutenant or something in the Army. He was a reverend. He was elected in the '40s [1940s]. I forgot exactly what year. And he--of course, I came in, in 1972. He was there in the '40s [1940s] and Fred Smith also was there too. He served thirty-six years. He retired in 1976 or somewhere. I--but he had seen it all and he understood the process. And since he understood it and everything--He was a regular Democrat. Don't get me wrong. But he fought for my people. You follow me? And he in turn educated us about the process and the things. And so--take him today. He's called, he call us his children. You know. So we in turn--(unclear) Harold Washington was one of the children too. All of them were his children. And some of them didn't like the way he approached things. But he was a great orator. He had a lot of respect amongst all the colleagues in the Illinois House. And he opened many doors. That's why I learned about the teachers downstate. When they were paying African American teachers less than they were paying white teachers. And he, he got Thurgood Marshall, who was a lawyer. He brought him down to Southern Illinois to break up that particular piece. When there was segregation in the dormitories at Illinois State University and so forth, he held up the budget. And that's when I learned about the budget. How you can use the budget to force a policy-making decision somewhere else with people who need those dollars. I--Clyde [L.] Choate who is still living was a state representative from Anna, Illinois. He was a Medal of Honor winner. He was elected to the House of Representatives when he was about twenty-one I think, really young. Corneal Davis--he took Corneal Davis by the hand when he was there and they became good buddies. And so--there are very few living Medal of Honor winners. This guy was. But he was from southern Illinois. So Corneal Davis and he became real close. So he was able to sway all the Southern legislative vote to help Corneal in his endeavors. So these are things I learned from him. He taught us how to negotiate and how you deal with folks and everything from different cultural backgrounds. Story_ID: 9322 Speaker 1: You paint a picture of a group of black congressmen who--or some were senators, who worked together. Is that--, Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: --correct? Speaker 2: See , they didn't get the exposure media wise. The media controls what people think. So, therefore, if the, if the editors of, of a television station or radio station, if they didn't give you any coverage, your constituents would say, "Oh he's not doing anything." That's why it was so important to always have the black media like the local black newspapers. So our message could get out what we are doing. It was so important. It's so important that--Because them people would write and they wouldn't even mention your name. When I ran for office the first time, a lot of times they would not even mention my name in the story. So, therefore, how would people know about you? So the media has a way of controlling what people think. And that's why it was so important that we had to be our own drum majors. And it was so important that we learn these things. But Corneal [Davis] he--he was a dynamic person. And--but he--the father of FEPC. He put all that Fair Employment Practice Committee, all discrimination in the workplace, and all those different things. He did all of that. And--the media never gave him the exposure for doing these types of things. You know. So it was important that we work together. We were forced to work together, due to those type of restrictions. You understand? We were forced to work together. Media didn't give the coverage that it gives today. And, and sometimes even today it gives improper coverage. They always give the coverage to the ones who are, who are the showboats, the show horses and all this other thing. The one making a lot of noise. But they don't give anyone the coverage of substance. That's why the substance came during those, those periods of time in Springfield [Illinois]. Story_ID: 9323 Speaker 1: Not being exposed to certain things when I was much younger, and not having that atmosphere around, growing up in the neighborhood where you saw elected officials. So that I didn't want children that I represent to grow up the same way. So I would take youngsters down--I even do it today. I want them to be educated. I want them to be informed. See if you know about these things at a very early age, then you can decide where you want to go a certain, you understand what I'm saying? If you not exposed to it, how can you have any ideas as to what you really want to be? I didn't know about this. Even though we had civics, I didn't know about state representatives, state senators and congressmen and so forth. I wasn't exposed to that. I wasn't exposed to a lot of occupations and professions. So when I found out about things, I became very hungry and eager to learn about it. You follow me? And, and life is a continuum, because you're constantly learning. But I didn't want young African American students to grow up and not know. So whenever they come to Springfield [Illinois], I don' care what I'm doing. I'm gonna grab those youngsters. I take them in my office and whatnot. And I tell them, "You can have this seat one day." And they can have it. But they, they have to have knowledge that it even exist, or the opportunity is there for them. And so, it's a great experience. But I, I--like I say, I didn't know about this place until I was an adult. And then when I got there I said, "Heck, I got a lot of work to do." And-- Speaker 2: So how did you feel--? Speaker 1: The night I was elected, I had worked so hard making all these meetings, all this training of voters, I was so exhausted physically as well as mentally. I was just glad it was over. I didn't give a durn whether I won or loss. That's the stress. I didn't feel any different. Can you understand what I'm saying to you? I did--I was glad it was over with. It's nice that I won, but I didn't really feel any different. I knew I had won the election. And, and I said, "Well, what's my next step after this?" You know. But I was so exhausted mentally. 'Cause it was a strenuous campaign. And that was at the time Hanrahan--Remember Ed Hanrahan and the Black Panthers? He was on the ticket, Democrat ticket, 'cause he had won the primary. And his name was out there and the black community was really against him. And so I didn't want that feeling to rub off on me. Which I had to work doubly hard. 'Cause the people had to explain how you could not vote for him, but vote for me. And it, it wasn't until about 12:00 [a.m.] that night that I knew that I had won. But I was so exhausted. The--the stress and the strain of the job of trying to win. That I didn't give a darn which way it went. I was just glad it was over with. And we had a political organization and, and sometimes people were anti-political organizations. You follow me? But here's what the political organization did. It gave a poor kid like me an opportunity to become a state representative. I could not have paid all those people who went out and rang doorbells for me, stood out there in the cold (unclear). The political organization--Even though I had a base, but someone needed to go out there to talk to folks where it was no base. You follow me? And talk to the voters. And that 21st Ward Democratic organization, you can call them the precinct captain, those workers, those volunteers. I could have not paid them to do that 'cause I didn't have the money. I was just a poor kid. Even though I was an adult, I was poor. And it gave an average person like myself an opportunity to run. And that's why I'm here today. Story_ID: 9324 Speaker 1: Why along have you chose--you know, you chose politics as a career. And you talked about it before that you were so excited about the whole possibilities. But why do you think it is--you chose it to be an important part of your life? And why do you think that politics and having African Americans involved in politics is important for the community? Speaker 2: Well, if you care about people and you want to bring about change, politics and government go hand in hand. Good politics is good government. And so one can choose two different direction in life. You, you can choose to be out here complaining against this, "I don't like this, I don't like that." Or you can get involved. This is one way you can be involved to bring about some of the changes that you believe in. That you want to. So I, I chose government. It was not my, my plans in high school and college to go into government 'cause I didn't really know much about it. And so, therefore, I more or less backed into this. I had a teacher I recall, in high school who always said, "He--you find me a person who can do one thing well, that person can also do another thing well." So whatever training one has in disciplining themselves, if they can do one thing well, they can do equally well somewhere else. And, and it's more or less people skills and understanding and a willing to apply yourself. So politics and government is one way by which I was able to bring about some of the changes I felt were needed as far as my people are concerned. And the other part of your question was? Speaker 1: Well, I'm thinking that the other part of my question was why is it important for the African American community? Speaker 2: It--it--it is of the utmost important. Often times you run into African Americans who say, "My vote won't count, it doesn't make a difference." All decisions that impact their lives are made by a politician or someone that, that politician appoint. Claude Holman used to say, "It's between the cradle and the grave. A politician signed that birth certificate and a politician signed the death certificate." And everything in life between those two points, that person--that politician has to make a decision. That's why it's important that you participate. That's why during the civil rights movement struggle you know they said--you got the politicians making the decisions. And sometimes you can make a decision and being in politics, you ain't got to pass a law. It's the mere fact that you were there. The mere fact that you happen to sit in this position, you're able to deny or you can approve. And that--and so African Americans for-- we are--we have what you call a representative form of government. And I, I believe that the more elected officials you have that represent a particular group, they can speak better for themselves than anyone else can speak for them. And that's why people, people should be involved, and that's why people should participate. You know, I learned early on, there no free lunches. Everything you get, you're going to pay for. One way or the other. But those who don't participate should never complain about anything. Because whatever happen to them is supposed to happen to them. Story_ID: 9325 Speaker 1: What really comes across is that you are really sort of a regular person. And that sort of makes you special. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: But what I'd like to do is talk about your time in the [State of Illinois] House [of Representatives]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Because you said when you got elected, you were so tired, you didn't even care. You know. That was the reality of the situation. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Talk about--I'd like to go back and just have you talk about that experience and what lessons you learned in those years. Speaker 2: Okay. When I first got to the House after my election, I was sworn in that January of 1993 [sic, 1973]. It was at that time, I--I begin to meet people from all different walks of life, farmers, suburbanites, whom I didn't have any real association with. I knew they existed, but I didn't really get to know them. And Ray Ewell, as I indicated said, "Sit next to a downstater. This way, you can learn about his community, what they think of. And you can in turn have influence on their votes on issues of things you're concerned with. At the same time, you'll be able to help him." And that's what I did. So learning the process, you must first learn the rules that govern the body which you are in--which is the rules of the House, which I learned that quite well. And in passing legislation, you know, you will get so much through orientation training. But a lot you will learn on your own. It's like a university more or less. And you learn quite a bit each day that you are in session. And so I learned how to pass legislation, and get it drafted. At that time the political power, say the city of Chicago and the legislators who represented Chicago districts in Springfield. The mayor somewhat dictated a lot of the legislation because he influenced those individuals getting elected. And downstate the--the governor, whomever the governor was in, influenced the legislators downstate. And the Cook County President of the County Board, George Dunne, he also had a tremendous influence over the legislation that was introduced. As it impacted on the county, as it impacted on the city of Chicago or as it impacted on the political process. And so with, with that, you have to work within that framework. And when you work within that framework, working with other legislators is a powerful learning experience. And I've learned from that process. And I guess that's why I was so successful in--in passing say the first set-aside contract for a small construction companies. I was able to do that. I was involved in the utilities. That is people who were getting their electricity or gas turned off during winter months. Those were some of the first pieces of legislation I introduced in the General Assembly. And I learned that from working with Wilson Frost when he chaired the City Council Utility Committee. I was his secretary and we--those complaints would come in. So when I went to Springfield, those were the very first pieces of legislation I put in. And that is to not have one's utilities cut off during winter months. And also, at the same time, if you are going to cut them off, give a person the opportunity to be able to pay or extend it. Not,, not have it so that they would have no utility service what so ever. Simply because it's not like going to Walgreens or--or to--K-mart or--or one of them major stores to buy food. Utilities we give them the right to operate as a monopoly. So if you lose that service, you cannot go shop somewhere else and get the same identical services. So that--therefore, that being the case, it was the obligation, I felt, on, on the part of the Commerce Commission which regulate utilities to give the customers the benefit of the doubt. Story_ID: 9326 Speaker 1: What do you think was your biggest surprise that you found in Springfield [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well one of the biggest surprises I found is that outside of the city of Chicago, there's a place called Illinois. And too often the people here in the city just think of only the city and that's what the news media focused on. But when I got to Springfield, it was an entirely different world all together. We were just part of a larger picture. It was the dominant form of government locally in the state of Illinois which is the city of Chicago and the county of Cook. But there were other needs outside of the city of Chicago. And this is how I learned to work with other legislators to explain our issues to them. 'Cause it was foreign to them equally as well. And when you explained your problems and get them to understand, then at the same time you must understand their needs. Usually back then legislators when they ran for election down state, they ran against Chicago. Or what they could keep Chicago from getting. But I learned after a short period of time is that if it were not for the city of Chicago, and the revenue that comes out of the city to the state coffers, most of the--those towns downstate would be bankrupt. They were actually feeding off Chicago. Most of the legislators didn't know that themselves. But then too, they will always fight and can't give Chicago too much. And so as a result of that, we have to work with them constantly. Because their election will depend on how they vote on issues as it impacts the city of Chicago. And Chicago being a dominant form of government, legislators who came from Chicago, if they were not in the leadership role, the people back home didn't know what they did. They didn't know who they were. And you could be a very successful legislator, but you are beholding to local government and, and the political powers, because your constituents whom you represented didn't know what you did, because the media would not give you the proper coverage as such. And especially if you were African American you didn't get the coverage. So you would have to be your own drum major more or less. You would have to go out and print newsletters. You'd go out to the local community newspapers. And let me say this about the small African community newspaper. They are the papers that actually keep the people informed as to what their elected officials are doing. And we need them. Because most often we were shut out of the main source of news. And so you are beholding to the local powers. And the only time you got any coverage back home if you were anti something so strong where they would give you the coverage. But the positive things that you did as a legislator were not picked up by the major media in the metropolitan Chicago area. And learning that and knowing that--that existed and so forth and everything, you would have to go overboard, I said overboard in trying to inform your constituents of the things that you were doing. Speaker 1: And did you find that you were successful in that, you know, in terms of sort of working that process to sort of gain awareness? Speaker 2: Oh yes. I--I found that after a period of time, I knew how to work it. I understood what the media did. As, as a result, I always made sure that I stayed in contact with local newspapers like 'The Crusader', 'The Citizen', 'The Bulletin' and the 'Southtown Economist', the local community papers, I would inform them as to what we were doing. We had to write our own press releases so--Because those papers didn't have reporters. We had to give them things already packaged. And knowing that process, at the same time coming from a metropolitan area, I was keenly aware as to the needs of the city of Chicago, its public schools as well. So I took care of that piece at the same time. If I found something that was to my dislike, I used to--just fought against that particular issue. And one thing I learned when I first got there, is my most successful piece of legislation came out of the fact that we were sending money to Chicago schools for Title I students at that time. And the money was coming here, but it was not being spent exclusively on the students. So it took me three years to change that law. And that is students who generated these dollars, these were students who come from poor economically disadvantaged families. We had to fight like heck. It took me three years to pass the law to target the dollars to the children who generated the dollars. And which threw me in conflict with the powers that be at the city of Chicago and the Chicago Board of Education. And individuals were telling me that, "Your political career is on the line." Because I was establishing--I was challenging the, the status quo. And we're talking about an excess of $200 million per year. And the dollars were being spent as general revenue dollars. It's ironic that during my first year in Springfield 1973, the resource equalizer formula which funded education systems across the state of Illinois public schools. That's when the debate took place on that issue. Only about five years later, I think it was, I found out that these dollars were not being spent, targeted exclusively for the children who generate the dollars. And they were being spent as general revenue dollars. I found that out through the Chicago Urban League or the 'Chicago Reporter'. So I set about the motion trying to change that law. Find out how it actually worked. And we, we eventually changed it and that was quite successful. At the same time, the Chicago Board of Education, I guess the mayor of the city of Chicago at that time were vehemently opposed to the change in the law. Because when you change how the funds come in, then you have to change the whole operation at each school in the city of Chicago. But we were successful in that endeavor. And again, you est--you are challenging the status quo. But I had so much no, no--notoriety working with the Chicago Urban League and the 'Chicago Defender' and so much out there on this issue, that, that any political retribution that an individual may have wanted to take, they were reluctant to do so. Story_ID: 9327 Speaker 1: Can you put it in context? I mean who was mayor at the time? And, and what, what actually--What was that whole three year process like? Was Mike Madigan--was he--? Speaker 2: No he was not. At that time, we were in the minority in the [State of Illinois] House [of Representatives]. Richard J. Daley was mayor. He died in--in September of--no December I think it was of 1976. We changed the law in 1978. I began the process prior to 1978 with Richard J. Daley. But being a legislator trying to--I had to find out how the dollars actually came into the system. And no one would tell me. So I worked very closely with The Chicago Urban League. It was a fellow named Bernard Laquor. I think Dr. Gwen LaRoche was the director of Education for the Chicago Urban League at the time. And--and Jim Compton. So we had meetings on top meetings, I'm in trying to find out how the dollars came in and Springfield [Illinois] learning the process 'cause no one would tell me. And so I tried all different ways. So I put in a bill. It would get killed. And then finally I found out exactly how it worked. Which I amended it to require that at least 50 percent of the dollars would go directly to the students who generated the dollars. Now when you change the dollars as it come into the schools, what happens is some schools were getting less money. Which means they have to shift the personnel. And this issue when--when we changed the law, I assumed that the Board would do what they should do. But they always find a loophole to get out from under it. And when I passed the bill from the House to the Senate, and I think Senator [Richard] Dick Newhouse picked the bill up. Harold Washington was over there at the time. And I explained--I went over to the Senate and explained this to the African American senators who were sitting there, Fred Smith, Harold Washington, Dick Newhouse, Kenny Hall. I sat down and explained to them how this actually worked. And, and I was the point person for the then Black Caucus on the education issue. And because I didn't want the bill to get over to the Senate and it would get--It would get killed over there and so I was able to convince them. It became the number one issue. The bill passed and [James R.] Jim Thompson was the governor. After the bill passed, the powers to be went to the governor and asked him to veto the bill. Jim Thompson called me up on the, on the floor and he said, "As soon as session is over with,"--it was the end of session, "I want you to come down to my office and I'm gonna sign this bill." And with me, I have a picture with myself, [state] senator Charles Chew and [Illinois] governor Jim Thompson. He signed this bill directing that all those dollars be spent on children who generate the dol--the dollars. But it was, it was quite a battle. And in the legislative process, sometimes when you're passing legislation, it doesn't happen just in one session. It happens over a period of maybe two years, sometimes three years. I had to educate my downstate legislators about the issue, 'cause many of your Chicago ethnic legislators were opposed to it being changed. And I had to go through a process of educating. And at the same time, I had to hold some other things hostage. To convince the other lawmakers, "We cannot vote for what they want here, unless they give us what we want on the Title I funds." And it was--it was a learning experience. I really learned how the formula impacts the funding of education. And we had to fine-tune that even as late as 1993 and 1992 when we did the School Reform Act. And we--I said, "You can do all the reform you want. But if you do not have a say so as to how these dollars are spent, then since the LSCs [local school council] are advisory, then you have no impact on the schools." So I gave the persons who were lobbying for school reform, I gave them a few words to in--insert in there, "These dollars cannot be--must--cannot be spent without the approval of the local school council." And once they had that, then you have an impact into--on your schools as it relate to the programs that should be initiated to educate our children. Story_ID: 9328 Speaker 1: You were very--really ahead of yourself in that, in that focus on education. I'm just wondering--I'm curious why you focused on that issue? Speaker 2: Well, number one it was an injustice. I served for one day in 1973 on the Education Committee. One of the members had a death in the family. So the Democratic leader Bill Redman appointed me to serve in his spot on the committee. It was--It was at that time, the whole funding formula was being discussed. It was all foreign to me at that time. And Senator Art Berman, who was the Democratic spokesperson on the committee. I asked him, I said, "What does this mean?" He said, "Just vote the way I vote," you know--and we--he was our education spokesman--which I did. At the time, that was when the impact aid--this is aid from students from disadvantaged families. And in the debate on the House floor they said, "We need these extra dollars because of the high cost of educating children from poor disadvantaged families. Usually these children come to the school ill-prepared." But I think the 'Chicago Reporter', or it may have been the 'Chicago Defender', someone I read--came out with, "These dollars are being spent as general revenue dollars." And so we discussed it, so most of the Black Caucus and they said, "Jones you be the point man." So I began to do the research to see how--I pull a transcript from the floor debate of 1973. And then I set forth trying to find out how we get the job done. At the same time, I was cognizant of the fact that no one from the power structure within the Chicago Board of Education in the city of Chicago would be in favor of this, because you're disrupting the--the whole process of funding education. That's why it took so long to get it done. But once I finally discovered where the dollars were, how they were generated, and once I found that out then I was able to, working with the Chicago Urban League--the hearings we held in the city of Chicago. The Urban League was so instrumental because they did a lot of the research for me. And that's when I realized that I had what I wanted. That's how we were able to pass it. But I also realized at the same time the importance of education. In that of all the social ills we have in our society, they all go back to our educational system. If one is well educated, they have the tools necessary to meet the educational needs of the children, you have less social problems. Be it welfare, be it work and crime. So that's why I focused on education. But it was all driven from the fact that we had such groups as the Chicago Urban League really pushing this issue. And that's how I got involved. Story_ID: 9329 Speaker 1: At the same time, I wasn't told this, but I knew the political pressures of the administration. See most of the legislators form the Cook County in Chicago [Illinois] at that time that time were aligned with the Chicago and Cook County Democratic Organization. As was I. However, I knew that enough pressure could be brought to bear to force them to back off this issue. There were attempts made very subtle to me to leave it alone. But it was such an injustice, I was not about to leave it alone. And this is how it came about [Illinois House Bill 2619]. And even today in the Chicago Public Schools--And you hear the Local School Council holler about, "The LSC money." This is the state Title I funds. It is now called Chapter I dollars. And the language--I mean it's not their money, but since these dollars do come into the system, I think the parents should have some say so as to how the dollars should be spent to improve the education of their children. And these were dollars sent there because of the debate that took place on the floor, "That we need more money to educate children from poor disadvantaged families." So what that means simply is this here. If we spend one dollar for a child who is not poor, for a child who is poor we, we would spend one dollar and seventy-five cents. A extra seventy-five cents per dollar. Now it's down to sixty-two cents per dollar. So what happens is instead of the dollars being spent exclusively on the child who generated the dollars, they were using it as general state aid. With no specific program to improve the education of children from disadvantaged families. So it was the entire system. And the poor child in the school system generates a lot of dollars. These were state dollars. You also had federal dollars that was being spent on these children. And so in some instances, the poor child would bring in twice as much dollars to the educational system to meet their needs, but the programs were not being put there. And also they were not being spent. And in many instances they were getting less than the other children. And that's why it was such as injustice. And that was--that was one of my greatest achievements being a legislator. Story_ID: 9330 Speaker 1: Senator Jones then what are your views on the last twenty-seven years and the state of the Chicago [Illinois] Public Schools, and, you know, where are we coming (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well we've come a long ways. And when we talk about reform, you may reform the way we educate a child. But those persons who are given the responsibility of educating your children, these are the classroom teachers, the administrators, the principals, they also must reform the way they think. See and if they believe a child can learn and teach a child differently, that child can learn. So we have a lot of new educators in the system today. many of the old timers who were there, who've done things a certain way for a certain period of time, they were very resistant to change. It's just like we're going through welfare reform today. Until you get--Many of the persons who have been there so long and are used to doing things one way, who are not about the process of trying to help a person get a job. They're about the process of trying to keep them on welfare. Now they must work. So those persons are the obstructionist. So in the school system, we went through the same identical thing. Until the old timers leave, and think about including the parents and community in the education of a child. And it's all coming about, right now, but it's a long process. But you have many dedicated teachers. I do a lot of work with educators. But they also must realize that we're working off taxpayers dollars. And--and cries at our schools aren't doing anything. So this means you have to change the way you teach the child. The people want results. And the way you get results is to include the community in and include the parents in. I always represent a suburbia as well as a Chicago district. In the suburban schools, they're much smaller, but the parents can walk in the school, they see the superintendent. They know who's making what. They can look at the budget and do everything. And in the Chicago schools, this was all new to the principals. So they didn't want to share with parents, "the budget. How are you doing these things? And where the money is coming from?" They didn't want to share all those things. When I was fighting the battle for Title I at the time, I would call the principals in my district. I would try to educate them on these dollars and what they are missing. Because they didn't know. And because they never had the responsibility of handling a budget. They didn't know 'cause that was all handled by the central office. So I was trying to educate them that they were being shorted. And I also go through the process even today. It's that these dollars are coming in. I tell a Local School Council, "You should call your principal and say 'You've got several hundred thousand in your budget for children from disadvantaged families in your schools. What programs are you putting forth to improve their reading, to improve their mathematics?" And they should ask those questions. And that's the whole purpose of reform. That the whole purpose for including them in the process. It's just not a lump some of money. All of a sudden you got this money, you can do as you want. Hiring your friends and so forth and things of that nature. The extra dollars are given to you because the need is there. So this process is a continuum. It goes on and on. But it's a process of not only educating children, educating the educators as it relates to how you spend these dollars. There--I, I used to hear complaints from school teachers saying, "Well I don't have supplies, pencils and paper. I use money out of my own pocket." I would tell them, "The school that you all are from is a school that is impacted by 90 percent of children from poor or disadvantaged families. You're getting all these federal dollars in, extra dollars. You're getting all these extra state dollars in. There is no need for you to have to go out of your pocket. The only thing it tells me that when you say that to me, then the monies are not being spent appropriately to deal with the educational system that you're dealing with." When you take an inner city school, with all the problems you may have there, but that school may be 100 percent Title I school. Which means it receives almost two to one in dollars to meet the needs of those children, than a school that is not a Title I school. Which tell me at that school, they should have all the equipment, all the books, all the materials necessary to meet the educational needs of the children. So the fight continually goes on and on. Story_ID: 9331 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the education of the African American community, you know, the inner city schools? What are your, what are your hopes (unclear)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well one of the things--see we have less and less adults in the community with children in the school system. Which--to generate the support for the school, you have to have the community involved. You must have parents involved in the schools. And we are--our whole culture has changed. We have more single parents than we had years ago. We have female heads of house who may be working a full-time job. So the schools have to change to meet the needs of the parents. Which means that you have these extra dollars, you should open the school on Saturdays. The schools should be open on Saturdays, where parents could come in and sit down with the teachers and the students. Because usually a parent has to take off from work to come to school just to sign the report card. This is an innovative way our schools must be run in the inner city or not just--throughout the entire system. You may have to revert to a--or come to--where you have evening times for parents to come in to deal with the children. And that's being more conscious of the change in our society. And when you do that, then you'll see parents are more interest. But if you want to hold tight to the old rule the way things were set up years ago, it's not going to work. There are some schools, many schools are functioning quite well. I--I like the schools when they began to require that students must meet certain requirements. A lot of educators resisted that. But why graduate a child with a diploma that he cannot read? So which in turn these students had to go to summer school. Wasn't it amazing how most of the schools, children went to summer school? The parents got with them, they buckled down, they met the requirements and most of them graduated. So what it is, we are placing demands on students and saying, "Yes you can do it." But we have to stay right on top of it. But the education of a child according to the old African proverb, "takes a village to raise a child." It takes a village also to educate a child. Which means everyone, the business person in the community, those who have children who have graduated, you still have a stake in that community, and those with children in the school. Everyone should revolve. That was the thrust of the reform, is to make the schools the focal point of the community. Everything should be involved around the schools. As a result, children do better. All studies have indicated that when the community and parents are involved in he schools, the children do better. But early on there was so much resistance from this aspect from the old line school administrators. Because they were not accustomed to that. They felt that running the school was their own private fiefdom. But the school didn't belong to them, it belonged to the community. And when we started the LSCs (local school councils), I got into a lot of arguments with my friends who were educators. A lot of local school councilpersons may have been a dropout from school. And we let the local school pick the principal. And they resented that. They said, "You got a dropout picking a Ph.D." (Chuckle). Now in a sense all we did in school reform is to codify what had been the practice prior to. Which the councilors did. But once they put it into law, there was a lot of resistance. Just because a person is not degreed does not mean that person is stupid. And that is what we found. So both had to learn. The counselors had to learn, and the administrators had to learn. And we found those two really working good together then the children were the beneficiaries of such. Speaker 1: Well, what are your views then on charter schools? Speaker 2: On charter schools? A charter school would be a school that would be run without any rules or regulations. And my problem with that, there's no accountability. You put the dollars in with no accountability. And we do need accountability. Currently prior to all the notion about charter schools, currently in the school code, even with the--with the teacher's union there's previsions set for a charter school. If one so desires to do such. But I'm concerned about the accountability aspect of such. If you're going to give a person all these rules, I mean monies without any rules or regulations and no accountability and you got the children there, then there's a major problem. My concern has always been for the public school for one reason. The public school must take every child. Must take every child. You all talk about the private and the Catholic schools, they choose what student they want to take. But the public schools must take every child. So you cannot mix apples and oranges in comparing. And--but when you begin to pull out of the system dollars that are already short. See here's my problem with a piece of legislation that past last year with the private and parochial schools. My problem is this. Once you pull money out of a system that's already strapped, all of the students who are now transferred out, you still got to teach those students. You follow me? If you already strapped for dollars, then you're actually not doing the schools any good. Our legal response--Our constitutional responsibility is to the public schools. And in the major metropolitan areas, Chicago for example, we spend about maybe $5000 some odd dollars per child per year to educate. In some of the other areas you may be spending $13,000 per year per child to educate. And some of these downstate schools in the rural areas, they may be down to about $4,500. So there's no equal funding of education. It cost more in the urban areas simply because you've got all the social ills of society thrown at the schools. Until you have equal funding for every child, that is, regardless of where that child is born, or where that child is domiciled, he should have equal amount of dollars spent on his education. Right now our system of funding is based on the property tax value. So in the northwest suburbs they may only receive 10% of their dollars from the state. The rest come from the property tax. So they in turn spend $13,000, $14,000 per year rich--all those rich communities. In the poor areas of the city or the south suburbs, you don't have the same tax base. Therefore you're spending less per child. And so each child that's born in the state do not have equal access to dollars. So when you talk about pulling money out of the system, and giving it to someone else to run, with no accountability for those dollars, all those other children are left here. With no additional dollars to fill in that void. And that's the reason why I oppose it. I'm Catholic and I belong to a parish. My children went to both public and private school. I felt the boys should be a little more religious training--so I--disciplined, I sent them to Catholic schools. But--but when the funding bill came down for funding for private and parochial, I voted against it. They couldn't understand that in the chair. I said, "This is a choice I want. I'm willing to pay. But my obligation as a lawmaker is to protect the public schools. To protect the public school children." And so I will not vote for money to go to a private school. Which is a benefit allowed my parishioners and their children, a school. But no, I couldn't do that. And so as a lawmaker our job is to protect the public schools system. Because in that public school system, every child--that child that's disruptive, the child that's has all the problems and so forth, whom a private school would not take. But we have to deal with that, and we must educate them. And that's why as a lawmaker we must protect the public school systems. All these different charter schools and all this blah-blah-blah. That's fine. Find your own funding mechanism. But when you pull these dollars out of the public schools and give to these other entities, those dollars are lost in the public schools. And we still have to have the school there to take care of that little poor child. Story_ID: 9332 Speaker 1: What are your views on the 'digital divide' then, 'cause that's a new hot issue? Speaker 2: It is an issue that must be dealt with. We're looking at it from--at the Springfield [Illinois] level. We are pouring a lot of dollars into a lot of the schools. I did a survey of schools in my district. All who do not have what you call a computer lab, we're putting dollars in there to make sure that they have computer labs. We're at that phase right now. You're talking about Internet, access to Internet. See children--Not only should they have them in school, they should have the accessibility of a computer, or Internet in the home, or within the community where they should be able to go. Because the way it stands right now, watching all those folks who are shopping for example, on the Internet. But those persons, who are shopping the more, are the more affluent because they have the access to computers. And again, it's not only in Chicago, and the inner city but downstate. Most of the schools couldn't even be wired 'cause they're so antiquated as far as equipment and so forth. Which we are pouring millions of dollars in to bring those schools up to par. But the dollars must be there and the schools must be--personnel must be trained to teach computer technology. They must be trained. So I assume that the Chicago Board is training its personnel how to use computers. So they can teach the youngsters. It doesn't do any good to have the equipment and all this technology there and the personnel there don't understand it. And it should be accessible to all the students. So the dollars are there. The dollars are there at the federal level equally as well. I believe there are some grants, about ninety million dollars going to be given out. But we must set up in the community (unclear) computer technological centers, resource centers where youngsters would be able to go in and work on the computers and work on the Internet. The Chicago Public Library have begun to do the same thing, to close that divide. 'Cause if we don't close it at an early age, in another five or ten years our children will be further and further behind. So we work--must work toward closing it right away. Story_ID: 9333 Speaker 1: Another area that you have done work on was putting black history applications in schools. And I would like to talk--you to talk about why you thought that was important, and what that whole process was to get that legislation passed. Speaker 2: Well one of the things is that--having went to the Chicago [Illinois] public school, growing up in Chicago, I recall as I look back on the history that I was taught in school, there was a void there. I knew about Booker T. Washington and George Washington Carver and that was basically it. You know and psychologically one--no one wants to be a slave. So you 're slaves or not and everything. So no one wanted to be a slave. So your whole teaching back then taught you to be--have a bad feeling about yourself. It's called--you have an inferiority complex. And so as I looked at the history books, you know and everything, it wasn't fair. They came up with a black history month in school, to teach you in school. But it cannot be done in a crash course once a year. We felt that it should be incorporated in the curriculum. It should be an ongoing process. Not just for blacks, for all students. So Senator Bill Shaw and myself had teamed up to get some legislation passed. Which we did, which would require the schools to teach the contributions that African Americans and women made to the United States, this country. And it passed. But we had to amend the bill because my Jewish counterpart asked could we amend the bill to have the Holocaust taught. Which we did and so it passed. So a unit of history should be taught in the school systems. But what I find out as you go through the schools, we pass the laws, give it to the state board, schools must do--you find out. They still don't do it. You almost have to make them do. When they go out and purchase books for children it should be included, ingrained in the history. And sometimes your white counterparts say, "Well why you have to have it separate?" The reason why you have to have it separate and also equal as well because it has not been taught before. And even to this day--We're getting ready to come into, what you call, black history month, the month of February. And they got pictures around the walls. But to actually teach the history (said expressively). Not that you were just slaves. Teach the African history about the kings and the queens and the power. And that's how one when they grow up decide as to what they want to be. They feel good about themselves. But when you're not taught this. And I didn't have this when I went to school. So I felt I was cheated. And since you were--I was cheated. I don't want the other children coming behind me to be cheated. And all schools should be taught what others do. And when I came back to Chicago, some of our more militant black friends said to me, "Why are you out here having them teach the Holocaust?", you know. I said, "Let me explain it to you in the context maybe you best can understand." The Holocaust took place in what we consider modern times, the late '30s [1930s] and the 40s [1940s] in Europe. I said, " You hear all this talk about Hitler. But what a lot of people fail to realize is Hitler was elected to office. He took over the reins of government. The killing and extermination of Jews had the sanctions of the German government. So if you don't know what your government is doing the same thing can happen to you. That's why you should get involved in the electoral process. That happened with the sanction of the government. He was elected. He wasn't a dictator. He was elected by the people. He took over the reins of government. That's why you should understand the Holocaust. You should study it. Because the same thing can happen to you." That's how I explained that issue. And it's a good lesson to learn in society. I think Frederick Douglass said it many, many years ago, "Those who are ignorant of history are destined to repeat it." And the same thing could happen to you. And I explain that as I go around to student about this issue. But our schools--It should not be just taught during black history month. It should be taught as a unit on a year-round basis. And most of our educators who are out there teaching black history don't even know it themselves do how can you teach it? The State Board of Education has set forth guidelines on how, what one should do, and get the proper material and teach this. But a unit should be set aside so that it's constantly taught. For all students, not just African American students. I gave a speech yesterday about Dr. Martin Luther King Day. It's not a black history--not a black national holiday. It is a holiday for a great American who happened to be black. It is the only national holiday for a person other than a person being president of the United States. So in, in the private sector, people used to come to me and say the employees still can u--Blacks you can choose--you got your day but some of the whites want to have another day. And they want Pulaski Day. I said, "That's wrong to do that, because when you do that, you diminish the work of the individual. Everyone should take this day as a national holiday and not just one select group." So, the same thing in the teaching of black history. All should learn about black history. All should understand it. Story_ID: 9334 Speaker 1: Senator Jones, while we're on that, what do you think of white Americans or just the world? What, what lessons do you think can be learned from the study of African American history in this--you know in this country? I say that because there's an organization called Our Facing History Saving Ourselves [sic, Facing History and Ourselves], and they actually do a lot of teaching things in the schools. It's about the Holocaust. And you know they say there's general applicability, a lot of times people try to, as you say, "Pigeonhole." What, what in your view is the lessons that the general community can learn? Speaker 2: What they can learn basically is this, is that, number one. When you respect an individual, you respect the individual because the individual has worked or the individual has contributed to society. What has happened as far as African Americans are concerned basically, especially in this particular country is that you didn't contribute anything. When you look at all the news clips of say the Second World War or the First World War, you see none of the African American soldiers. In other words, you did not exist. And so when they learn all of this, then they themselves will have respect for their counterpart. When I was in Florence, Italy for example, last year, and I visited the American cemetery. About 4,400 something little white crosses. And they had people there, young men between the ages of twenty-five, I mean, eighteen to twenty-five, all lost their lives during this invasion. There was a division called--I think it was the 92nd Division. Which was all black soldiers. They lost all their--The crosses are there for them, as well as the white soldiers. I had a friend of mine with me--who was there during the invasion. And he told me about this. What I am saying to you is they fought in Europe. They fought in the war. And when they make movies of soldiers like, 'The Saving of Private Ryan' for example, you see no black soldiers. That is perpetuating the myth that you did not participate. And so what white America can learn from that, and they would have to admit this, that we're making a great mistake that we should want to set--'cause then too you are, you are in all the dispute between the groups. And I didn't go see that movie for that basic reason. And I saw all those little white crosses, black soldiers, white soldiers, Italian soldiers who gave their life for the freedom of this country. But yet and still even in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] they make these movies they continue to perpetuate the myth that blacks did not participate. So many of the great inventions, many of the scientific inventions that white America are beneficiaries of, blood plasma for example, heart surgery. All these things that blacks have contributed to this society, white America needs to learn about that. And that's how you can benefit and you can begin to heal the rift and the wounds between the two groups. Story_ID: 9335 Speaker 1: As the arts and things Germany was at the highest level point. They were--they competed with Paris, France in opera and music and (unclear). They were there! This was the crust. At the height, you understand, they reached their low. And for African Americans I said, "Gee you better, you better understand this stuff." It happened so--it was so subtle that even all the Germans right there didn't realize that it was happening, 'til it was too late. And these are things that concern me. And these are things I try to pass on to my youngsters and I pass on to other people. "You better understand this stuff." And because it's all based on ignorance. Ignorance, not knowing about someone else. That's ignorance. And, you know, it's frightening. Story_ID: 9336 Speaker 1: I had read that Senator Mike Madigan blocked--you know, you were just tired of him blocking you and you said, "Forget it I'm (unclear)--." Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No not blocking me. Speaker 1: Well, what, what was that deal about? Speaker 2: He was the Democratic [party] leader at the time. I was Assistant Democratic Leader. But I recognized politically that Mike was going to be around a long time. And so, therefore, after redistricting there was an open [Illinois State] Senate seat. So I decided to leave the House [of Representatives] and go to the Senate, where I felt my fortunes over a period of time may be better. Which they ended up being better. But it was not that he was 'blocking' per se. But he was the leader and so forth and I respect the leader. But then, too, you like to be leader yourself one day. And so I thought my fortunes would be much better in the Senate rather than staying in the House. Speaker 1: Now what is the difference between the Senate and the House? Did you find really as much different or--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The Senate is more sedate you know. And the House is more like the people's body more or less, it seems to be disorganized, but it is really not disorganized. But the Senate is more--We look at--should look at things on a more broader, stately perspective than the House does. They both are the same body more or less. And usually the legislators who are senators use the Senate--the representative in the senate district vote the same way on given issues and things of that nature. Story_ID: 9337 Speaker 1: Now I want you to describe how you managed to be unanimously elected as [Illinois State] Senate Minority Leader? That was a big coup, for even just a white person. But it was a big coup for an African American. But how did you end up doing that? Des--describe the process. What was that? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, it came right after redistricting. Senate President Phil Rock had decided not to run for re-election. So which that left the leadership spot open for the Democrats to select amongst themselves who would be the leader. And when the election was over, the regular election was over, it was about twenty-eight, I think it was, Democrats and the rest were Republicans. So the Republicans had the majority. So the twenty-eight Democrats had to decide amongst themselves who would be their leader. And there were--There were several who had aspired to be leader. You had a couple of downstaters and a couple from Chicago and then including myself. And I just counted the numbers. I must have a majority of those who were elected Democrats in order to receive a majority. And I was able to put the coalition together to get the votes. It's called coalition politics and knowing the needs of the various groups. Between the blacks and Hispanics I think I had nine votes. I think it was about nine votes, but I needed six more. I needed fifteen. And so I, I tried to--to see, you had three separate factions. I needed one of these other factions to get the vote. And I chose the one that would give me the necessary votes. And that's how I put it together. And it's all namely numbers and everything, and how people relate to each other. And also how one feels about the--that person who is aspiring to be leader. All too often people go after things based on what they feel that they want. But they never get--take into consideration the needs and wants of the people when they're trying to get support. And so that's how I was able to solidify and get the votes. But some people say it was a coup. But--they didn't expect me to win it. But I knew enough about the process. It is the process and the rules that govern the process that enable me to put the other necessary number of votes to win. Too often what happens is in the whole process, the legislative process you get an individual giving a fiery speech on a bill. So forth and like this here, and the bill fails. The other person sitting there may say only a few words, and they get theirs passed. Because the person saying the fewest words understands the process. He understands the members better than the other person. And that's how things happen. Story_ID: 9338 Speaker 1: Why do you think politics is so important? Why do you think it's important? And then I want you to answer what role you think it plays in society? Speaker 2: Well everything is political and most folks don't realize it. The late alderman Claude Holman used to say, "From the cradle to grave. Everything you do is determined by a politician. A politician signs the birth certificate and a politician signs the death certificate. And everything in-between those two particular points in life a politician has something to do with." So, therefore, since we have that much influence, over one's lives, then that--person should involve themselves in the process. At least going to the poles to vote, so they can vote for a person whom they feel comfortable with. And so it plays a very important role in the lives of people. And so as a result, everyone should be involved. Everyone should be concerned. And usually it's your local politicians, your local elected officials I should say whom you come in contact with the most, who has the most influence. So, therefore, you should get to know those individuals. It is a process something like--it is something that is sintriguing. It's not foreign and it is just the every day walk of life. Sometimes when people say, "Big government," they mean government has become insensitive. And the only reason it becomes insensitive is because people let it become insensitive. But if they were involved more in the process, then those who are elected would pay more careful attention as to what the people are saying, and be sensitive to the needs of the people. But politics is everything. And it's a very rewarding profession 'cause it is an opportunity that people can bestow upon you the honor of representing them. It is an honor for people to go to the poles and say, "I want you to go speak for me." That is a great honor. And so by them giving you that honor, you in turn, you in turn must respect it and do the best that you possibly can to--to represent them. But, they bestow that honor on you. That's why you see the person is called, "Honorable this, Honorable that." The people have given you this honor and so--and it--we live in a democracy--In a democracy, the majority wins, that 50+1. So when you become elected, not only do you represent the majority, that 50+1, you also represent the minority. So you must in turn treat the minority fairly. You must represent them equally as well. Just because they did not vote for you does not mean that you should not represent them. And when you represent them--'Cause you will lose some of the majority, but you will pick it up in the minority if you represent all the people. It is a great, great process. It is a tremendous honor to have people do this to you. You cannot satisfy everyone. If you try, you will fail. So the best thing you can do is just do the best that you can possibly do, and then not concern yourself about all the complaints. I think Abraham Lincoln said it best, " If he spend time concerned and trying to answer all those who complained against him, he would not have time to do any work." Speaker 1: I didn't know he said that. That's cute though. Would you speak at all just briefly to the ethics? Do you think--I mean do you have your--you've come to the political arena with your own sense of ethics? Speaker 2: Yes, ethics basically, yes. No question about it. You must have ethics. And even amongst you, yourselves, your colleagues certain ethical things that one must have. And usually--I would say that it's, it's also cultural, but certain ethical things you must have. No question about it. I am for strong ethics. Story_ID: 9339 Speaker 1: Do you have advice for young African Americans wanting to enter politics? Speaker 2: Why yes I do. Too often what happens with young African American who want to enter politics sometimes they sort of remind me of a person who want to join the Catholic church, and be the Pope tomorrow. What I would suggest is to, this is for anyone. To get in, get involved at an early stage, at the lower rung, not come in at the top. But learn it from the bottom up. When you learn it from the bottom up, then once you get to the top, you will know how the other part functions. You will be able to govern accordingly. But when you come in at the top, and not know this other piece, you cannot be successful. So be willing to sacrifice a lot of time learning it from the bottom. And when you learn it from that, that area, you in turn can rise to the top because you--your decisions will always be rooted at that lowest person of the rung. And that's how I suggest they get involved. Get involved as a volunteer. Volunteer your time to do something. And Albert Schweitzer--I have on the wall in my district office; "There's something that you owe your community. Something for which you receive no compensation other than the joy of doing it." And you get involved in volunteering and you'll learn something. Then you will decide later on whether or not this is a career you want to choose as an elected position. You can be involved and not be elected. I have a lot of staff, I have African Americans on my staff. They're not electable. They are a professional staff. They do the research; they do the writing and so forth. You can be involved in government but not be in the elected capacity. Once you get to the point where you're going to put yourself out here to the people, then that's a horse of a different color. Speaker 1: Now, I was asking about political party signing. Speaker 2: You know, one of the things is this, is that, I guess in the '40s [1940s] and the '30s [1930s] you know, most of your blacks were Republican. And they were Republicans because of Abraham Lincoln, you know,--Emancipation Proclamation--freed the slaves. So they were Republicans. The big, major change didn't come until the latter part of the 60--1950s and early '60s [1960s]. When the--when the old line Republicans came--died out. And they became Democrats. And the two party system. And they're overwhelmingly Democrat today. I always teased my Republican counterparts back then because the Republican starved you all out of this party. But it, it is the party, I think blacks who have needed many of the social changes, it has been the Democrats who have always been in the forefront of those changes. Be it the Voting Rights Act, and just like Social Security is one and Medicaid and Medicare. All the social changes and civil rights the Democrats have fostered this. So afterwards the blacks that came into that behind the Democrats as a result. And the Republicans who are there who, who said we should go with the Republicans and not be locked into one. But see what happens then you are not with the Democrats, you get out there on your own, it's called coalition politics. Then you, you lessen the opportunity for one to be a majority and get something done. For example it's, it's okay to have a black there. But then too you got Clarence Thomas sitting there you know. And he's, he's a Jewish, and he's a lawyer an what not and all the way--All the programs that are put forth to aid and assist African Americans he, he is the beneficiary of such. But only to get to the top and makes a decision, he says, "No they're not needed." And begin to turn the clock back. And so--and his party supports that type of notion. So until that party changes, and understand, you got a black congressman today from--I forget his name--he's one of the leading Republicans there. But he is so anti-issues as it impact blacks. It's just like Danny Glover, the actor who's in New York. He filed a suit. Until you realize one day that you are African American and sometimes you are treated wrongly. Mr--just be on the street waiting for a cab, and see that cab run by you. Until you understand that, then we have to have laws and government to protect. And Individuals say, "They made it on their own. They got to the top." But we are all standing on someone else's shoulders. So the Democrats--the Democrats who have been the forefront on those issues--I, I would say not one hundred percent there. But they have been there for those issues. And that's why I support the views of my party. Now if an enlightened Republican come along, you can't say, "I'm black and I'm Republican" and the great party go along, but all your counterparts are in the opposite direction, on the issues that impact on my people. Or issues that impact on our people are broad. South Africa, be it--See those, those two issues come forth and you see where they stand in time of crisis. It is in time of crisis--South Africa with all the U.S. currency invested in South Africa and I handled the divestment legislation for South Africa. I saw where Democrats stood and I saw where Republicans stood. I saw why many of my own Democrats were not for divestment. But the Republicans were solidly against us doing it. So, I 'm for the two party system. But I'm not for weakening my party and going to a third party. In doing that, all you allow is the other party to come in. We have those battles in Springfield. You have them in Congress. It's ironic that, all your Hispanics and all your blacks who serve in the Illinois legislature are Democrats. Then the other side say, "We know the best way to free you or help you get your programs through." No 'cause I don't see any of them sitting there. And in the U.S. Congress the same identical thing exist. So, you know, it's, it's a situation there is a difference. There is a difference and blacks need to know that. You got some more militant blacks who say, "Well we all locked in one party." But that's not the issue. Because if you don't be with the majority at the time, you weaken the majority. You allow that party to come in where there aren't any. And that happens quite often. And that's how Clarence Thomas got to be where he is. I'd love for Clarence Thomas--I. I think it's okay to be a Supreme Court justice. But I'd love for him to stand on the corner of Madison Street here or Halsted waiting on a cab and its cold and late one night winter and watch that cab run right on by him. He'll find out that he's really black too. That he's being discriminated against. Story_ID: 9340 Speaker 1: you've had political successes. What I want to know is what are the political fights that you have lost and what lessons you learned from them? Speaker 2: Legislatively or elections? Speaker 1: I don't--it doesn't matter to me. Speaker 2: Oh I've had some defeats. I never dwell on defeats you know. I, I had wanted to get out of Springfield [Illinois] and move on to a higher plain. I, I tried twice to get away and I was handicapped both times. I wanted to go to Washington [D.C.] and, that was in 1978. I think the election was. So I didn't make it that time. So I decided--A seat opened up again and I said, "Let me get out of here. I've been here long enough to go to Washington." And I lost. Then the people said, "Well we can't afford to lose you now." A lot of my supporters--a lot of them were educators and they said, "If we lose you, we're not going to have another black to, to replace you." And I ran against--Jesse Jackson's son was running at the time. Had his name been Jesse Wilson and so forth, I would have won. See 'cause his father's name carried him over, but then too in the whole campaign. I recall one issue came out in the '[Chicago] Sun-Times', Judge Pincham said, "If we lose Jones in Springfield, we lost our leader. We can't afford to lose him." So a lot of my friends, followed their advice and they told me, "Heck we want to keep you here." So sometimes you get penalized for doing a good job, or penalized for the position that you hold. I got penalized. So I, I accept that. You know you--I never dwell on the things I did not achieve. I just continue, you know, in the direction that I think is best. Story_ID: 9341 Speaker 1: Senator Jones what do you want your legacy to be as a politician? Speaker 2: You know I never really give that much thought really. I would want people to think that I have built some bridges for many young African Americans to come across on. I want them to think that I cared about their children and that I cared about education. Because I felt that education was the key to the future. It's always the key to freedom. This--For them to remember me as a great servant. Speaker 1: What, what other accom--things that you've accomplished during your political career are you proud of? You know, you talked about education. You talked about some of the other legislation. But what other things are you particularly proud of? Speaker 2: Well I'm proud of basically is that especially since I was elected leader. It enable me to be at the table with the other three leaders and the governor. And I'm proud of the fact that I've been able to help my other colleagues, African American legislators as well. To--for them to receive their due respect, their share of the pie, when I say share of the pie, the resources of government to come back to their respective communities. I'm proud of the fact that I've been able to do that for them. So throughout the city of Chicago, and downstate, East St. Louis [Illinois], I've been able to get the resources that those communities have been lacking in the past. More focus have been placed on issue that they were concerned with, and programs that were needed. And serving in this position I've empowered not only the members of the Illinois Senate, but also many African American members of the Illinois House [of Representatives]. Just my being there. Speaker 1: Now what do you think the--I want to know just generally of the African American politicians here in Illinois. What do you think a legacy is? Of, of the you know, the African American political movement here. You know in Chicago, Illinois? Speaker 2: Well one thing they've got to be very careful of. There are those who sometimes promote African American political empowerment, but they have a separate agenda. And their agenda is their own self-aggrandizement and their own self--personal gain. I saw that during the redistricting remap. And that the current map right now supposed to have so many blacks elected. But they got in bed with the Republicans who were bent on not doing that. And the way they drew the districts, they drew them like from the lake front all the way over to Cicero [Illinois] dividing the communities up and so forth. We got sold a bill of goods. So I would hope that those who want our community to be empowered, that they would look at the more mainstream of really being able to deliver goods and services to your community. For the good of the community rather than for the good of the individual. And , we have to be very careful because you must remember that going into slavery and understanding history, there were Africans who sold other Africans into slave--slavery. So the same thing happens today. You are also being sold a bill of goods by others. And so we have to be very careful about the empowerment aspect of it. I've seen it happen. I've seen our people being sold down the river. Sometimes you're powerless to do anything about it at that particular moment. Story_ID: 9342 Speaker 1: Who is your political hero and why? Speaker 2: There are lots of political heroes. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And I wonder who they are? Speaker 2: Heroes. I like Cecil Partee. Cecil Partee was an African American who was President of the Illinois [State] Senate. He came from Arkansas. He was very bright, articulate. I believe his mother was a schoolteacher. He wanted to go to law school, but they wouldn't let him go to law school there. So they paid for him to go to law school here in Chicago. I believe it was Northwestern. He became the first president, black, African American president of the Illinois Senate. But--He was the first to run statewide. He was more or less like a trailblazer. He opened the doors for the Roland Burris's, the Jesse White's. He was that trailblazer. As--by him serving there, by him running it was easy for the party to come together and say, "We must endorse this particular candidate." That's how Roland Burris ended up being endorsed for Comptroller. 'Cause Partee had blazed the trail when he ran for Attorney General. And along now we have Jesse White, Secretary of State. Harold Washington was a member of his organization. As a matter of fact, Harold Washington when he won the Senate seat that Partee vacated--had not it been for Partee, Harold Washington would have lost his bid for the state Senate seat. So as a result from that, he went to Congress and came back to be mayor. A lot of folks didn't even realize that. They talked about Partee. You understand? I like those who--My heroes were those who blazed a trail. The late Corneal Davis for example who could not be--could not stay in the hotel when he was sworn as a state representative. But he used to pull all of us together the blacks (unclear) to educate us and so forth. He was a hero to me. Because he knew one day that the Partee's and the Emil Jones's and the Harold Washington's would rise. And it's on their shoulders whom most of us stand. None of us get to the position that we are today strictly on our own. And that's, that's what happened. And Harold Washington became Mayor. But a lot of folks didn't realize that in the meetings down in Springfield that Harold liked to read. And they would push all the reading stuff off on him. He had to read all that legal language in the bill and do--but we worked as a team. And then a lot of times Corneal would say, "You boys go ahead and do this here." "You guys go ahead and do this here." "Now I can't do this here." "You know you--" So he wouldn't hamper us. But he in turn would instruct and encourage us to do the things that we did. So these were my political heroes at the time. Wilson Frost who I worked very closely with back then is still my friend. And for those for--See here's what happens if you're not that person out always doing what some of the militants want you to do, they would call you different names. And Congressman William L. Dawson who was a Republican, who saw the movement going blacks--going to become Democrats. He got in front of the people and said, "I'm, I'm the leader." Now he was a United States congressman. He was able to open many doors and jobs and positions for people. But as they got older and what not, folks said, "Ah he's not doing the right thing. He want somebody to give him more voices." And So forth. But he laid the ground for many other individuals where they could stand up and do the things that they did. So my guy Wilson Frost who became Chairman of the Finance. He did in that role what I do as a leader now. He was able to empower many of the African American aldermen just by his being Chairman of the Finance Committee. He was able to fund programs and money to their respective wards that they heretofore did not receive. So a lot of times when you sit in positions of power, you're not the person always out front. But you're enabling someone else to be that person. Story_ID: 9343 Speaker 1: Well [U.S.] Congressman Ralph Metcalfe. I recall Congressman Metcalfe when he was an alderman at [Chicago, Illinois] City Council. He was part of the Regular Democratic Organization as an alderman. He had a falling out, I believe with the mayor when he was a congressman, over an issue. I think it dealt with the police. Something happened with the police and so forth. So he and the late [Chicago] Mayor Richard J. Daley had a falling out. And either the guy was brutalized, beaten up by the police or something of that nature. So his falling out came over that issue. So since he challenged Daley, and the two of them fought and everything. And he ran for Congress. He was already a congressman, I believe he was, and they tried to defeat him. But the people rallied and supported him. So he rose to the--rose up to be a strong congressman as a result. But prior to that, he was just like any one of the other aldermen. You follow me? So usually out of conflict sometimes individuals rise to the occasion of greatness. Harold Washington was the same identical way. He was part of the Regular Democratic Organization. That's how he got elected. That's why I mentioned--he ran for, for the state senate. See he was part of the Regular Democratic Organization. But Jim Taylor who was a state rep was fighting against him. And they ran somebody by the name of Clarence Barry who you never heard of. Harold Washington barely won the election. It was Cecil Partee's political 20th Ward Democratic Organization that enabled him to get elected. So from there, Partee ran for Congress against the person. And he ran anti--people said, "You're against, we're with you more." That's what enabled him to get elected. So Ralph Metcalfe came out of the same particular mode more or less. He was part of and then he broke away from. Story_ID: 9344 Speaker 1: We've had people historically who have had their own power. But I mean when you look at the sum in total what do you think that collective legacy [of Illinois' African American politicians] represents? Speaker 2: Well see the whole--the whole turnaround--And here what's unfortunate. You use the term about "Had their own power." Power to get themselves elected, or did they have power to get somethin' done for the people they represent? And those are two different things. So you may have the power to be anti this, anti-this and you get elected. But then it comes time for you to be able to deliver something of substance for the people you represent. And usually that does not happen. So as a result, I've seen from both ends. And when you look at it, what is your job as an elected official? You can choose the--the glamorous route, I'll put it the, "Rah, rah, rah" route. And giving fiery speeches, attacking this person, attacking that, but you're not able to accomplish anything from the legislative point of view. So as a result, the people generally are the ones--The ones you do not hear much about are the ones who are really delivering the goods and services to their constituents. So one of the--What would the legacy be? The legacy would be that we've had many persons of power and substance. But you must understand when you say--use the word, "power," a person can have a title but not have the power to do anything. The power is the ability to have folks do what you want them to do, against there will sometimes. That is to force government to bring in all the resources, bring in programs, get appropriation here, change laws and so forth. Having the power to do such. Being able to influence enough people to make this happen for your constituency. So I think our basic legacy would be one where we have had those type persons. We've had those who were behind the scenes with the power. We've had those who received all the limelight with the power. Sometimes yes, and sometimes no. So what do we have today? I think we should look at--look beyond the person and their title, look beyond the rhetoric. We should begin to ask the questions, "Okay, you have this title. You're elected here. What are you delivering to my district? What are you bringing back? Are you bringing back a slice of the pie? What programs have you instituted? What laws have you passed to solve this particular problem?" They should begin to ask these questions. As an elected official, I see all of this. And I see sometimes--you heard of people playing to the cheers of the crowd, and the pie in the sky type attitude. And too often we go for the pie in the sky, rather than for something of real substance on a plate. So only history will tell how effective individuals were in the, in the elected positions that they've held. Story_ID: 9345 Speaker 1: You had talked about the Urban League and the black press. And I wanted you to just--are there institutions, or organizations, or people that you think have had a very positive influence on the black community? And I don't--you can talk locally, or you can talk nationally. I don't care which. Speaker 2: Well basically nationally I like the Chicago Urban League for lots of reasons. It was a very stabilized organization that had professional staff. They--Under great leadership. And so issues and things that came up to impact the community. It was a great resource center. What I discovered in Springfield is that many of my white counterpart legislators, North Shore legislators--they would come to Springfield. They would be up there speaking on a bill. And they'd introduce this bill and so forth. But they had in their community folks who did all of that for them. All they had to do was introduce the bill. So the Urban league became that for me, and other black legislators. They became that resource center. All the research and drafting and that, I was able to work with them to help put this forth. That's the reason why I said, "It was a very, very strong organization." There have been other organizations that have been put together, that have been able to do such. A lot of the church based organizations with leadership under the coalition of white and black who actually came forth with the resources, you the legislator, could be very effective. So Jim Compton went with extensive resources and been had a tremendous impact. It has not been as loud and vocal. I worked with Operation PUSH for example. But it didn't have the same type of resources. You're dealing with two different types of entities. So you don't see Jim Compton always out here in the world getting all the PR. But Operation PUSH did. But after you get past the rhetoric, the TV, and the movies, who's going to do the basic work that you need to get done? Just like voter registration. Both entities have been involved in educating our constituencies in the importance in being involved in the voting process. Now I mentioned the black press a lot. The black press is so important. It articulated the views of the black community as well as its black elected officials. It kept us informed on issues that impacting the black community that the major media would not focus on. At the same time, the issues and things that we were fighting for be it Springfield, or be it city council they would cover it. They would put it in their paper. They would, they would let you write a column there so that people would understand what was going on. These types of institutions were needed then, and they are needed now. Because the press decides what our community see, be it television, radio, or, or the written media. That editor decides whether or not it's going to be shown on television, or on radio, or whether or not it's going to be printed where the masses will pick it up. So you always need that piece there. It has been very, very critical for those who have served in elected capacity to have that resource there. Story_ID: 9346 Speaker 1: What about church in the black community or religion in the black community? What role do you see it playing and what are--well, what role do you see it playing? Speaker 2: Right, the church in the black community is about the only real institution that has on a given week sometimes three or four hundred, maybe a thousand people as parishioners in the church at a gathering. So they become not only a good resource center, they also became a center where you could get your message out. So using the churches in the black community would permit the black elected officials to come in--and the white elected as well, especially during election time. You could come in. You'd be able to articulate your views to the parishioners. Sometimes the ministers may be proactive. Wherein they may be involved in politics to a certain degree. 'Cause they recognize that a lot of complaints of their parishioners as it relates to government, is these officials who have to deal with them. So it--the black church in the community has always been the focal point even since from the time of slavery even up to the present daytime. It's there because it has been a gathering point. And so many issues and things that we try to deal with, especially as it relates to juvenile as I spoke on Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] Day. That the church has to be involved in it. In becoming the peer group representative to try to save our young people, those who are getting involved in juvenile crime. So the church is the key anchor, a very key element in all our communities. Story_ID: 9347 Speaker 1: Senator Jones what are your hopes and aspirations for the African American community? Speaker 2: My hopes and aspirations? That a very, very difficult question. But my hopes and aspirations is that they would become so involved and so in tuned as to what is going on around them and in the larger community, that they would have a sound impact. They have a sound impact more or less on our young people. Especially the young African American males. But it's going to take a--the entire community to come together to realize the importance of such. The African American community is a community with many resources. And what we attempt to do is to try to channel those resources in a very--the right direction where they could be helpful to--not only to the individuals you're attempting to help, but to the community as a whole. And also, be that resource for the people you select to represent you. See what happens all too often is that we who serve in an elected capacity, people elect us. And once they elect us, you know, they--there's no other resources come with that. You know. You're out there. And so to be involved, for example, I represent a multiracial district and always have. But take time to write a letter. Just take time to complain. Just take time, pick up the telephone and call. And I guess they feel we all--they don't do that. I return telephone calls from the, the senate floor, to people. Just to pick up the telephone and call, pick up the letter--pen and write your little note, be it pro or con, good or bad. It's always nice to hear from them. And once they begin to do those things, then they will find out that the people that they elected to represent are no different than their next door neighbor sometimes. Story_ID: 9348 Speaker 1: We talked last time about your family--the family you grew up with. I'd like to talk a little bit more about the family you have. You know and the importance of family in your life. Speaker 2: Well, number one, my wife is with me. She is my wife Pat. It takes a special kind of woman to I guess be married to an elected official. Simply because of all the demands that are made on you. Folks stopping by the house, and sometimes they're calling. And wherever you go, there's someone that know you. And since those individuals know you and everything, you know, they want to come up sometimes to discuss business. So she was to put up with all of that type of stuff. But it take a special type of person to understand that. It takes a lot of giving on, on their part. I raised my nephew since he was two and a half years old. So--which a lot of the responsibility came on her to do that. But to take a young child in when you got one just a year older, for her to do that took a special kind of woman. And my daughters, you know, they're doing all right. My oldest son is in computer science. Then I've got my daughter, she works in human services dealing with the homeless individuals in the city of Chicago. So a family is very important for us who serve in public office. Because sometimes people take us and say, well and put us on a pedestal. We, we're different than others in the community. Nah, we've got the same type of problems, you know. I worry her about spending too much money and running up my credit cards. I'm on the boys about doing what they have to do around the house, and so forth. Same type of (unclear). We're no different. Speaker 1: Now is there anything that you want to say that I've not touched upon? Speaker 2: Well, we've covered so much. And half the things we've touched upon I believe I've forgotten, you know. But--but it's been a rewarding experience. I've often said to individuals who served I guess Springfield, I always call it a great, great university. Because I've learned something every day, each day I've been there. And my colleagues whom I serve with, both white and black have been great teachers. I hope that I have taught them equally as well. And it's been one of the greatest experiences I believe an individual could have. Speaker 1: And what--two, two other questions--What do you want your epitaph to be? Speaker 2: I don't want my--I don't think--I don't want to talk about my epitaph. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause we're still young. Speaker 2: That's right--that's right. Speaker 1: We're still young. Then what, what do you want to accomplish still politically out here. Speaker 2: Well politically I like to accomplish--right now I'm in the training mode. I hire staff and I train staff. I'm trying to train individuals, as well as legislators to take over after I'm gone. To be in a position wherein what we have started, you can continue to do the same identical thing and to improve on such. So we're in that constant training mode. Because all my professional staff, these are the persons who do all the research, the writing, you know. They hand me little notes on this. I got to understand what they're talking about. But to train individuals to be involved in the process. And the bridge that we built, hopefully that many can cross that bridge...