 Story_ID: 534025 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines with The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me please, including your middle name? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Colonel Stone Johnson, C-O-L-O-N-E-L, S-T-O-N-E, J-O-H-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, date of birth. Nine, nine, eighteen [September 9, 1918]. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Where were you born? Speaker 2: Hayneville, Alabama, way down in the sticks. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation or your former occupation? Speaker 2: I been retired twenty-nine years. My occupation was, after forty years, worked for the railroad company, L and N Railroad company [Louisville and Nashville Railroad]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And out of those forty years, I was a union representative twenty-eight of those years. Speaker 1: All right. And what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: It's Birmingham, Alabama. Story_ID: 534026 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay? Speaker 2: Help yourself. Speaker 1: All right. Tell me, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Oh, I like all colors. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm a rebel man (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Tell me what you like to eat. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: I, I been so many places around the world, sure I, I'll eat most of anything. God make it and I eat it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me, when you go on vacation, what is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I had somebody to ask me a question like that, but it had it turned around, asked me was there anywhere I haven't been that I'd like to go. And I told them Nigeria. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at the church this guy was pastoring at, sent me to Nigeria last year. Speaker 1: So is that one of your favorite destinations? Speaker 2: So far. Speaker 1: Okay, Nigeria. What about the times of the year? Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, I don't. They go, they come. God sent them all. Whatever he send, I'm satisfied. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite saying or bible verse or phrase? Speaker 2: Blessed by the best. Story_ID: 534027 Speaker 1: Now let's talk about your family, your mother and father [Colonel Johnson]. Tell me about your mother. What was your mother's name? Speaker 2: Fannie [Fannie Johnson]. Speaker 1: Fannie, F-A-N-N-I-E? Speaker 2: That sounds pretty like it. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about her parents, who were her parents? Speaker 2: Well, they mostly raised me. Speaker 1: What were their names? Speaker 2: William and Fannie Johnson [sic.]. Speaker 1: So your grandmother's name was Fannie also? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: All right. Now was this your mother's father and mother or your father's father and mother, William and Fannie? Speaker 2: I ain't never thought about it. Speaker 1: Your father's father was Johnson [William Johnson], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. That's William and Fannie? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me about your mother. We're talking about your mother. What was your mother's name? Your mother's--your grandmother on your mother's side, your mother's mother. Can't think of it right now? Speaker 2: I think I can. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think her name was Fannie too (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Well that's fine. And what about her father? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Can't think of it? Okay, that's fine. Did your mother share any stories about her growing up? Do you know where she was born? Speaker 2: Hayneville [Alabama]. Speaker 1: She was born in Hayneville also? Okay. And did they live on a farm? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Wasn't nothing around there but a farm. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know whether her parents owned the land that they lived on, or they were sharecroppers (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Tell me about them. Speaker 2: Well they lived pretty good. Her daddy was what you call a riding boss, ride the horses around and check on the folks working on the farm. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was like the overseer? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Can you tell me anything else about her growing up, or where she grew up? Speaker 2: She grew up in the country. Speaker 1: How much education did she have, do you know? Speaker 2: They all went to high school, but they had that old fashioned thought about--the boys some of them went to college, but they didn't feel a housewife needed to go to college (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you, your grandmother, her mother, do you have any remembrance of her? Speaker 2: Well, they all lived there on the same plantation. Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the plantation? Speaker 2: Hawthorne Place [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there any stories about any of your family members being in slavery on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Yeah, my granddaddy was eighteen years old when the Emancipation Proclamation was announced. Speaker 1: Okay. So he was raised on the Hawthorne plantation? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Were there any stories passed down about that at all? Speaker 2: I didn't understand that question. Speaker 1: Were there any stories passed down about them living in slavery? Speaker 2: Not to my knowing. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 534028 Speaker 1: All right let's talk about your father. Tell me your father's name. Speaker 2: Same as mine. Speaker 1: Colonel Stone Johnson? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (Laughter) See, it's not the same, okay. Speaker 2: Colonel Johnson. Speaker 1: Okay. And was your father born in Hayneville [Alabama] also? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you know his mother and father's name? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Don't remember, okay. You said you were, that your grandparents raised you though? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You didn't say which one. Speaker 1: Well that's what I'm asking you. Which grandparents raised you? Speaker 2: Oh, much better. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: His, his mother and father. Speaker 1: Okay, and their names were? Were they Fannie [Fannie Johnson] and William Johnson? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 534029 Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up in Haynesville [sic. Hayneville, Alabama]. Speaker 2: They brought me here when I was about three or four years old. I went to school, public school here in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. So you only stayed out there until you were three or four and then you came to Birmingham. Who did you come to live with in Birmingham? Your whole family moved? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Moved in one of the 1918 Ford trucks (laughter). Story_ID: 534030 Speaker 1: Now do you know how your mother [Fannie Johnson] and father [Colonel Johnson] met? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: No, okay. How much education did your father have? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Oh, I take it back. He went to Alabama State College [State Normal School for Colored Students; Alabama State University] in Montgomery [Alabama]. Speaker 1: And he became what? What was his occupation? Speaker 2: Well, he started off a school teacher, thirty dollars a month. And he saw he wasn't making no progress, he changed his occupation to pipe shop manufacturer. And then he, saw that work was pretty hard, and until he caught on to something else, then he got to be a cement finisher, making sidewalk curb and gutter, and he stuck with them 'til he retired. Story_ID: 534031 Speaker 1: Tell me about where you lived in Birmingham [Alabama]. Tell me about the neighborhood or the community in which you lived. Speaker 2: As I was growing up, when we first came here, we couldn't get the kind of house he [Johnson's father, Colonel Johnson] wanted. He got a house kind of in the ghetto, and they were, all of them was just about the same, they just a little different. But the company he worked for had a nice house, but we stayed out in True Village [ph.] for about a little better than a year and a nice house come available. This guy owned a lot of houses. Then we moved in a house where it was, we was the only black family in the block, but across the railroad tracks was the black community. And I could see discrimination but it wasn't as bad for me as it was for a lot of folks. Speaker 1: So what year we talking about, like 1924 or so? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. So 1924 your family in Birmingham, Alabama, moved into a neighborhood and you were the only blacks on the block? Speaker 2: On the block. But they had a--in the yard of a big construction company, had a fence around it, but it was an extra nice house, had a driveway and everything, but we didn't have no car. Speaker 1: So what was it like living in the neighborhood with white people during that time? Speaker 2: Well, the blacks that went to school with me, they would come over because we were the onliest somebody in the block had a radio, thirty-nine dollar Philco radio, nice lawn. Eventually that old man bought it. But the guys that owned the property was foreigners. They was white, but they were foreigners. Speaker 1: They were foreigners? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they had a little bit of action--a little bit of attitude than the average person. Speaker 1: So when you say foreigners, are you talking Italians? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: You say foreigners. When you say foreigners what do you mean by foreigners? Speaker 2: Not American. They come from Denmark. Speaker 1: Denmark. Okay, that's what I was trying to get at. Okay, so, all right. So tell me about your growing up in that area. Speaker 2: Well, back in those days, the boys didn't, didn't do no murdering, had fights, what they call rock battles. Speaker 1: Rock battles? Speaker 2: Yeah, throw rocks at each other. Now they throw a .38 at you (laughter). And it wasn't as many fights and fusses as it is now. You make a fellow mad now, the first thing he say, "I'll kill you." In a way that worked. I did hear it back yonder. Story_ID: 534032 Speaker 1: Tell me about your elementary school days. What school did you go to? Speaker 2: Well, the first school I went with, with Jim Burke Buick [sic. Jim Burke Automotive, Inc.] is downtown. It's three, two and half blocks from the Civil Rights Institute [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 1: What's the name of the school? Speaker 2: Slater [Slater School, Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 1: And do you remember any of the teachers there that might have encouraged you, or that you just remember because, for any particular reason? Speaker 2: Well, yes. There was some good teachers and some just about like everything else. Some wasn't, as the old folks say, wasn't worth the bread, the salt that went in the bread (laughter). Speaker 1: Can you think of any of the teachers' names? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a--my first grade teacher was named Miss Clark, C-L-A-R-K. Speaker 1: Tell me about her. Speaker 2: Oh, she seemed to be okay and I had a second grade teacher named Miss Holland, H-O-L-L-A-N-D and she was just as nice as your mother could be. And that school didn't go no further than the fourth grade. Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then I went to primary school, Lincoln [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama]. They closed it up last year. Speaker 1: You went through the eighth grade at Lincoln? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Story_ID: 534033 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: Ain't nobody but me now. Speaker 1: But how many brothers and sisters [sic.] did your parents [Fannie Johnson and Colonel Johnson] have? Speaker 2: Oh, about three. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you tell me their names? Speaker 2: One wasn't at home, but his name was same as one at home. His name was Willie C. [ph.] and the one at home was named just straight Willie [William Johnson]. Story_ID: 534034 Speaker 1: What extra ac- curricular activities did you participate in when you were in elementary school [Slater School, Birmingham, Alabama]? Speaker 2: Well, back in those days, and if you'll study human nature like I have, you was almost discriminated by the mulatto people as you were by the white. They thought that they was a little better than a fellow look like me. When I left elementary school, one of the best football players, my buddy and I, but we couldn't get on the high school team, didn't qualify, but it wasn't 'cause we couldn't play. It was color. Speaker 1: So there was a class difference-- Speaker 2: Yeah, color class (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in high school [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama]? Um-hm, color class. Speaker 2: But if you don't know, you just don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If they look like me and a feminine gender, you couldn't be in the parade, be a majorette. The guy was over the parade, he'd just tell you straight up and down, "You won't qualify, you don't even have to come back." Didn't try you out or nothing. I can remember when, when they had the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] and President Franklin Delano Roosevelt brought out a WPA for grown folks and times was hard, and they had something, paid thirty dollars a month, had to give the students and when things got so tough, my old man [Colonel Johnson] got cut off, he was one of the main (unclear), and if the qualifications on the register if your parent didn't have no job, they put you on the YWCA [sic. National Youth Administration], something like that, youth administration, comes under the--YWCA, and they didn't even put my name on it. Me and my buddy went to the office. He was a real mulatto, you couldn't tell who his daddy was. But you could tell who mine was. And they didn't even take my application, say we got as many as we need. And, course it wasn't much money but every little bit help. A dollar a day is what they give you, thirty dollars a month. And I never did get on. Speaker 1: And y'all went together to fill out the applications? Speaker 2: Ma'am, yeah. Speaker 1: Y'all went together? Speaker 2: Went together and they asked him first just like they waited on white people in stores. At that time if you went in the store and you be first and the white person be behind you, they ask the white person, "What you want Mr. or Mrs." And I can remember at Pizitz store, the store still downtown now, but it's closed up. Its empty sitting there and a lot of these church people wonder, all these nice buildings, won't nobody rent them. They don't read the book. The book say you got to reap what you sow. All that's reaping. That's what sent me to Africa last year. I spoke to a church group at the Civil Rights Institute [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama] and this guy, white preacher, say, "If I could get you to speak at my church," say, "me and you could be good friends." I said, "Well, you don't have to do nothing but ask me." He said, "What you charge me?" I said, "It's free baby. I done made mine." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "The Lord done fixed me up already." Story_ID: 534035 Speaker 1: So you graduated from high school [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama] in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-nine [1939]. Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-nine [1939]. Now during this time of what, between '29 [1929] and '39 [1939], you were in elementary school [Slater School, Birmingham, Alabama] and high school, and this was the height of the Depression [Great Depression], did your family feel, did you know that there was a depression going on? Speaker 2: Yeah. The way I knowed it, wasn't nobody working but folks working at WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] on the street. All your buildings was built, WPA built them, the tuberculosis association. It out of business now, but the building over there. It was built in 1937 by the federal government, and then in order to keep the folks, had a--in the wind as they called it, they wouldn't let nobody work over three days, two dollars a day. That's what the federal government paid. Story_ID: 534036 Speaker 1: And when I got old enough and come out of high school [Lincoln School, Birmingham, Alabama], I got a job eight houses down the street right here. And this guy was a multimillionaire, and I've seen him discriminate on his own children. He treated me almost right, better than any of the other folk look like him. But when you got common sense, you know when you ain't treated fair. He had a packing company and he paid me a dollar a day and paid the white drivers twenty-seven dollars a week. Speaker 2: So you made a dollar a day and the white drivers made twenty-seven dollars a week? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And you were a truck driver? What was the name of the company? Speaker 1: Bowden packing company. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, say it again. Speaker 1: Bowden, B-O-W-D-O-N [sic.], and he got a nephew, one of the greatest coaches in America. Story_ID: 534037 Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about the fact that you worked at the lumberyard and you were telling me about how they made wooden cars, boxcars. Speaker 2: Right. That was the railroad life. They didn't make nothing but wooden cars and then they start to making steel cars. And then they studied up to make aluminum cars, which was twice as light than a steel car, and as good a material. So I left the lumberyard and went to the scrapyard as they called it. When they have a train wreck they bring all the scrap to the scrapyard, you pick out the secondhand stuff and if it's usable you take it to the warehouse. And I just kept moving up, and the way I got my promotions, I went to the union meeting and God took the fear out of my heart when I was a boy, before I knowed myself I didn't have no fear. And I began to ask about different jobs. "How come y'all call these jobs white men jobs, these black men jobs, what's the difference?" And the union folks would lie to me but I, old common sense tell me don't take it. And then they wanted me to be on the union board and the job they wanted me to take, Shuttlesworth's wife's [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth] uncle had it. I said, "Let me talk to the president of the locals." He had two or three positions because he was a big professor, and he supposed to been my only friend out there and I didn't want to break up my little friendship for a little money, so I talked to him. He say, "I'll be glad for you to take anything the men want you to have. I start--endorse you." I said, "Well, you my friend," I say, "That's who's supposed to endorse you, your friend." Speaker 1: Okay. So you became a union rep after that? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Story_ID: 534038 Speaker 1: The jobs that were different for blacks and whites, what jobs were available to whites that were not available to, to blacks during that time that you were questioning? Speaker 2: If you were, got to be a helper, if you was working with a white guy, he's a machinist and come from one of these little country towns out from town, and he didn't hardly know his way home and you had to show him how to get to the shop and how to go back home, you done your job if you look like me. And he got the top pay. And it seems right 'cause they been doing it so long. Folks been taught that. But organized labor come along and one man special named John L. Lewis, was the president of United Mine Workers of America. He said it ain't right. And he looked different from other men. He just looked like the truth. Speaker 1: I got it. Speaker 2: And he had long eyebrows and God had him marked. No man that I know of looked like John L. Lewis, and when--before the boys started wearing long hair like Christ, he wore kind of long hair and he had a lot of nerve. And when I would read my Bible, I could see where he had the right idea. Speaker 1: Okay. So he's the one who helped start the union? Speaker 2: He was the president of the union (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was the president of the union. Speaker 2: United Mine--United Mine Workers of America. Story_ID: 534039 Speaker 1: Paper wasn't but--Birmingham Post [Birmingham Post-Herald]--was a nickel, five cents, and when I'd make me a little money. I always was aggressive. I could make me twenty-five, fifty cents every day that I wasn't working. You see back then didn't nobody have no ceramic tile on their floor. Things was hard. Story_ID: 534040 Speaker 1: So the union (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They all-- Speaker 1: You were telling me about the union. You became the union rep and how did you, how did things change once you became a union rep? Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) as men go, mens come. As superintendents come, every once in a while you'll be a nice one and then when he don't live up to his supposed to be reputation, they'll get rid of him, and somebody come in that seem like you don't like them, but you gotta have to learn how to like them or love them. And the average white man had been taught so long that he was the boss regardless, that he worked in the vicinity of where you worked, not doing your job. If you was in the pipe department, if he was in the boilermaker department, and he see you doing, helping your machinist or pipefitter, he'd come over there and tell you, "Oh, you're doing that wrong." And he could go to your boss and get you fired, just on his word. And if you refused to do what some of the fellows tell you to do and they was white, they'd get you fired, which was an unfair deal, but that's the way it was. Speaker 1: So the union helped to cut some of that out? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but what hurts you, some departments, they wouldn't let, if you looked like me, you couldn't join the union. And they didn't hide it, say, "We ain't got no colored folks in this department in the union." And you didn't have no representation, just like it was when they didn't let folks look like me vote, taxation without representation. Story_ID: 534041 Speaker 1: Well how did you become a union rep then if blacks weren't allowed to join the union? Speaker 2: Well, it's a long story. I'm gonna give you-- Speaker 1: Give me-- Speaker 2: --the substance of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The machinists had a few blacks. You had to be one of the fellows that worked yourself to death, like you're going crazy when you're working, doing three or four men's jobs, and they call you a good man. And, (laughter) but you couldn't get in the union if you looked like me. And finally, they let some of the machinists, black, get in the union because folks was kicking all over the world and it took a long time. It wasn't nothing but fear. It something you got in your hand, they'll make anybody behave. It made Hitler [Adolf Hitler] behave when the folk went to writing Hitler up, but until they got where they cooperated. The Jews--went to killing a lot of Jews, especially those was cripple and sick, said they wasn't no good in the community. And Hitler had them killed. Then in the long run they come back with the, at healthy Jews. The folks what had plenty of money, they come back, start to killing them or taking their stores without buying. Story_ID: 534042 Speaker 1: So now how long did you work at L and N Railroad [Louisville and Nashville Railroad]? Speaker 2: Forty years. Speaker 1: Forty years. Okay. So tell me about the, about war time. Speaker 2: Well, they had me on the list to go to the war [World War II, WWII] and at that time I was driving a big two ton stake body truck and it paid eleven cents an hour more in labor, and they automatically named that job a white man job, and the chief clerk--my name was sent to the office by his superintendent to keep me on the job 'cause it hadn't been a scratch put on the truck since I had been on it. And the chief clerk had tried to get me off. I hadn't done nothing to him, just making that eleven cents an hour more, more than the other fellow and he took my name off the--I can't think of the name what they call it, where they give an excuse not to go to the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 1: What, deferment to get you off, okay. Speaker 2: Deferment, 'cause I was needed at the shop more than I was needed at the Army, and the superintendent come through the shop and wanted to know where I was. It's five thousand men in that shop and one of the stenographers, say, "Mr. Superintendent," say, "he been gone about a little over a month," say, "the chief clerk took his name off the deferment list." And say, "He probably in Fort Benning," that's over in Georgia. The superintendent say, "Go get the chief clerk." She went and got him, so she told me, and he asked this guy that was chief clerk where I was. He said, "Oh, oh, I don't know," and the lady didn't have no fear about her, she said, "He the one took his name off." So he told him, "Send down to the," aw shucks, it's downtown, send downtown and have my name put back on the deferment list and ordered them to bring me back from Fort Benning, Georgia. They didn't mess with me no more on going to the Army. Story_ID: 534043 Speaker 1: Had one fellow there, come out of Mobile [Alabama], and chief clerk had told him that I was one of them smart ones, whatever that mean. Speaker 2: So tell--I'm sorry (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he say I'm gonna run him off. And he had mixed up with some of them fellows that had fear in their heart. My Bible say nobody, no man, no man, that mean nobody and then used to respect mankind, a man like that, but. Speaker 2: Tell me what you-- Speaker 1: I had got on the union board and the superintendent called me a boy and I was about, I was maybe twenty-nine, thirty years old. He said, "Boy." I knowed he was talking to me, but I igged him because my name wasn't boy. And he said, "I'm talking to you." And a lot of men was standing around, four or five of them run over to me and touched me, said, "Superintendent talking to you." I said, "Naw he ain't, might be talking to you." I said, "Who gonna call me boy?" So he come up there. He said, "Didn't that boy tell you I called you?" I said, "No, he might have thought he was telling me, but he wasn't talking to me." He said, "Oh, you that smart one. I'm gonna run you away from here." I said, "You ain't man enough to run me." I said, "If I thought I was weak enough to let a little fellow like you run me," I said, "I'd dig a hole, make me a grave." He said, "I, I heard about you before I got here." And he say, "I'm gonna run you off, I'm gonna run you home." I say, "You ain't man enough." And when he got ready to run me off, I had two transfer trucks running, was mine, paid for. And he wrote me up, say I was stealing lumber out the lumberyard (laughter). Speaker 2: So you had two trucks that you owned? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: For what type of business did you have? Speaker 1: You mean the name of them? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I had a Chevy [Chevrolet] and a GMC [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company]. Speaker 2: Oh, you just had two trucks. What did you use the trucks for? Speaker 1: Transfer on the side with mine. Speaker 2: Right. So you had your own little business? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. And what did you transfer? Speaker 1: Moved people, that's what transfer. Speaker 2: Okay, so it was like a moving company? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: Like a moving company? Speaker 1: Yeah, but it was on the side. Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: And people had been taught so nasty 'til they didn't want to see a fellow look like me own nothing. Speaker 2: If you was a black undertaker, they'd get a excuse to fire you. Shuttlesworth's wife's [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth] uncle, was the president of my local, he had a undertaker and they had been at him for years. He was a well dresser, he run the oil department at the shop and when business kind of got slow, they told him to lock up his office, lock the building up and they burn up a couple in there and want him to say didn't nobody come there (unclear). He said, "I don't know whether they come in there or not, y'all told me to lock the building. Until you can learn how to tell the truth, then you can protect yourself." A lot of folks didn't protect their self in court. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And not a true witness. Story_ID: 534044 Speaker 1: Tell me how you got involved in the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: Well, when Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] come to Birmingham [Alabama] from Selma, Alabama, come from First Baptist Church [First Baptist Church of Selma, Selma, Alabama], half a block from Brown Chapel [Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church, Selma, Alabama]. I know you done heard of Brown Chapel, and he come a message from God that things wasn't keying out right in the South. And a lot of folks don't know this, and a lot of them don't want to know it. A lot of preachers won't stand up, black or white. When Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got killed, all the black and white preachers say they was Martin Luther King's friend. Wasn't so. If you my friend, you come see about me when I get in trouble. They didn't go see about Martin. No white church didn't let him preach and just a few black ones. Speaker 1: Okay. So you said Fred Shuttlesworth came to Birmingham from Selma and that's how you got involved. Tell me how actually you got involved. Speaker 2: Shuttlesworth's wife [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth] was my local president's uncle [sic. niece]. Speaker 1: The local president of the union. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: The local president of the union? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he owned the undertaker too. Speaker 1: Right, he was an undertaker, okay. Speaker 2: And when Bull Connor was rearing just like a wild steer, and you couldn't do nothing with him. He had white women beat up. If you stayed close to a white family, and the white woman come up in front of your door and you and her was talking and Bull come by, he'd have the police whoop her and you. They had a law, they called it comingling 'cause you just standing up talking to a white person. That was against the law. And they put folks in jail for nothing, and something that's been happening ever since there was a world, until God put it in A.G. Gaston's heart to build a motel in Birmingham in 1954, right behind the Civil Rights Institute [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama], A.G. Gaston Motel. If you come to town to visit some of your folks and you had a house full of children and didn't have no room for your kinfolks, you'd have to try to get somebody to rent you a room in a house, you could be a millionaire, but you couldn't get no accommodation, no kind of accommodation. If you stop where there wasn't no restaurant, well white restaurant, you couldn't go in there and pick up a sandwich. This town been something else honey. But the folks won't tell it. They won't tell the truth. It's a black woman trying to build a dome stadium in Birmingham now. They won't give her the job, nobody else ain't got the money, but they got it, but they can't work it like they want to 'cause they say no discrimination. Story_ID: 534045 Speaker 1: So now back--let's go, let's go back to Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] and your involvement, you still haven't told me how you got involved in civil rights (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay. One Friday night we had union meeting and the president asked me would I ask some of the mens to help watch the black churches. They was blowing up churches just like it was Halloween night, setting off firecrackers. And he told me, "Now, you got a lot of influence," say, "if you do it, they'll come." I said, "I don't mind." I said, "Need doing," and I believed in the guy, but he was afraid. You see when God with you, nobody can stop you. Story_ID: 534046 Speaker 1: Monday night. Tell me about Monday night. Speaker 2: Every Monday night they'd have a mass meeting to get the fear out the folks' heart. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Have a good preacher, somebody hit a text like Joshua fought the Battle of Jericho, and put the right kind of emphasis on it, and put God in front of the battle. So you got to be a good demonstrator to show out God's work. You'd be surprised at the mighty preachers you got, black and white, was afraid to show their face back then 'cause folks like Bull Connor was (unclear). Story_ID: 534047 Speaker 1: So Monday night meetings were to plan and to get people to understand what they were doing. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me about Bethel [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama], about the bombing at Shuttlesworth's [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] house and the church. Speaker 2: Okay. Didn't nobody think nobody was dirty enough to bomb a church on the first bombing. It was a surprise. But it had got out, you know when you have a meeting in a church, black folks having a meeting in the black churches, some preachers was afraid of what the folks (unclear), even the rich folks called Mr. Gaston [A.G. Gaston] and said, "Gaston," said, "you one of the leading men in Birmingham [Alabama], say you get up on the radio and tell the black folks we gonna do better," and he got up on the radio and told the folks, and a young lady looked like me called Shuttlesworth. She was a maid. That's the only kind of job if you looked like me you could hold at city hall. Ain't got no black mayor, all that stuff the folks don't honor the Lord for bringing them through. She called Shuttlesworth. I used to come by his house every afternoon when I got off from work and stay there 'til dark, come home and eat and go back and stay 'til twelve o'clock at night, and a lot of the fellows, not as many as we wished to have, but it, it kept accumulating. Folks kept getting a little more numerous. That's my manners. But anyway-- Speaker 1: So you had enough men that would come and guard the church and his house? Speaker 2: Well, it hadn't started when the first bomb went off. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Bull Connor was having meetings in white churches, telling the white boys that's what dynamite was for. You didn't make them behave, you got plenty dynamite. But the rich folks was furnishing it. You'll be surprised what folks would do for money. Story_ID: 534048 Speaker 1: So what happened after the first bombing at the church [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll tell you--let me lead you up to the first bombing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Bull Connor had a man from Stone Mountain, Georgia [sic. Lookout Mountain, Georgia], and his name was--I thought I never would forget his name, but I'll think of it in a minute. And he was a famous bomber and he was an imperial wizard from Stone Mountain, Georgia. Speaker 1: Was it Venable [James Venable]? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Was it Venable? Was the last name Venable? Speaker 2: No, if you call it, I can remember it. Speaker 1: Stoner [J.B. Stoner]? Speaker 2: Stoner, that's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I witnessed, went to court for him, and wouldn't but one person go with, to the courtroom besides me. And the judge was afraid, but he wasn't afraid of us, was afraid of the Ku Klux [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]. See fear make a man, make a rat go in the hole, but God got something straighten everything out. Speaker 1: So you saying you witnessed Stoner? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: You witnessed Stoner? Speaker 2: Against Stoner, and they sent him off, he didn't make but eight of the forty years. I think he still living. They got a black mayor in Stone Mountain, Georgia, now. But you couldn't stay there back in yesteryears. Speaker 1: So you the only one that testified against Stoner? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, who else went? Speaker 2: McErnest Robinson [ph.]. And the Lord give him something for it. He had a son, a young boy, was the smartest young man in any schools in Birmingham [Alabama]. When he finished college and they test him out, he was the smartest young man had finished high school. They hired him at Mountain Brook High School [Mountain Brook, Alabama]. He sent his application in and he made the most scores and they give him the job. Story_ID: 534049 Speaker 1: Let's go back to the bombing. That was the first bombing or the second bombing? Speaker 2: That was the first bombing. They put the wor- Bull [Bull Connor] put the word out, we gonna bomb Shuttlesworth's [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] house for his Christmas present, in 1958, Christmas Eve night. And they been saying things like that so much 'til they didn't pay it no mind. They put the bomb between a church [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] and the parsonage. They was that close together, just could walk between the two buildings. They didn't care how, whether your church and your house was a special occasion or not. Folks been taught so bad that they blowed that house up and you could hear it five or six miles. Guess what? Blowed it into splinters from the back to the center of the house up to where his bedroom was. Blowed the mattress out off the bed that Shuttlesworth was sleeping on, and his wife [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth]. But nobody got hurt but one person, just a little bit, a little girl. Her, her husband got the church that Shuttlesworth had for forty-something years in Cincinnati [Ohio], Reverend Bester [Harold Bester]. The back of that house went down into splinters. You could see the front, it looked all right. All the doors was so tight, you couldn't open nothing but the back door and it was blowed off the hinges. He had to stoop down to come out the back and they all come out. Shuttlesworth come out first and, as he was coming out, he met the assistant chief of police. He used to stay right down the street there. And he said, "Well Fred," say, "I guess you'll get out of town now, you see Mr. Bull gonna have you killed." He said, "No. You said if you was I, I'm not none of you," said, "God give me something to do, I got to do it." And the next day was Sunday, that was Saturday night, Christmas Eve, 1958, and he got out there on the church ground and preached the eleven o'clock sermon. Wasn't no lights in the church. All the lights fell down out the ceiling. Anything, all the fixtures in the church, but the church still standing. They got a brand new church. The federal government done give them the money, the grant, but they got to match it, and that's when we organized the watchmen of the church. We had to get a lot of them because they was afraid to stay out there by they selves. Story_ID: 534050 Speaker 1: And what was your role? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What was your role? Speaker 2: Well, I helped organize the watchmen, and I was one. All this is volunteer, free. Speaker 1: But this was ac- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wasn't but one deacon and one layman was in the bush with all the men out there. We needed a lot of folks. We took a lot of folks from East Birmingham [Birmingham, Alabama], about maybe two or three miles from the church [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama], the most of them, and the polices got where they would intimidate you. You sitting out there on somebody's porch, the police would pull up right up to the church just like it was going run into it with his lights on the church and then all of a sudden they cut his lights out and started throwing cigarette butts up against the church. You go out there to see was it anything bad, then they cuss you out. "What you come out here meddling us, we watching the church." (Laughter) Some- most of the time it was them. Story_ID: 534051 Speaker 1: You were Fred Shuttlesworth's [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] bodyguard were you not? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Well, I was all the way around man, whatever Reverend Shuttlesworth wanted me to do, I did it. Like when his, his four children went to, I know the name of the college up, up, out from Chattanooga [Tennessee]. It's a black college [HBCU], all four of his children had been harassed so, not getting enough sleep. Summer coming they sent them up there to summer school. They made it alright up there and almost back. They got back to Gadsden, Alabama, and the bus driver, he had to be connected to them, all the little towns he didn't even slow up, just flying, 'til he got to Gadsden, then he pulled up in the alley behind the jail. Don't know what kind of conversation they had had between there, but they put all four of them, three girls, one boy, put them in jail. And a black doctor, twin to the doctor here, called his brother and told him to tell Reverend Shuttlesworth his four children was in jail in Gadsden. And we got up a caravan and went up there, nine cars. Uncle George Wallace had called the highway patrol and told them to get all the, every car in that vicinity and don't let those folks pass, but they wasn't but seven cars of highway patrolmen, nine cars of us. They missed the first car. It had done got by. Reverend Shuttlesworth and James Armstrong was in that car, the one that integrated the schools in Alabama, his children. In the back car, and I was driving the back car, it brought up the rear, and the two guys what was riding with me, we, all the cars, highway patrol, those seven cars pulled to the side, but one had got by. And we passed them, but when I got to Gadsden, I didn't know where the jail was. It was just as quiet on the street. Somebody had put the signal out for them to clear the streets, that it was gonna have a big race riot. It wasn't so though. Police walked across the street and I was stopped at a traffic light and I say, "Hey officer, can you tell me where the jail is?" He said, "Oh, you one of the boys from Birmingham [Alabama] come up here to take our town." I said, "Oh no, we come up here with Reverend Shuttlesworth, they had his children." "How he gonna get them?" "Well, get them out on a bond for whatever y'all got them charged with." They had done called all the bondsmen, they closed up, shut up shop, but it was trying to put fear in their heart. They stayed 'til the next morning and the doctor got them out. But he bought the Holiday Inn, so when they come back to the trial, they'd have a place to stay. That was the doctor. Speaker 1: So you got them out. What were they charged with? Speaker 2: Riding up front on the bus in the South. They had, the judge had said no more discrimination on interstate commerce. The federal judge had said it, but the folks been trained. It's bad to train an ignorant person wrong. There was a lot of laws that broke. Story_ID: 534052 Speaker 1: Now the next time when the Freedom Riders was stopped in Anniston, and the bus was set on fire in Anniston, Alabama, about twenty-eight miles to the right of Gadsden [Alabama], they stayed up there a whole week. No treatment at all, just laying in the hospital, half fed. We went over there that Sunday evening and just a record of a man, and when you got God in the middle of it, it makes a big difference. All them bad Ku Klux [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], look like a drove of blackbirds but they was white. Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] got out of the first car at the hospital and walked straight up to the hospital and them folks just spreaded out, got out of the way. I said, "Good God almighty, these folks talking about how bad these Ku Kluxes is." I say, "'Cause I got some power in this bunch." And it just had to be. Story_ID: 534053 Speaker 1: Now tell me during the boycott at Montgomery [Alabama], the bus boycott, it was after that or before that that there were some demonstrations going on here? Speaker 2: The bus boycott was 1955. This was in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: You've already gone to the '60s [1960s], but I was just asking about the boycott. Had anything been done about riding on the buses here before or after the boycott in Montgomery? The bus boycott, did the people here in Birmingham [Alabama], did they stage any demonstrations so that they would be allowed to ride on the buses in Birmingham? Speaker 2: The federal government put out an ultimatum that the bus drivers couldn't tell nobody where to sit no more. And they put a flock of us in jail because we were riding up front. And it used to be a policeman, him and myself used to sit down and talk, had a board up in there, L and N Railroad Station restaurant [L and N Station, Birmingham, Alabama] and it had a board over the counter between black and white, just a board 'bout like that (demonstrates), and every day at lunch, him and myself, he'd be on one side and I'm on the other, we'd sit there and talk. But when he got in a push, he'd be like, "I don't know you." I said, "You mean to tell me you don't know who I am?" He said, "No, I don't know you." But he wouldn't arrest me, he'd call his sergeant. Story_ID: 534054 Speaker 1: Tell me about 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Well, we was out there, 1963, when the big push was, when they had all them beaucoups of dogs weighing 250 [pounds] up. They had big head dogs, and that was, that was the push for downtown Birmingham [Alabama]. And Bull Connor said ain't nobody gonna demonstrate downtown, we gonna stop them. 6th Avenue wasn't no one way, but they had it blocked, the fire trucks on one side and the police cars on the other on 6th Avenue, going the same way the one way go now, from 18th Street to 16th Street. And they was standing out there with the fire hose ready, but didn't nobody know Bull Connor desire but the chief, fire chief, and he kept asking, say, "Where old Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] at? Where Fred at?" Didn't nobody say nothing. He asked the fire chief-- Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: And after a while Shuttlesworth come out the church. See the leaders, after we lined the folks up, the leaders would come out and walk, go ahead of the marchers. When Shuttlesworth come out of the church, he was on the, on the top platform and he picked up one foot and stepped down, and the fire chief said, "There he is Mr. Connor." He said, "Put the water on him." And they hit him on east side of the front steps and that water blowed him over to the far side to the west side of the church and he was just as wet a duck. Dr. Hamilton [Herschell Lee Hamilton] come out the crowd and checked him. Said, "Take him to the Holy Family Hospital [Holy Family Community Hospital, Birmingham, Alabama], he got pneumonia." It was on Friday evening, and they didn't continue the march, hadn't, hadn't, hadn't started. Story_ID: 534055 Speaker 1: And about 1:30 or 2:00, Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] called me, said, "Johnson [HistoryMaker Colonel Stone Johnson], say go out to the parsonage and get me some clean clothes, I just got through talking to my wife [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth], I got to have dry clothes." And I did. I called my two buddies what rode with me. Went to Cartersville [Alabama] to the new parsonage and got a change of clothes, and he had left orders at the hospital [Holy Family Community Hospital, Birmingham, Alabama] not to let Shuttlesworth out. He put the order out. Aw he was a, he was a bugger, and I happened to know the family of this young lady. She was one of the Solomon [ph.] girls. And when we walked in the hospital, she dropped her head, never did look up no more, and we walked right by her, went on up to his room and he put his clothes, pulled off that little lighting gown he had on. We started back, she dropped her head again. She didn't have to lie, she didn't see nobody, and we come out and I took Fred to room number ten, the suite, to A.G. Gaston Motel [Birmingham, Alabama]. He said, "Johnson," say, "you been up all day and all night." Say, "Go home and get you some sleep." And I said, "Okay," I said, "but if you need me before day call me." And I walked on up to the room with him. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was speaking and he said, "I don't know what we gonna do. I'm just a visitor here. Fred Shuttlesworth is the boss of this march." And said, "I guess we have to call the march off." (Laughter) Shuttlesworth said, "To hell you say, I'm here." And he said, "Let's rest a little while." And Martin Luther King went to smiling and laughing. He said, "How you get out this time of night?" (Points) He said, "The Lord open doors for you." And they didn't march until the next evening, but they marched. Shuttlesworth say, "I'm gonna march if nobody march but me." And he did. Now what you want (laughter) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What about, you talked about the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] and you said that you couldn't go up there, something you alluded to when we were off camera. Story_ID: 534056 Speaker 1: No, you know why? 'Cause they don't want to talk about the truth. Speaker 2: Well, that's what I'm saying. So, we're talking about class. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And you were saying that a lot of the churches in Birmingham [Alabama], you know, the light skin people didn't want to go to church or didn't want dark skin people to go to church with them. So you alluded to the fact that their parents, you know, taught them that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And you were getting ready to tell me about something a teacher said to you. Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: You were getting ready to tell me what a teacher said to you. Speaker 1: A teacher asked me, I went to the church when I was a teenager. We used to go down to the church at night on Sunday night and she said, "Johnson [HistoryMaker Colonel Stone Johnson]," say, "what you doing at my church last night?" I said, "Well the boys was going by looking for the girls." She said, "They don't look for y'all." That's just how they felt. Speaker 2: So was that prevalent in the movement? Speaker 1: No. That church had moved. It's up on a hill where they had, where Dynamite Hill [Birmingham, Alabama] is now. Story_ID: 534057 Speaker 1: The biggest struggle was Dynamite Hill [Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Tell me about Dynamite Hill. Speaker 1: It's in Smithfield [Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Where all the big shots used to live. They died and gone on somewhere else. But now Mr. Gaston [A.G. Gaston] bought a house up there, but he didn't buy it to live up there 'cause he was a little shaky too. He bought it to cooperate with folk look like me. And he let a preacher stay there free. And I could see where this preacher when he got old, he suffered. His name was D. Ampos [ph.], sent all his children to big colleges. When he got old, took him out to the old folks' home. All of his children had good education 'cause he seed to them having it. Story_ID: 534058 Speaker 1: Tell me about your family. You got married. Tell me what's your wife's name is. Speaker 2: Well, I got married about sixty-five years ago. Speaker 1: What's your wife's name? Speaker 2: Beatrice [Beatrice Yancey Johnson]. Speaker 1: And tell me how you met. Speaker 2: Well, my buddy had a old 1931 Chevrolet. We used to drive it to Atlanta [Georgia] every other week. And my wife sister was my dancing partner and we wouldn't thinking about marrying, not even going with each other, but at that time I was kind of halfway popular, had one nice suit and I kept flirting with her 'til we started going together. We went together about three years and then we got married and been married ever since. Sixty-five years and a piece. Ain't counting the years we courted. Speaker 1: And how many children do you have? Speaker 2: Don't have any. Speaker 1: No children? Speaker 2: The world's children is ours. Speaker 1: Okay. So was your wife involved in the movement, alongside you? Speaker 2: Yes ma'am. She didn't miss a meeting. And every time Mr. Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] put his actors, had something in Cincinnati [Ohio], he'd invite both us. We'd been to Cincinnati so many times, (laughter) and he failed his first wife, Ruby [Ruby Keeler Shuttlesworth]. Story_ID: 534059 Speaker 1: We were just finished talking about the march in '63 [1963] from 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama]. What about the bombing at the 16th Street Baptist Church? Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you some things happened that day (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: One man say he saw it, but he was a pimp, one of ours, (laughter) and he wouldn't tell what he seen 'til he was on his dying bed and Shelley the Playboy [Shelley Stewart] was a disc jockey, he sent for Shelley and Shelley would he tell the story. And he identified, I can't call his name, but the man [Bobby Frank Cherry], the one died in prison, last one they convicted. Speaker 1: So he said he saw him? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't get you. Speaker 1: I said okay. You were telling me the story about what happened during that time. Speaker 2: This young man had seen it, but he was one of Bull Connor's boys. Bull told him if you tell it, he was gonna kill him. And he never did tell it, but a disc jockey told it, and this guy's ex-wife [Willadean Brogdon] told it. A witness--put her on the witness stand, and when he changed witnesses, folks changed their mind. She had been saying she didn't know nothing about it. But after her and her husband quit, she told it like it was. And they give him life without parole. Speaker 1: This was so many years after it happened that that happened. Speaker 2: It happened-- Speaker 1: But he didn't get convicted right away. Speaker 2: Took them forty-one years to convict him. Speaker 1: Exactly. And what was the people here in Birmingham [Alabama] talking about when he was convicted finally after forty-one years? How did people feel about that? Speaker 2: Well, some said it was one sided, some said--went along with the verdict. But you got folks who look like me with enough nerve to show up at the courthouse. And the judge convicted him, retired about eleven months after he convicted him. But he didn't intend to convict him, he had done--had the case and he sent him to the crazy house and the folks raised so much sand, singing and praying, whooping and hollering, you name it. He didn't want to go through that no more and when it come down to the nitty gritty, he sent him off, life without parole. Story_ID: 534060 Speaker 1: Now how did you, were you a part of the March on Washington? Speaker 2: Well, it's about one of the greatest things ever happened. I'm sorry. Speaker 1: It's okay. Speaker 2: You see it take folks what--have to get their nerve up. If all the preachers would get up, preach the gospel, like God want them to do, wouldn't have been all of this. See the gospel so forceful when you preach the truth, it's demanding. Can't nobody preach the unadulterated truth, they got to be part of. Don't, they lose their nerve. Speaker 1: So how did you prepare for the march? Speaker 2: Oh, I was just ready. I was already ready, red eye ready. Speaker 1: But I mean as a group. What was going on for people to get prepared to go to the march? Speaker 2: Well, you see I had been going all over America with organized labor. I been getting up speaking for the folks that need speaking for and it wasn't no hard job for me. But you see what get you, the folks would have the opportunity to put you on program and you known all over America when you talking. These folks get up ahead of you. And they has already been (unclear), "Don't let So and So talk." You'd be surprised. They didn't mean to kill Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. They mean to kill Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth]. After they couldn't kill Fred, God didn't mean for Fred to be killed. Then they took a second thought. That's the reason the man found out they didn't tell him the truth, what they put, laid the burden on, James Earl Ray. They told him to take the rap. He looked at the price that Jesus can be bought for, thirty pieces of silver, he see folks go put out three hundred thousand dollars and they done told me they run the United States, I'm a take a chance but after it all said and done they backed off the word. That's the reason they wouldn't let him have another trial. Have you ever heard of another white man say he didn't do a thing and they didn't give him a new trial in America? Unh-uh. Think about it. Story_ID: 534061 Speaker 1: Were you at the March on Washington? Speaker 2: Ma'am? Speaker 1: Were you at the March on Washington? Speaker 2: Every time they went to Washington [D.C.] I was there. Speaker 1: I'm talking about the March on Washington in '63 [1963] when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] gave the I Have a Dream speech. Speaker 2: I was right there. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about the experience for you. How was the experience for you? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Tell me about that day. Speaker 2: That day? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Oh, it was marvelous. Nobody spoke like Martin King. God had a few preachers and probably you done heard all about them. Speaker 1: Sit back, please (laughter). Speaker 2: I don't mean to be out of order, but I'm so used to being comfortable. It's okay. You ready? Speaker 1: Oh, yes sir. Speaker 2: Okay. You know when they said, talking that good talk with Jesse Lewis [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] about him going to Georgia [sic. Kosovo], getting that soldier? You know about it don't you? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: A rich preacher furnished the money and his name, he's sick now, and he ain't no old person either. He got the richest church in New York. And his name, oh boy, he furnished the money, and, Wyatt T. Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker], ever heard that name? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: But they give Jesse Jackson the credit. Popular, but he wasn't popular enough to be the head. Walker is the top man, he done wrote about thirty different books. He's a smart guy. Then you got C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian], you know him? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: Them God's special men. Joe Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] hadn't reached the top. He was with the little boys, but he can speak now, but he don't speak fair enough. He got fear in his heart. And you know one of our supposed to be greatest preachers [Joseph H. Jackson] had the doors nailed up in Chicago [Illinois], one of the biggest churches in Chicago, at his church [Olivet Baptist Church] to keep the folks from going in and out. They named that street Martin Luther King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]. And it seemed like Martin was getting all that credit. He getting the money. He told his folks we gonna have to have this door shut up and they shut it up. It's shut up for good. You wouldn't think somebody look like me would do that would you? Story_ID: 534062 Speaker 1: Tell me the, the climate of Birmingham [Alabama] after King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. Speaker 2: Oh, it was a sad day and a lot that didn't like King, you could hear them hollering and laughing and grinning at the shop I worked at and all over America, so the newspaper say. See that tell you where hate come from. It don't just come up by itself. Folks get out there destroy it. Story_ID: 534063 Speaker 1: Well, it seems that Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] was really an organizer and got things together here, and King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came in to lead certain things. So Shuttlesworth had a following in Birmingham [Alabama]. What were some of the things that got accomplished after King's death as far as civil rights here in Birmingham? Speaker 2: God don't bring his men up regular. See all, everything was done if the men had've cooperated. Most of them was out there for greed, money. And most of them will sell you. I seen that so much on my job, folks had they hand out. Martin had a saying, "Before I be a slave, I be buried in my grave and go home to my master." That mean I ain't gonna pay up, I ain't gonna humble myself to nobody but the Lord. The folks don't like it when you don't humble. Come on. Speaker 1: What do you--what haven't you told me about your time during civil rights? What do you want to tell me about that time? Speaker 2: Aw, I was just a servant, just happen to be there, and done what God, I would think he would want me to do. It take somebody to want to do what God want done. Story_ID: 534064 Speaker 1: What are your, your hopes for the African American community? Speaker 2: Well, it's a whole lot that we got to learn. We got to first learn how to be fair with our fellow man. The average one of us and I'm talking about the men now 'cause God didn't charge the women with nothing. Let you know she was weak to start with, number one. And when man get on a snap, he said well, you give me that woman and she persuaded me. But you got to be strong enough not to. And you got to stay prayed up. That's the substance to the bread. (Laughter) Oh, it's a bitter pill to swallow, yeah. Story_ID: 534065 Speaker 1: Well, during that time whe- after Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is killed and Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] steps in and signs the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], what are your thoughts at that time? Speaker 2: Jackson? Speaker 1: About LBJ signing the Voting Right Act? Speaker 2: Well, they had to settle the folks' mind. See when you make them mad, they'll fight. But Napoleon [Napoleon Bonaparte] fought without being mad. The cause was treating the folks right. And when a big man go in office, he go in there for the people he represent. Story_ID: 534066 Speaker 1: What organizations did you work with? Tell me some of the organizations that you worked with. Speaker 2: Well, I worked with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and National Alliance Against Racial and Political Oppression [sic. National Alliance Against Racist and Political Repression], and that's about all of the number ones. Speaker 1: What did you--how did you participate? Were you a part of voter registration drives? Speaker 2: Yeah, before they let me be registered I was hauling folks to the polls. I was way back yonder when they had to pay a dollar and half a year for every year you missed. Speaker 1: So you mean after you registered you had to pay a dollar and a half? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me what you meant by that. Speaker 2: Well, it cost you a dollar and a half every year you missed. Speaker 1: Every year you missed what? Speaker 2: Miss voting. If you missed the test to register. See they ask you a question, how many seeds in a watermelon. Folks asked you a question that they didn't know. They had a judge named Judge Skinner [ph.]. He asked so many questions, he said he did know all he did ask, but when they had the federal government cut that out, he was a seventh grade scholar. They give him a job being a judge. Got a payoff for being nasty at folks look like me. Speaker 1: So when you went to register-- Speaker 2: Ma'am? Speaker 1: When you went to register to vote, I'm trying to understand the voting process at that time. Tell me, tell me how you went to register and about the test. Speaker 2: Well, when I first went, three or four years or more, they wouldn't let me vote. I'd go right back. I pulled up to the courthouse and let a carload of folks out my car and they go in the courthouse and then I'd go in there. And Judge Skinner would say, "Boy didn't I tell you not to come back here in a year?" I say, "Yes, sir, but I'm qualified." "No you ain't." Wouldn't okay me. Speaker 1: So they just could tell you, you just couldn't vote-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because you couldn't answer the questions that they were asking? Speaker 2: Right. Say you ain't qualified. Speaker 1: Okay. So do you remember the first time you were allowed to vote? Speaker 2: Yeah, I got the receipt (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you remember what year it was? Speaker 2: It was in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That been a long time. Speaker 1: And were you Republican or Democratic? Speaker 2: Well, I'm a Democrat, but if the party ain't going like I think it ought to go, I go for the one that good for the nation. Speaker 1: What did you think about Vietnam [Vietnam War]? Speaker 2: Well, they was out of they place. I don't need to go over there and fight in this man backyard and then come back where I live and get killed. That's about the way it be. Story_ID: 534067 Speaker 1: So you retired in what year? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What year did you retire from L and M Railroad [sic. Louisville and Nashville Railroad]? Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: In 1979. Speaker 2: Class of '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what have you been involved with? Those groups that you just named is the organizations (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Civil rights. Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: Civil rights. Speaker 1: What are some of the things that you do now? Speaker 2: Ain't too much, ain't too much a old fellow can do. Ah, lordy. It's a lady come here yesterday from Atlanta [Georgia] and she's wealthy, she's white. Every time they have something big over here, she call, tell my wife [Beatrice Yancey Johnson] whatever it is, "I got the tickets, I want y'all to go with me." And the folks thought they were taking her for a good thing, I say, "The lady got more sense than all y'all got together." I say, "All these different organizations she head," I say, "it clear as water, that it's right." When they was fighting this housing bill, she was right in it for it to be legal, move anywhere you want to. (Unclear) to have leaders, they be afraid to go with her. Me and my wife would go. Story_ID: 534068 Speaker 1: Because this tape is going to be shown or available to the future generations, what message would you like to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: If you wanna be somebody, be a true witness, the kind of witness God wants you to be. That's the kind of witness I would want all the young folks--and I'm not a discriminator, I want black, white and all to be truthful. The world will get better. You'd be surprised. Story_ID: 534069 Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't spoken about? Did you want to talk more about the trial that you witnessed? You were a witness against J.B. Stoner in the bombing? Did you want to tell us more about that, about that trial? Speaker 2: Well, the way I identified Stoner, one leg was shorter than the other one. He was deformed and he had a shoe on that short leg, heel-- Speaker 1: Sit back, please (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) The sole on the shoe was thicker and he limped when he walked. See all those shoes they would fix for him, he still limped. That was his giveaway. Speaker 1: Where did you see him? Speaker 2: I saw him on Sunday that he come to the church [Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] when they was doing all they could to murder Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] and they couldn't get to him after we got enough watchmans. And he come out there one Sunday evening, they was having a youth program, and my buddy and myself and the other gentleman that be with us, was across the street where the porch was screened in, and when I saw him walking, I said, "That's old Stoner." And John L. said, "Let's go get him." I said, "No, they said nonviolent. The only thing they want you to do is be a witness. They don't want you to bother him." And John L. went over to the church was--he was asking youngsters some questions, and me knowing John L. would fight, he was a miner, he was president of a miners' union, I went over there too. But I went to protect him, you see, 'cause if you hit at him, they gonna put you in jail. And a lot of times you let your temper run away, you get arrested for nothing. But I went over there so if John L. wanna strike him, I wouldn't let him. And he asked some of them youngsters, "Where old Fred Shuttlesworth at?" He talked with hate in his voice. And John L. took him up on it. Said, "Don't ask these young folks that, old Shuttlesworth, he ain't no older than you are," and they went to arguing. And I said, "Unh-uh John." I said, "Don't do that." And he said, "I won't only do that, I'll do so and so and so," threatening. See you make yourself liable when you run your mouth. But anyway, that's when I was up close enough to see him good and he walked off in broad open daylight, and you could tell how he limped when he walked. And he was something else. Speaker 1: So you saw him the day of the bombing? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Did you see him the day of the bombing? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, okay. Speaker 2: Saw him before the bombing, surveying, looking around seeing around seeing how he could get to the church. And I seen him at a yellow cab. He rode around in a yellow cab three hundred and sixty-five days in a year. And his idea was to frighten the old folks, so they would tell the deacons to get rid of the preacher. See a man that's a scound bugger, he know how to frame you. And it made me think that somebody that owned a yellow cab, and I used to know the guy's name that run it in the South, and I told the judge and the jury, I said, "This guy here rode around in a yellow cab three hundred sixty-five days or nights around the block, around the block." See some nights you'd be waiting to be relieved at twelve o'clock, your reliever wouldn't show up. He seen that guy riding around the four hours you was there, then you see him the next four hours, and the next four hours. Speaker 1: So he constantly rode around the block? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Around the church? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In a yellow cab, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 534070 Speaker 1: So after the bombing [of Bethel Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama], how did they determine, how did they arrest him [J.B. Stoner]? Why was he arrested? How did they know it was him that did the bombing? Speaker 2: Well, he was identified on the scene. Speaker 1: By who? Speaker 2: By different witnesses. Speaker 1: Okay. And so how many of those witnesses came to court? I thought it was just you and another person that weren't afraid to go to court. Speaker 2: That was the only two that come up. See they had some more witnesses but they couldn't get them to come up. What they called protected witnesses. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then you talk about the witnesses God talks about, truthful witnesses. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You can't get truthful witnesses every day. Speaker 1: Were you afraid for your life to testify against him? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Were you afraid? You had no fear about testifying against him? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh. I saw a lot of Ku Klux [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] was in the courtroom from where I work at. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But I wasn't afraid. Story_ID: 534071 Speaker 1: Were you ever harassed at home? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: I put the word out. See them folks was a little afraid, they would threaten them. We had a fellow named Ruby Davis [ph.], got to be a city--a county commissioner. He worked at the shop [of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad] then. And he was a union representative in another department at the shop. He was a push up man. To keep from calling an engine out every time they got ready to move a car, they had big, great big tractor, Ford tractor, and he was a tractor driver. And they pushed four cars in at a time. They pushed the first four all the way in there to the end and then they come along and pushed four more cars and leave a big spot between them and blocked the wheel, and then he would, Ruby would get on his spot, just sitting on the tractor. He couldn't move unless he had to go to the restroom and the foreman would come out and relieve him. Well he had to watch them tracks so nobody would get hurt, nobody would do no bad pushing, and he had nerve too. Story_ID: 534072 Speaker 1: Tell me how you would like to be remembered. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Tell me how you would like to be remembered. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, about like the song say, if I could help somebody, then my living wouldn't be in vain ['If I Can Help Somebody']. My main thing was, Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] was my prayer. I figured God answered one of my, oh, I'm sorry (laughter), oh, lordy. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Maybe I put too much in my speech (laughter). Oh, lordy. Speaker 1: Go ahead, continue. You said Fred Shuttlesworth-- Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: You were telling me how you want to be remembered, and you were beginning to say something about Fred Shuttlesworth. Speaker 2: Number one, the reason I was so honest in being a watch for Fred, a protector. Never did have to pull no gun or nothing out. See God want you to be able to represent him. If you represent him, he gonna furnish everything else. I ain't never had to pull a gun out. We went, I told you about that, we went to Anniston [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Right. So you wanna be remembered? Speaker 2: That I helped somebody. Story_ID: 534073 Speaker 1: Used to be in Anniston, Alabama. You still running? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I ain't talking about what somebody told me, Anniston, Alabama. They had signs at filling stations: we sell gasoline to white folks only, and on American highways. It was 78 [U.S. Route 78]. They hadn't built 20 [Interstate 20], and I thought that was one of the baddest things in the world, in the bed of the Ku Klux [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] and you run out of gas. My ace beaucoup, my showing up buddy at that time, but he let me down. Story_ID: 534074 Speaker 1: I was living up closer to town [Birmingham, Alabama] in my other home, house, that the Lord give me. I hadn't moved in this one. We moved in this one thirty-two years ago. I bought two houses and on this spot here, a vacant lot, this house on three lots. And my buddy was fussing one day, just like he was feeling to fight. I said, "What's the matter?" He was the head maintenance man. I said, "Boy look like God just furnish you with everything, got big money, making big money, all your children in college, half of 'em coming out." He said, "Well, I tell you," and he was the head maintenance man at the biggest milk company in Alabama. And he was fussing because they give him all the milk he wanted and he was living with his uncle, his wife's uncle and aunt, and they had children and he had children, him and his wife. He was fussing about they was poor and drinking up his children milk. I said, "Man don't worry about them drinking the milk, ain't costing you nothing." I said, "The man owned the place done told you to get what you want John [ph.]." I said, "What your worry?" I said, "You done messed around and let old greedy catch you." I said, "Old greedy works with the devil." I said, "Don't be mad." I said, "Your problem is you." I said, "You building houses all over town for everybody but yourself." I said, "You living junky, ain't got sense enough to save your little money." And he took me at my word. I said, "Go somewhere and buy you a lot or two." I said, "'Cause it ain't gonna cost you nothing to build. When you get off every evening, we go out there and clean the place up, build you a nice house." But he wasn't satisfied. He went bought one lot. I said, "You don't want to--that's every time you spit, you spitting on somebody else property, and God done give you the stuff to use." So he said, "This will do me." So he just went on with that and he bragged on it. I said boy been much better that way your kids can play out in the yard, and finally he moved in the new house and I was riding down through it. Story_ID: 534075 Speaker 1: We want to thank you for your interview and taking the time to give us your interview to tell us your story. Thank you so much from The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: See the Lord wants something like this told, he want it told, truthfully. And then it won't be no more Hitlers [Adolf Hitler]. I saw his hand go up, you know what it look like? Looked like snake behind your head (laughter). Story_ID: 534076 Speaker 1: I, I had that picture made. They had it made at first and my wife said she wanted one. I had Chris McNair to make it. Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture of you? Speaker 1: When I was on the board to represent the Civil Rights Institute [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Tell me about this picture. Speaker 1: Well, that was a picture, I was working, I believe, when I had that made. Speaker 2: You were working where? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: You were working at the railroad [Louisville and Nashville Railroad]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Do you know what year this is? Speaker 1: Not exactly. It's been about-- Speaker 2: Was it in the '80s [1980s] or the '70s [1970s], well not the '80s [1980s], the '60s [1960s] or the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Tell me about this one. Speaker 1: I wear a suit, I bought that suit and wore it to a federal trial in Montgomery [Alabama]. Looked for one for four or five years before I could find it (laughter). Speaker 2: What year was this about? Speaker 1: Oh, boy. That was, that ought to been about '79 [1979] or '80 [1980]. Speaker 2: Tell me who this is, and when it might have been. Speaker 1: That been about maybe about thirty-five years ago. Speaker 2: Tell me who's in the picture. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Tell me who is in the picture. Speaker 1: My wife. Speaker 2: And her name is? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Tell me her name. Speaker 1: Beatrice [Beatrice Yancey Johnson]. Speaker 2: Now who's the gentleman in this picture up here? Speaker 1: That's my daddy. Speaker 2: Tell me his name and say this is my father. Speaker 1: Colonel Johnson. Speaker 2: Say again? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: Tell me who this is. Speaker 1: That's my daddy. Speaker 2: And what's his name? Speaker 1: Colonel Johnson...