 Story_ID: 35991 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Larry Reginald Jordan, L-A-R-R-Y, R-E-G-I-N-A-L-D, Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N. Speaker 1: Now, is your first name Larry or is it Lawrence? Speaker 2: It is Larry. Speaker 1: Okay. The same happened to me (laughter), I can attest. Alright, so is there a story behind your name, in terms of the rest of it? Speaker 2: Well, there is a story behind my name. My mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan] was a teacher in Kansas City during the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. And during World War II, she met my father, and my father's name was Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan. And they met and they became, like a lot of young people during the war, became involved and fell in love with each other. And he became her boyfriend, but she couldn't hang with the name Napoleon. And so she began to introduce him to her friends as Larry, which I think must have been a popular name in the early '40s [1940s]. Maybe it was some movie star that she saw. And so, she liked the name Larry. And he became Larry. And in fact, growing up as a young child, I remember a number of her friends always referring to my dad as Larry. And I'm saying, that's not his name, that's my name. So, that's--she liked the name, and I guess I got it from my dad. Speaker 1: Okay. That's an interesting story. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And Sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born 7 February, 1946 in Kansas City, Kansas. I stayed in the hospital about three days and moved to Missouri, never to go back to Kansas. Speaker 1: Okay. And now, what is your, I know you're retired, but what was your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I was a career army officer. I served for thirty-five years, and I managed to attain the rank of lieutenant general, 3 Stars. And I served at that grade in three different assignments. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 12th of February, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are at the present time? You don't have to give your address. Speaker 2: We're in Fairfax Station, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 35992 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we have to ask everyone as a warm-up. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, I certainly have a favorite food. I have a lot of favorite foods. I like, being from Kansas City [Missouri], I like barbeque. So, barbeque is one of my favorite things. Also, being from Kansas City, it's beef country, and I like a good steak. But I spent a lot of my time in Germany, so I like a good German Schnitzel, too. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Interestingly enough, I grew up liking the color green. It had nothing to do with the [U.S.] Army at the time, I just liked green. And so, today, green's okay. A nice blue's okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like all the times of the year. Springtime is a time of renewal for me. And so, I like the spring. I enjoy the summer. The fall, also, is beautiful because of not only the colors, but what it sort of symbolically means, particularly when you get to my age. I'm sixty-seven [years old] now, and so I'm sort of in the autumn of my life, but it's still pretty vibrant. And so, I like the autumn. The winter, although the older I get I don't like the cold weather, winter is a great time of reflection, but also a time of promise, because spring follows it. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, several. But as it turns out, a number of my friends that I grew up with in the Army and the families, we gather together every March, and we head to the Caribbean. So, there's about four families. And so, many of the Caribbean islands are what I would consider my favorite destination: St. Lucia, Jamaica. I have a son who lives, it's not in the Caribbean, I have a son who lives in Bermuda. So, that's a favorite for us now, because we go there a couple of times each year to see him and his family and some of our grandchildren. Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have a couple of favorite phrases. One is that "The only legacy most of us leave in life is in terms of the people we touch, for better or for worse." Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Did you want to give us the other ones, or-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I've been sort of infamous, I guess, in the Army for having little phrases. I used to say that "You either manage your own career or someone else will mismanage it for you." I used to say that "The four things that make life worthwhile are faith, family, friends and flag." And I believe that. Faith, family, friends and your country. So, I mean, those were a couple of sayings that I'd say. And some of the others are not family friendly. They're old Army phrases. We'll just skip those. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. I guess it's useful to have those kinds of phrases when you're an officer in the military. Speaker 2: Yeah. But you've got to believe them, because people will very quickly see through you if you're just sprouting phrases and you don't believe it. You've got to live, you've got to walk the walk. You've got to live it. And so, when people would approach me, or I'd be in one of those situations where suddenly there's fifty people out in front of you, and unbeknownst to you, you're going to make remarks, then you fall back, and I'd say, "Well, let me tell you about what I'm thinking about today. It's four F's--faith, family, friends and flag." So, you got yourself a ten minute speech right there. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 35993 Speaker 1: So, well, I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but separately, so we don't get them mixed up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, we're going to start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yeah. Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan. D-O-R-O-T-H-Y. Speaker 1: What is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth was 29 August, 1915 [1914]. And she was born in Jefferson City, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, what can you tell us about her side of the family? How far back, first of all, can you trace them, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: I can go back to approximately 1842. My mother and a brother who was born about eighteen months earlier than her, were the children of Dr. Herbert Johnson and Gertrude McKim Johnson. They were married in 1908. He had graduated from Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] in 1907. And they lived where he practiced, in Jefferson City, Missouri. Her, my mother's, my grandmother had a sister, Hattie McKim, who was an interesting lady for the late 19th century, early 20th century. She was married three times, quite an adventurous woman for that time in history, but also finally settled down and became a teacher. I can trace my genealogy back on that side of the family, both paternal and maternal, when I grew up, to a number of relatives, to include a great-great aunt, who was--no, a great-great-grandmother, who was full-blooded Cherokee. But I lose it there. I go back to 1842 on that side of the family, and basically I run into a brick wall. And it appears that one of my female ancestors had a child with a slave-owner. And so, I'm still working through the genealogy trying to find that out. But that's, it's interesting to do that. It's a little difficult, because some of the records are not quite complete. But I find that the marriage certificates, death certificates, church records, are the best source. The other interesting thing is that my grandmother on my mother's side had a brother, Joseph McKim. And I had heard as a child that Uncle Joe, as he was called by my mother and uncle, was a soldier. That--when you--as a child, I'd ask, "Well, what did Uncle Joe do?" And so, like so many older individuals, they would change the subject or they wouldn't go any further. Well, through my own research I found that in 1907, I believe it was, or '06 [1906], Joseph McKim enlisted as a Buffalo Soldier and went to the 9th U.S. Calvary, and was sent to what is the current name, Fort Riley, Kansas. It was called Camp Riley back then. And through the National Archives, I was able to find some of his records. And Joseph McKim was seventeen [years old] when he enlisted. He was, I think the record said he was a brown-skinned young man of medium stature and about 140 pounds and about 5 foot 7. Because back then in those days, whoever recruited you had to send a telegram to the War Department, saying I enlisted Joe Blow today. And so, I was able to trace my Uncle Joe as a soldier. And I found out he wasn't a very good soldier. After a couple years, the Army and he parted ways. And so, that's why my mom and my uncle probably didn't say much about Uncle Joe, other than he was a soldier. But it's interesting what you find out about your family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that's my mother's side. My father--and they were--I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask you more about your mother, too-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --before we go to your father's side. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Story_ID: 35994 Speaker 1: Now, you said you--okay, so, well, are there any other family stories about people in the family other than your [maternal] Uncle Joe? Speaker 2: Ahhhhhh- Speaker 1: Or stories about how the family--how did your [maternal] grandfather [Dr. Herbert Johnson] was he the first person on your mother's side of the family to go to college, or was he-- Speaker 2: It appears to have been. So, on my mother's [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan] side, when you go back up through her mother [Gertrude McKim Johnson] and that female side, the McKim side, it appeared that they were--I can't tell if they were free blacks before the Civil War or gained their freedom as a result of the [American] Civil War. I just haven't been able to dig that deeply yet. But they were, they were not shopkeepers, but it appeared that they worked in the Jefferson City [Missouri] area, either helping someone or--but they were not in agriculture. They were not farmers. Speaker 1: So, Missouri being a border state, they very well could have been free. Speaker 2: Could have been, but it's hard to tell. And I was thinking they might have been, because in Missouri, there weren't a lot of Indians who were in bondage. And I had the Cherokee great-great-grandmother who was married to an African American, so I deduce that they were probably free at that time. Story_ID: 35995 Speaker 1: Dr. Herbert Johnson [Jordan's maternal grandfather], he went to [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]--so, you think he could have been the first on this side? Speaker 2: I think he was, because I went back through the census and found him growing up. The occupation for the head of the household was laborer, day laborer. So, I'm fairly certain he was the first one to attend college. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Are there any stories about his college days, because he was in the early days of Meharry [Medical College], I would guess? Speaker 2: Right, the early days. Speaker 1: He would have been in the system maybe twenty years before-- Speaker 2: Unfortunately, he had died by the time I was born. Stories from my mother and uncle, they obviously saw him as a great man, a great role model. Interestingly enough, and you mentioned Missouri being a border state. Missouri had certainly segregation and racism, as we recognized it, but in every state, that sort of manifested itself differently. So, this was not what you would find in rural Mississippi, for example. Yet the best I can piece together, his professional status, while it gave him stature in the black community, probably caused him to run afoul of some of the white establishment around Jefferson City, Missouri. I'm told that there was constant harping back and forth between the black professional community, whether it was in Missouri or elsewhere, and the establishment. So, the only thing, once again, the older generations often weren't very communicative about some of those things. The best I can tell, while he was certainly well-respected in the black community, he probably rubbed up against the establishment a little bit. Speaker 1: It sounds like a good thing. I mean, somebody would have to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, or we'd be in--some of us are in trouble now (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, that's-- Speaker 2: But some of that's educated speculation on our part, trying to go back and piece things together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I think by being in a position in the very early 20th century, and being, trying to break into the middle class at that time, I think that certainly gave my mother and her brother and later generations a sense of what was possible with hard work. And that was something that was sort of driven into all of us, that you've got to work hard, you've got to respect yourself, you've got to respect your family. And what you do, reflects on your family. Speaker 1: He would have been a black professional in a time when there was probably unparalleled tension among blacks and whites in most cities in the U.S. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, the early 20th century then-- Speaker 1: The lynchings, the riots--there were race riots and-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Particularly, you know, the country was changing. The country was becoming more urban in the first 20 years of this century, and as blacks moved into those urban areas--and you still had immigration from Europe, and you had a lot of tensions. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how do you spell McKim? I didn't ask you that. Speaker 2: M-c-K-I-M. Speaker 1: Okay. That's what I thought, but I wanted to ask. Okay. So, I take it you don't know a lot about the Johnson side as much as you do about the McKim side? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nope. I can trace back on the Johnson side to my grandfather's parents. And then through the census, you can determine siblings. And while I've began to collect all that, I certainly, I'd have to refer back to it to remember all the names. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it's, you know, I started dabbing at the genealogy about fifteen years ago, and I found that it's got to be a labor of love, because it takes a lot of time. And we happened to have been in the Washington [District of Columbia] area at that time and I spent a lot of time at the National Archives digging through there. A lot of that's online now, and so it's a lot easier. But once again, it takes time. And so, you got to allocate your time and your life to different things. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: But I still find it interesting. Story_ID: 35996 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan] have any stories about growing up in Jefferson City [Missouri]? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it's interesting. They moved from Jefferson City to Kansas City [Missouri] in the mid-'20s [1920s]. My mother's stories really involved following her mother into the teaching profession. She talked about just growing up around Kansas City in the black community. But after her death, what I found in looking through old papers and photographs, in one case a diary, I found out that my mother really wasn't forthcoming. She had done quite a few things. I mean, I found that in the late '20s [1920s], she was interested in aviation. I even got a photograph of her with an old biplane. I don't know if she flew it, I doubt if she flew it. She may have flown in it. But for the late '20s [1920s], it's interesting. The little bit I've done in history--I did my graduate in history and taught a little bit. But the little bit I've been able to find, women in this country in the '20s [1920s] went through sort of a revolution of their place in society, some of them did. And I think black women did, too. And I think my mother and her friends at that time probably saw themselves as young, vigorous, outspoken, breaking out of what they considered the old mode. By the time she was my mother, she was probably back in a motherly mode, but it's interesting what you find. She was active in a sorority. She was-- Speaker 1: Which one was she in? Speaker 2: I think she was a Delta [Sigma Theta]. I'd have to go back and check. Speaker 1: Did she go to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: No, she didn't go to Fisk. My mother went to--oh boy, why did you ask that? It was in Kansas. Speaker 1: Was it in Nashville--no, it was in Kansas. Speaker 2: No. She went to Emporia Teacher's College [Emporia State University, Emporia, Kansas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I hadn't thought of that in years. Speaker 1: Emporia Teacher's College. Speaker 2: But she--Emporia Teacher's College. And before meeting my father [Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan], and after really getting into the school system, the war came along, and she was teaching during the day and working at the defense plant at night. I asked her--by the time I was a teen, I asked her once what she did there. And she said, "Well, I helped put engines on bombers." And I knew that Pratt and Whitney, and Boeing and other companies had defense plants in Kansas City during the war, but I had no idea that my mother put engines on bombers. But that's what that generation did. And they didn't, in some cases, do a lot of talking about it afterwards. She never talked much about the [Great] Depression. And the more I've read and studied about the Great Depression, a lot of black people said, "What depression?" I mean, "Life hasn't changed for us." Now, that's more than just an amusing anecdote. I mean, like it hadn't changed much for them. Times were tough all the time. And so, for many African Americans in this country, the Great Depression was just a continuation of what they always lived with. Speaker 1: Yess sir. So, nobody jumped out of a window because of the stock options. Speaker 2: Right, right. Story_ID: 35997 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, let me go to your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's full name? Well, we already know. Speaker 2: Yeah, Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His place of birth was Hugo, Oklahoma, in May of 1915. So, he was slightly younger than my mother. She was born in '14 [1914]. Speaker 1: Okay. May, 1915, Hugo, Oklahoma. Now, where is Hugo? Speaker 2: Hugo, Oklahoma is a wide spot in the road, very close to the Texas border, in southern Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story about Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan? Speaker 2: I have never been able to find it out, except that I think my grandfather and grandmother on his side thought that Napoleon Bonaparte had been a great individual and so they named their son after Napoleon Bonaparte. Speaker 1: Oh, now wait a minute. He's a junior, isn't he? Speaker 2: No, he is not a junior. Speaker 1: He's not a junior? Speaker 2: No, he's not. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: His father was Clarence Jordan. Speaker 1: Okay. So, his father, your grandfather is Clarence Jordan. Speaker 2: And before living in Oklahoma, Clarence was born and raised in Arkansas. And I do not know whether he met my grandmother there or not. Her maiden name was Ethel Trimble. Speaker 1: Okay. That's T-R-E-M-B-L-E? Speaker 2: T-R-I-M-B-L-E. Speaker 1: Alright, okay, Trimble. Speaker 2: But Ethel and Clarence parted ways, probably in about in 1958. And I knew them as a child because we'd occasionally go to Hugo. Story_ID: 35998 Speaker 1: Okay. So, we were talking about your father, Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan. He was born in Hugo, Oklahoma. How far back can you trace his side of the family? Speaker 2: I can't trace it quite as far. It appears that Ethel [Trimble; Jordan's paternal grandmother] might have come from Louisiana, although I haven't been able to prove that yet. Clarence [Jordan; Jordan's paternal grandfather], after he and Ethel divorced, moved to California, moved to Bakersfield, California. He eventually remarried, lived to age of eighty-seven, a stately old gentleman, and outlived his second wife also. And he was a well-respected old gent in Bakersfield, California. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: In Oklahoma, his profession was listed as laborer. In California, it appeared that he worked for--because by the time I was in my teens, he was retired. But he had worked for the City of Bakersfield in various capacities. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Clarence had not gone to college. Clarence had finished high school. And so, in fact, my father was thought to--had entered college, I believe, when World War II broke out, and he never returned after the war. Speaker 1: Now, where did he go? Speaker 2: In the war? Speaker 1: No, in the beginning. I mean what college? Speaker 2: He never told me. So, I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did your dad grow up in Hugo? Speaker 2: He grew up in Hugo and then left in the war, and as part of his moving around, ended up in Kansas City [Missouri] for awhile, where he met my mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan]. In fact, he stayed there until the war ended. He had been in the Philippines, and returned in early '45 [1945]. Speaker 1: Okay. World War II in the Philippines. Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he share stories about the war with you? Speaker 2: Not really. He said that the war was a terrible thing, but he had seen a lot of places. He'd never been to the Pacific. And my uncle who had been in Europe, in North Africa, Italy, during the war--and they would get into friendly arguments about which had it the tougher. You know, was it Europe or the Pacific? Speaker 1: Now what kind of job did your father have in the military? Speaker 2: He was a corpsman. He took care of--hospitals, and then in the process, the deceased. Story_ID: 35999 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, did your father's [Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan] side of the family have a history of migration in your family, coming from some other southern state going to Oklahoma? Speaker 2: The best I can tell, they grew up, the family was basically from Arkansas. Speaker 1: Or Louisiana? Speaker 2: Or Louisiana. And, you know, if you recall, after the [American] Civil War and certainly into the 1890s and 1900s, a lot of blacks moved across and into Oklahoma. They moved north out of Arkansas into Missouri and Kansas. And so, I think they moved to Hugo [Oklahoma], and it might have been because Hugo turned out to be a place where they canned and preserved fruits, jellies, and that sort of thing. In fact, they still have some large factories down there. And so, I think a lot of people moved in. And while they might have been migrant workers at one point, they decided they'd just stay there because there was work, and they put down roots. Once again, I'm speculating, but I'm trying to put these pieces together, which is a little difficult sometimes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your dad was stationed in the Philippines [during World War II], but he didn't really have, you talked about how--what did he say about the experience? Speaker 2: Well, he said that he, you know, like most soldiers, he thought it was tough being away from home, it was a new environment. He said that the people were interesting, the Filipinos themselves and, of course, the Filipinos had a long association with Americans, and surprisingly, with black soldiers. Because during, I mean, at the end of the 19th century, after the war with Spain, we acquired the Philippines, and we put troops there. And one of the groups of troops were the Buffalo Soldiers. They were actually there for awhile. So, there had been a long association between what we consider African Americans--black Americans, and Filipinos. And so, he was sort of taken by that. He was also taken by art. He said the people painted and they did sculpture. And I think he probably was impressed, like a lot of young black people his age, with what happened in the Harlem Renaissance and all of that. And in fact, I know after the war he took up a couple of forms--he piddled around with a little bit of art himself. He carved wood for awhile and then he and my mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan] got into ceramics, and they actually produced and ran a business on the side, of producing ceramic pieces at home. And so, I learned all about clay and kilns, and firing and then glazing and, you know, ceramics, and trying to market them. Speaker 1: Okay. I was just thinking. You know Carter G. Woodson's [African American historian, author and journalist] first teaching job was in the Philippines. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, it was back during that era. Speaker 2: While he never would talk about it, I think, obviously, it was the death associated with war that bothered him. Who wouldn't it bother, I guess? Story_ID: 36000 Speaker 1: Now, the soldiers during World War II used to talk about "Double V." Speaker 2: That's right--victory overseas, victory at home. Speaker 1: And it was almost like a war going on in the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Yeah, racists-- Speaker 1: Did he [Jordan's father, Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan] talk about how the Army treated him, as a soldier? Speaker 2: He never, it was interesting. He was pretty proud of his unit, just like my uncle was. And they all had, you know--I wish I had them, I don't know what happened to them. They all had these, what appeared to be like yearbooks. They were unit books which recorded where they trained and what they did and who their mates were, you know. So, I mean he certainly wasn't--he was proud of his service, just as my uncle and everybody else that I knew. And the one thing I remember distinctly, I was very young. I was only four years old when the Korean War broke out. But I remember distinctly my uncle and my father talking about that, and saying "I wonder if they're going to re-call us, if they're going to call us back up?" Because I mean, being both veterans--and they'd only been back from World War II for four years, five years, been back five years. They were worried about that, and I mean that's one of the earliest memories that I distinctly have, of sitting around the breakfast table and them discussing that in 1950. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36001 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan and Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan] met? Speaker 2: Not that I could find out. They were two young people, and so they met through mutual friends there in Kansas City [Missouri] and struck it up. But, you know, I've often, I used to ask, "How did you meet?" "Oh, we met through friends." But there was no big story. I mean, my wife and I have a story, but that's a different thing, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, your parents did meet. And did they have a long courtship or did they get married-- Speaker 2: It's interesting. I think it was probably about eight or nine months, so pretty quick back then. In fact, my courtship was about three and a half months, and I've been married almost forty-four years. So, a lengthy courtship doesn't mean much. Speaker 1: Okay. Because you were born in '46 [1946], so they, he got out in '45 [1945]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, it happened pretty-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they were married--that's right. They met in '44 [1944]. He was still in the [U.S.] Army because, you know--. And then I think he was discharged in '45 [1945]. They got married in '45 [1945], and I was born in '46 [1946]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, they actually married very late in '44 [1944]. I'll go back and look at the marriage certificate. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36002 Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan and Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan] personalities, their dispositions, how they walk, talk, how they look, what they're interested in, their attitudes--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: A little of both. I think personality-wise, probably more after my mother, but I think in terms of sort of having just a little subtle sense of humor and poking fun at myself and others, it's probably my dad. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, do you have a lot of brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: No, I only have one sister [Joyce Jordan Moore]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A younger sister, by six years. Speaker 1: Okay. She's younger. And what does she do? Speaker 2: She's a teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She--you know, like, I said, a family of teachers. They look at me and say "What's wrong with you?" (laughter) And I tell them I teach in my own way. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, for six years you were the only child? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the only child. My grandmother was still living at that time. She didn't die until '48 [1948]. Speaker 1: When she died, did she live with you, with you all at the beginning? Speaker 2: Yes. She lived with us. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean, you were too young to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I can barely remember her. I remember a couple of distinct incidents with her. But I was, I'm told, her little jewel. But I just can't imagine that, because I was probably a pretty bad child. Speaker 1: You weren't too old, about two, and--the terrible twos. Speaker 2: The terrible twos. Story_ID: 36003 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Actually, my earliest childhood memory is with my grandmother, walking up to her and asking her for something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That is my earliest childhood memory. Story_ID: 36004 Speaker 1: Now, did you, now you grew up in Kansas City [Missouri], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the same neighborhood, or did you move-- Speaker 2: We grew up--I lived in two neighborhoods. We grew up in the old part of the neighborhood. Kansas City is laid out in rectangles and squares. The boulevards and avenues run north and south, and the streets run east and west. And it's laid out in a grid. I lived not far from the old downtown section, the old black part of town, and about three blocks from the old Municipal Stadium, which was where they played baseball. The [Kansas City] Monarchs [Negro League; baseball] and others played ball there. And in the mid-'50s [1950s], when the Athletics--I think Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] moved to Kansas City, and the Kansas City A's, out west [Oakland, California]. They moved into that old Municipal Stadium about three blocks away. So, my neighborhood was an old, you'd call it more of a middle class black neighborhood, and where families lived for years, and there weren't many transients coming in. People didn't move a lot. And the typical individual--well, I'll give you an example. The gentleman living across the street, there was a family by the name of Hambright, an old name. And Mr. Hambright worked for the city. And he had worked for the city probably thirty-five years. And Kansas City, like most cities, had a big market where produce was brought and sold. And the public could buy, and the stores could buy. And Mr. Hambright had worked his way up from janitorial service to being in charge of a big section of this, and he was sort of a supervisor. And he was a professional man. That was the way he was seen. Next door to us was a family where the gentleman was in charge of the maintenance in one of the public schools. And so, those type of jobs, today we'd say those are menial, janitorial service oriented. In those days, those were considered good stable jobs. And they were the mark of a successful black family. My family, my mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan] was a teacher. My father [Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan] at that time had left the service [U.S. Army] and, you know, I mean had some businesses on the side, but was a postal worker. And that was considered a good job, because it's for the government, it's stable, you get a little retirement. And so, that's the kind of neighborhood I grew up in. All the families knew each other. And about every three or four blocks along those streets, you'd find a little neighborhood store. Those neighborhood stores--and it didn't strike me as a child, but those neighborhood stores were never owned by blacks who lived there. They were owned by others. And in the case of my little store, about a half block away, it was named by a Jewish man by the name of Sam Kaufman. I remember him very well. And old Mr. Sam would put, your parents would send you to the store and buy a can of corn or whatever, and they'd say, "Tell Mr. Sam to put it on my account." And he'd put it on there. And once a month, they'd pay off Mr. Sam. But that's the way, that's the kind of neighborhood I grew up in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We called it a lower middle class neighborhood. Speaker 1: Was there a name for that neighborhood? Speaker 2: No, it was just Kansas City. Story_ID: 36005 Speaker 1: I mean, it's interesting. Kansas City [Missouri] didn't have districts where you had sort of names as such. It was just, you had Kansas City proper, which was municipal. Then you had north Kansas City, which was literally north of the river and had its own little government. Then you had Kansas City, Kansas, which is a completely separate city, but they abut each other. And that was about it. I lived there through about the fourth grade. So, I was about nine or ten [years old]. But we moved, and in the mid-'50s [1950s] they began to integrate not only the schools in Kansas City, but the neighborhoods. People began to move out of the traditionally black areas and buy better homes. Of course, Brown v. the Board [of Education; U.S. Supreme Court declared state laws establishing separate public schools for black and white students unconstitutional] was in '57 [1957; it was decided in 1954]. And Kansas City had started it about a year before, but really didn't get going until about 1959, '60 [1960]. And so, we moved to a new neighborhood-- Speaker 2: Was there a name for this neighborhood? Speaker 1: No, just moved south about, from 21st and Lodge down to 39th and Benton. Benton is, Thomas Hart Benton [painter and muralist] was, you know, obviously famous out there. And so, the neighborhood was a big boulevard that was named after him. And we moved to a nice home there, right across from another school. I'd gone to, I had gone to Carver [school], as I said a little while back, and Booker T. Washington Elementary School. All the schools in Kansas City were named after famous blacks and so, Carver School, Lincoln-- Speaker 2: Now, I was thinking about the street, Thomas Hart Benton. Isn't he the author of 'The Red Badge of Courage' [author is Stephen Crane], is that the one? Speaker 1: No, Thomas Hart Benton was an artist, an architect. Speaker 2: Alright, alright. Speaker 1: But, you know, Crane, I think, wrote-- Speaker 2: Stephen Crane, right. Speaker 1: --wrote 'The Red Badge of Courage'. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: But anyway, so it was sort of interesting. The school that was now across the street from me was Alan B. Ladd [school]. Ladd had been a city father back in the late 1800s. So, I mean, to me, I didn't think of it at the time, but today I think about it. Okay, growing up in a black sort of, fully black neighborhood in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], I go to Booker T. Washington. Once we integrate the city in its late '50s [1950s], I'm going to Alan B. Ladd School. Alan B. Ladd School was probably 20 percent, 30 percent black by the time I finished there. We were probably the second black family in our block, and these were big city blocks. So, there were probably thirty houses, fifteen on the side, along this long city block. And so, we were about the second family in there. It was an interesting transition. Some people were very friendly and some were very hostile. Story_ID: 36006 Speaker 1: What were--we always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Kansas City, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Sights and sounds. I'll give you some snippets. I told you I grew up three blocks from the old Municipal Baseball Stadium. I grew up about a mile from 18th and Vine, which is a famous part of the city where clubs--and there was a lot of jazz played. And there were barbecue places. And one of the most famous in Kansas City was a gentleman by the name of Arthur Bryant, who did Arthur Bryant's Barbecue. And if you Google him today you'll find a lot of stuff, Arthur Bryant. Arthur Bryant had a great clientele. It was a rainbow of people. You'd see the mayor in there, of Kansas city. You'd see, you know, truck drivers in there. And it was interesting. This was the '50s [1950s], and nobody worried about integration or segregation then. They went in and had barbecue. Speaker 1: Now, Arthur Bryant is a black man? Speaker 2: Arthur Bryant is a black man, a famous black man in the town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were two competing guys in Kansas city for barbecue--Gates, Wally Gates--Ollie Gates, I guess, and Arthur Bryant. So, the sights and smells were people going to Arthur Bryant's barbecue. White, black, Mexican, it didn't matter, Puerto Rican. The smelling the barbecue. It was--another sight was baseball day, particularly after the professional team came to Kansas City. They didn't have enough parking. And so, people would park cars on their yard and charge two dollars for people to park there. Or, as a young boy, my friends and I, somebody would drive up in front of the house, and we'd say, "Park your car, Mister." And what that meant was, I'll watch your car to make sure nobody steals your hubcaps. Give me 75 cents to park your car, Mister, okay. The people who lived on Brooklyn, which was another big street where the stadium was, would rent out space on their porch roofs. People would go up and sit on the roofs and watch the game. Those were the sights that I remember growing up. Speaker 1: When you were growing up, the A's [Kansas City Atletics] were playing then? Speaker 2: The A's were there. I remember when they moved there. I can remember getting on the city buses and trolleys, because we had city buses. We had three things. We had regular city buses. We had city buses that had electric poles, and they actually fed electricity--and in a couple of other cities I've seen that. And then we had trolleys that ran on rails. I can remember getting on the older cars and still having a white line down the middle where blacks had to sit behind the white line. Now, we didn't have to. I mean, I think we were supposed to, but by that time, '54 [1954], '55 [1955], people were sitting basically where they wanted to, unless you got to certain parts of town where you were in a definite minority, and you sort of went to the back. I can remember that. What other sights and sounds can I remember? I can remember a big amusement park for kids, Fairyland Park. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what was it called? Speaker 2: Fairyland. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this park was still segregated. And I recall that a couple days a year, they had like school day. And so, if you happened to have gone to what was called the colored schools then, you were invited to Fairyland. And I remember my parents [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan and Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan] saying, "You're not going. If you're not good enough to go everyday of the year, you're not going out there." As a kid, I said, "I want to go to Fairyland Park." I now understand. So, those were the sights ands sounds you grew up with. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36007 Speaker 1: So, you started school at Booker T. Washington [school; Kansas City, Missouri]. This is in kindergarten, right? Speaker 2: Right, kindergarten. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And part of my experience was always needing to be on my toes. Because if I was doing something, somebody grabbed me and said, "Boy, if your grandmother could see you now. If I told her--" I can't tell you how many times I heard that. I was so sick of that. (laughter). Speaker 1: So, they not only knew your mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan], they knew your [maternal] grandmother [Gertrude McKim Johnson; also was an educator]. Speaker 2: Right. And they would talk with her. So, I mean, boy, I tell you, this was a tough road. Speaker 1: So, were you well-behaved? Speaker 2: I was a typical young man. I mean, I was into stuff. (laughter) Speaker 1: So, what did you-- Speaker 2: I was a pretty good boy. You know, I mean, I did things like all boys do, but I, you know, I always had to watch myself, because you know, they knew my grandmother and they knew my mom. You know, I didn't want to let them down. And I'd go home saying I did this today, and they'd said, "Oh boy, you know you represent the family." So-- Speaker 1: What were you interested in, in grade school? Speaker 2: Oh, geez. I was interested in science and space, and I was interested in kickball and baseball. I mean, I was interested in all the things that young men are interested in. Speaker 1: Science and space? Now this the age of Sputnik [first artificial Earth satellite; launched by the Soviet Union in 1957] and all that. Speaker 2: Well, Sputnik happened when I was--by the time I was-- Speaker 1: About eleven [years old], I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, '59 [1959]. So I was-- Speaker 1: No, it was '57 [1957]. Speaker 2: '57 [1957]. Yeah, I was eleven. Well, let's see, '59 [1959], that's the missile crisis. That was something else. Anyway, yeah, I remember Sputnik and watching the television for hours, and they'd show the same grainy films, and I'd say, why couldn't the Americans have done that? So-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you say you were interested in science and space. Now, what was it that--was it the space race that got you? Speaker 2: Oh, that, and there were a lot of television shows on. Television was in its infancy but, you know, I can remember the first television set in our old neighborhood. Everybody came over and saw--you know, it was this family, Mr. Hambright, who I mentioned was a supervisor, and he wanted a television. Everybody went over, and the television played for about four hours a day, five hours. And we'd go over everyday and watch about thirty minutes of it. But later, when we got our own television--but there were a lot of, you know, 'Mr. Wizard' and all these shows, and so I became interested. My mother, being a teacher, you know, I guess I inherited this from her. I got all these books around here, and I've got probably four times as many in boxes that I should unpack. But she had a garage and had a bunch of old trunks full of books. And in the summertime as a kid, I'd go up there and dig through those, and pull them out and read them, or look through at them, at least. And so, at an early age, I got interested in reading and books. And so, between books and dogs and bikes, and occasionally girls, you know, you get interested in things. And so-- Speaker 1: Now, you had a dog growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah. Everybody's got a dog when you're growing up, now. Speaker 1: I mean, was it one particular dog that stands out, or did you have a series of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a couple of cocker spaniels. And I remember my favorite was a cocker spaniel named "Lady." And she was sort of a blond-colored cocker spaniel. And that was my dog growing up. We have had a couple of dogs as an adult. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36008 Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers or mentors at this stage [elementary school; Booker T. Washington School; Kansas City, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Not really, because--and the reason I say that is because I had this sort of strange relationship with all these teachers. I mean, they were all sort of almost extended family. And so, yeah. By the time I got to high school, I had a couple of teachers that really stood out. I had an English teacher. She seemed elderly to me now, but she was probably about forty-five [years old] or so. Speaker 1: Now, this is at Alan B. Ladd? Speaker 2: No, Alan B. Ladd is an elementary school [after integration of Jodran's elementary school in Kansas City]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I probably ought to tell you that story. And so, I finish up in about--let me make sure my years are right. In '59 [1959], I start middle school, junior high school, they call it then, seventh grade. And by this time, they're fully into integrating these schools. I went to Central Junior High School which probably had 3,000 students. No, not quite that many, 2,000 students. And there was a big athletic field. And right across that athletic field was the senior high school, Central High School, Central Senior High School. So, this whole complex is about three city blocks long and a block wide. It's a big place, a lot of students. They were integrating these two schools, the junior high school and the senior high school, and they had a lot of trouble with it, you know, a lot of fights, and whatever. And I can remember my parents [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan and Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan] were so worried, because Ladd School across the street, had gone pretty easily. They'd gone pretty smoothly. They integrated, and by the time--I went there two years, and by the time I finished it was probably 50 percent African American. It started off with about 10 percent. And these neighborhoods were transitioning very quickly. Speaker 1: Okay. But Central Junior and Senior [high schools] were tougher? Speaker 2: Those were tougher, because you're dealing with adolescents. You're dealing with a little older kid. Feelings have hardened by this time. You know, I'm going to fifth grade over at Alan B. Ladd School but, I mean, okay. And so, we were thrown together, and it's alright--kids at that age. But by the time you got to junior high school, high school was pretty tough. And so, I was prepared for the worst, but things went pretty well. I got over to Central High School, Central Junior, and spent two years. And in the six years that I went to that junior high school and that senior high school in that complex, it went from about, once again, maybe 20-25 percent African American to about 98 percent. There was a dramatic change in those six years. Story_ID: 36009 Speaker 1: So, where did the white population go? Speaker 2: They moved, they moved away. I can remember during those times as we were looking for our new home, and searching, there were a couple of things that happened. I think a lot of the veterans of World War II began to use their GI Bill to not only go to school, but for loans. I think in the case of my family, they had saved enough where it was time to move. And in our old neighborhood, which I described as being very stable and, you know, the whole neighborhood knew who you were, and took care of you. I mean, Hillary Clinton says "It takes a village [to raise a child]." It takes a block, you know. And you're doing something bad down the road, and somebody will wear you out right there and then send you home and call your folks and say I wore out your son. And then you'd get it again, for whatever you were doing (laughter). You don't find that now. In fact, you get sued. But by the time we left that neighborhood, it had begun to change, in that there were some of the old families dying out and moving. And it began to see a little blight. And so, blacks who could afford it, moved to better houses. I mean, these were old houses. People tried to keep them up, but they moved to better houses. And the whites just moved further out, moved to the suburbs, moved to the south of the city. And I can remember driving around as we were looking, and you'd see "For Sale" signs. And you'd get to a block where every house had a sign in the yard that said, "This house is not for sale, especially to colors." I mean, you'd see signs like that. And whole blocks would sign contracts that they wouldn't sell--because once the first person sells, and a black or a Mexican or a Puerto Rican family moves in, then you have flight. And everybody sells, and they were worried about their property values, and all the rest. So, those were some--and I should have mentioned that during sights and sounds, too. But that was, that's what happened. So, my neighborhood then, of course, in about six years became, went from two families out of thirty, to probably twenty families out of thirty who were African American. Story_ID: 36010 Speaker 1: Alright. So, anything special about Alan B. Ladd Elementary School [Kansas City, Missouri] when you there? I mean, this is the first integrated school you attended. Speaker 2: It was the first integrated school I had gone to. I was impressed with how friendly some of the students were, and how easy it was for me to make friends. What impressed me was that people who were different could get along, because I had never seen that. I mean, before it had been living in a separate neighborhood, going to separate things, interacting with people on a very distant level. You go downtown, go to Macy's downtown or one of the big stores and, of course, you could shop as long as you had money. In Kansas, you could shop. But it was always distant. We, my parents [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan and Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan] used an old established bank in Kansas City called Commerce Trust, one of the biggest banks in town. And they had run into a man, a white gentleman who knew them, recognized them and spoke to them. And his job was running the parking garage. So, he was the manager of this parking garage for this bank. And it just so happened that when we moved to our new neighborhood, he was about seven houses down. And it was interesting to see--oh man, the reaction. And so, we got along fine, I got along with his family and his children. But it was obvious--and as a child you see those things. They don't really make a huge impression, and in years later you reflect back and say, "Oh, that's what that meant, or, that's what happened." But it was an adjustment for us and for them, because now, even before, we're obviously middle class or lower middle class blacks, and able to afford a nice car. In one of the pictures over there--I guess my dad was always concerned about, not appearance so much, but my mother used to say, "I'm going to have you in a good ride." So, he'd buy an old Cadillac or something. And he always had a nice machine around. And so, when they drove through the drive-in for the bank, obviously, they were well-to-do, they were okay. But now, we're moving on to your same block with you. We're your neighbors. And so, some people couldn't handle that very well, and others could. Luckily, this gentleman could handle it, and he and his family were very nice to us. An old gentleman by the name of Daniels, I believe, Daniels. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in terms of--did you, was there a difference in the school experience? Now, you're away from Booker T. Washington [Elementary School]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the teachers don't know you. Speaker 2: Right. Although it's interesting--but some, the teachers would find out who your parents were. And I can remember having white teachers who said, "Oh, I think your mother was a member of the school system." By this time my mother had left the school system and was a social worker. She worked for the county and helped needy families and aided dependent children, and all of that business. But now it was a different, it wasn't the same nurturing--"Hey, I know your grandmother"--but it was "You're a good student." And for the first time, I saw, I saw students in the classroom being praised and rewarded for how smart they were, not who they knew. Speaker 1: Okay. So, really you felt like it was more of a-- Speaker 2: Well, at the time I just, I mean, at the time, you go to fifth grade and sixth grade, and it's just getting through school. But, I mean, as I reflect back--and I found it a wholesome place. And as we thought about the next year and going over to Central Junior [High School] and all that controversy, I mean, yeah, as a kid I'm saying, "I'm going to be in a fight everyday and get chased home everyday. What's going on?" Well, I got over there and I established new friends and found out that as kids, we all worked it out. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 36011 Speaker 1: So, were there any--you said at the high school level [Central Junior High School; Central Senior High School, Kansas City, Florida], there were some teachers-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. There were teachers that, by that time, you know--. I remember my old English teacher, Mrs. Thumland was her name, really sought to encourage our imagination and our thoughtfulness. And by this time, there are those--you're at tenth grade, eleventh grade, there are those students who, they aren't interested in doing anything but getting out of high school and getting a job or doing whatever. And then there were others who were on the fence. And I think teachers like her helped convince them they needed to go on to college. I mean, I never, it was never a question in my mind--I mean, that was just the assumption, that I was going to go to college. I mean growing up, you finish school, and you're going to go to college. And so, it was never, I never thought, well I'm going to go and do something else. It was just a natural thing. Story_ID: 36012 Speaker 1: Now, had you, when you were growing up, did you have a paper route, were you in the Boy Scouts, were you involved in the Boys Club or anything like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, the Cub Scouts for awhile. I worked. A good friend of mine and I managed to buy a couple of old push lawnmowers. We went to the junkyard, a junk store, and got--and so, we had a little route where we cut grass in the summer. We'd shovel most people's walks in the winter. I couldn't get a paper route. Paper routes were, oh boy, those were prized. And once you got a paper route, you passed it on in the family or to your friends. So, I couldn't break into that. I got a couple of, I had a couple of steady jobs. I mean, I'm talking 12, 13, 14, 15 [years old], doing work around people's houses. And so, the philosophy was, "Son, we can give you things, but you got to go out and earn them. You know, you got to go out and earn--. If you want something extra, you got to work." And so, having a little job was the thing. Even in high school, my mother managed to get me a little job with a big cleaning company that would clean office buildings at night. So, I spent about three hours a night cleaning up, and I'd get a little check at the end of each week. So, I mean, this was good stuff. When you're 16, 17 [years old], every little--you get your little $60, $65 a week, hey, that was okay. So, you had to put half of it in the bank, and then you could go and have a wild time on your $30. Story_ID: 36013 Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Church was interesting. My mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan] and her family were all devout Baptists. They went to St. Stephens Baptist Church. By the time I was a teenager I was told, "You got to go to church." Okay. And some of the services were a little long for me. And so, "You got to go to church." I ended up never intending to convert, but I went to mass for about a year because it was quick, it was different. It was--and as it turned out years later, my sister married a young man out of Peoria, Illinois. His family was Catholic, so she converted. But yeah, church was important. I can remember the summer revivals, and boy, people get happy in a revival tent. Speaker 1: Now, what did you think of that, growing up? Speaker 2: I thought it was what old people did. (laughter) It was what grown-ups did. Was I personally into it a lot? Not really. I think I really got close to the Lord a little later on, as I got older. I sure as heck did in Vietnam. Speaker 1: Now, did you have, like, assignments in church, I mean, as a youth? Speaker 2: I can, well, yeah, I mean, you'd either go to Sunday school, or particularly what they call Vacation Bible School now. But we just called it church school in the summer. And we had different assignments, whether it was writing stories about Jesus or whether it was understanding the Christian way. I mean, so those things were, to me, those were just part of life. Okay, that's just part of what we do. I know for some people it takes on a real meaning and emphasis. But as a youth, I've got to tell you, I was just a typical boy. And so, that was, yeah, that was part of life, I did that. But it didn't have me, I never thought about becoming a member of the clergy. I really think one of my sons did at one point at that age, but not for me. I didn't-- Story_ID: 36014 Speaker 1: Now, do you remember like--the Civil Rights Movement was really cooking when you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --were in school. And I think in 1961, the National Baptist Convention had a big meeting in Kansas City [Missouri], and Dr. [Martin Luther] King and Gardner Taylor and-- Speaker 2: It's interesting, because my mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan], in particular, would try to explain the news to us, by the time my sister [Joyce Jordan Moore] was seven or eight [years old]. And so, she was old enough to be aware, too, particularly as the Civil Rights Movement became, really bloomed in '62 [1962], '63 [1963]--terrible treatment of peaceful protesters. I can remember as a youth. By this time, by this time, okay, you're a young man, and you say, "Why do those people let them do that, put dogs on them, and water hoses. Why don't they fight back?" I wanted to be aggressive. And I think it's the nature of a young man at that point in his life. And so, I was frustrated on several levels. In our country, why do they allow people to do that to others, and then at the same time, why don't those people fight back? And I didn't understand Dr. King's non-violent approach. It took a little maturity to understand that. I sure admired what, you know, people were doing--Freedom Riders, oh man. They're out there, you know putting their lives on the line. Well, why don't they fight back? So, I mean, but that's just youth and ignorance. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember the March on Washington? Did anybody that you know go, offhand? Speaker 2: I didn't know anybody who went. You know it's interesting. You grow up in the Midwest and you see all these things. And Washington and New York are like a world away. I mean, the first time I got on an airplane was 1964, flying to New York to go to West Point [United States Military Academy]. I'd never been on an airplane before. So, yeah, you know, you saw the world through the newspaper and through television and radio. Story_ID: 36015 Speaker 1: I know you said your family would occasionally go to Hugo [Oklahoma]. Did you make other trips with the family? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting. We--now, two specific trips stand out in my mind, because they so much defined where the country was in the '50s [1950s]. So, on one of our trips to Hugo, in particular, I remember my grandmother was very sick, and we were going down there. And so, driving all night--and we get down into Oklahoma early in the morning, and we're an hour or so from Hugo. And geez, we're hungry. So, we stop at a little place and we're trying to get some breakfast. And of course, it's a segregated place and, "No, you can't have--get out of here. You've got to go around to the side and we'll give you something there." And I can remember my parents [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan and Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan] were just so chagrin. And I said, "Are we going to eat?" And they said, "No, we're not going to eat here." "Well, the man said we could get something on the side." So, that was Hugo, that was going south, and I remember those things distinctly. I can also remember going to St. Paul and Minneapolis [Minnesota] within the same year. And it was a totally different experience going north. First of all, driving through Iowa, I never saw so much corn in all my life. (laughter) I didn't think we'd ever get through all that corn. Then we get to St. Paul, Minneapolis and here, unlike Kansas City [Missouri], I see more interaction, racial interaction. I mean, so I mean those are the things that impress you as a child. And you say well, that was different. It wasn't like Hugo, even a little different from Kansas City. In Kansas City, people got along, and everybody sort of--it's an old expression--"knew their place." And every now and then you'd cross that--and you'd rub up--and you had a little tussle. But St. Paul and Minneapolis, a little different. Story_ID: 36016 Speaker 1: Now were you, what did you like to do growing up? Were you involved in music or movies or TV? Speaker 2: I was involved in, I was involved in sports, okay. I liked to play sports, I liked to hang out with my friends. And I can remember, for about three years, what we loved to do more than anything else, we rode bikes all over that city [Kansas City, Missouri]. Sometimes we'd leave home at 8:30 or 9 in the morning on the weekend, and they wouldn't see us until 8:30 at night. And in those days, I mean--so it's a pack of five or six boys on these bicycles, twelve or thirteen years old. Some would see a pack of troublemakers. I mean that's what they perceived. Others would say, "What are these little black guys doing riding over here?" Others would say, "Look at those young men riding." But for us, it was just freedom. I mean we'd literally ride for miles--joke, laugh, hang out, go see friends, go chase girls, whatever we were going to do. We played a lot of baseball. And then all that changed when you turned about sixteen. It wasn't cool to ride a bike anymore, and you weren't quite, you didn't have your license yet, so you did a lot of walking. That's when young men, you'd see these young in groups of three and four, I mean, just stroking. You see these guys, they always, you know, we always looked like we were in a hurry, going someplace. We had no place to go. I mean we were just stroking, talking. And so, those were the, I mean I hung out with a lot of friends. And that was life growing up. Speaker 1: Was there a style of dress? Speaker 2: Oh, man, hey look. You had half a stingy brim, and you had, I mean you had, by the early '60s [1960s], you had to be clean, you know. You weren't grungy, you know, jeans weren't the thing, denims. I mean, you had to have Stacy Adams shoes and all the rest. And that was just Kansas City. You wanted to be seen as neat, clean. And girls were fine. You know, that's the way it was. And you saw the same thing being played out on campuses. I mean let's say you go to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] or, you know. So, I mean, hey. And that was just the time. And our models, we saw role models in 'Jet' and 'Ebony' [magazines], and that was it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36017 Speaker 1: Now, you were a good student. We know this, or you would never have gotten into West Point [United States Military Academy]. Were you always a good student from grade school all the way through? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a pretty good student. And there were times when I probably didn't live up to my potential, and I'd get a little encouragement either from the teacher or at home, or whatever. But interestingly enough, by the time I got in high school, it was pride. I wanted to be at the top of my class. I wanted to be one of--. And the friends I hung around with were all good students academically. It doesn't mean we behaved very well. We did some childish and devilish things (laughter), but we were basically good students. We were not gangsters or hoods or anything like that. But, and so by the time I became a sophomore and junior, my goal was, I want to be one of the top guys in my class. Because as we looked around, those at the top of our class academically were girls. The girls were doing very well. And out of the top ten graduates in my high school, seven were girls. There were three guys. It happened to be that the other two guys and I were all good friends. But--and you were expected to do well. By the time you got to high school, people sort of said, well--. Naomi Jolly, who happened to be one of my classmates, she, I mean it was, got to do well. So, everybody expected her to do well, she expected to do well, and all that outside encouragement caused her to do--the same thing with me. They expected me to do well. And if I didn't do well, then I was disappointed in myself, and my friends were disappointed. And so, we all reinforced each other. Speaker 1: Did you have time for sports? Was that something--I mean in terms of high school, I mean, did you play official sports? Speaker 2: I ran track. Speaker 1: Ran track? Speaker 2: Ran track. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the time I didn't think I was big enough for football. We didn't have a baseball team. I mean back then, in poor black high schools, you had basketball, track and football. I mean, that--and girls had field hockey and volleyball, and they ran track. The sisters were good on the track, they were good. But that was me. Story_ID: 36018 Speaker 1: And did you have any idea when you were in high school of black officers in the military, you know, Benjamin Davis and [Daniel] "Chappie" James [Jr.] or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Chappie was, when I was in high school, Chappie was probably a captain in the [U.S.] Air Force. I mean, so, I was beginning to be aware of the opportunities, because in those days in Kansas City [Missouri], you had to have--what was that? You had to have a year of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. I think every boy had to take at least one year. And then for the rest of the time, he had to take either ROTC, P.E. [physical education], or both. And so, those were two things I liked, so I took them both, you know, right through. But I'd been interested in soldiers, just like I was interested in cowboys and firemen as a kid. Well, I got into ROTC. And I really, in high school, I found this was something I liked. I liked, first of all, I liked to wear that uniform. "I'm distinctive. Hey, look at me, hey, I'm one of this group." I enjoyed what they trained me--being a young man, stand up, have confidence. And they did things that, you know, as a little freshman or sophomore, I hadn't thought about. "Hey, here's a rifle. We're going to teach you how to take this apart and put it together. We're going to teach you how to march. We're going to--." And then I was on the little drill team that the school had. And they'd go out and they'd put on performances. So, all this was, for me, interesting and enjoyable. So, I mean, it's--. Story_ID: 36019 Speaker 1: And by the time I was a junior, you're starting to think about college. You know, I'm looking at the opportunities. And one of those opportunities was suggested to me. "Why don't you go to West Point [United States Military Academy]? You like ROTC." I knew about West Point. I knew from TV, I thought I knew what it was, and it never entered my mind that I can go there. "I can't afford to go there." And then they said, "No, they pay you to go there." Speaker 2: So, who introduced that idea to you? Speaker 1: Two people. One of the school counselors happened to mention it. But my mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan], being a social worker, was working with a pastor of a Presbyterian church, a big white church. It turns out that the pastor, Andrew Carhart, was a 1946 graduate of the military academy of West Point. And he served, and had gotten out and gone to the seminary to become a Presbyterian minister. And they worked together helping families. You know, she worked for the county. He brought his church into a couple of situations. And he had asked her, "Well, where is your son going to college, you know, in a couple of years from now?" He said, "I want to talk with him about West Point," which he did. And he really helped me begin to think about it as a possibility. And then Dick Bowling was our representive, national representative, and was a Democrat in the Fourth District there in Kansas City [Missouri], and wanted to, and had pushed civil rights. And the black community had been on him and some of the Senators, and said "You're not appointing any minorities to these congressional positions in the academies." He said, "Well, I'll sure look around." And so, it all sort of came together, and that's how I became interested. I wasn't certain. I enjoyed ROTC, and looked at the military and said okay, fine. But in 1964, we still had the draft, since before Vietnam. I mean, and so, I was looking around saying well, I really don't want to get drafted. I mean, I like ROTC, I don't want to get drafted. I want to--so, if I go to college I can get that deferment. I had it all planned out. And then the West Point thing became a possibility. And I said well, that's different, I'll go there. I had a couple of other opportunities that turned out, and even had some teachers tell me I was making a mistake. So-- Speaker 2: So, what would they say in that regard? Speaker 1: Well, they didn't, they weren't anti-Army or military, because I mean in 1963, '64 [1964], you know, that institution, it was there, but the [U.S.] Army was something people enlisted in when they couldn't do anything else. That's how a lot of professionals looked at it. Or, you got, if you didn't have a job, you got drafted. Well, I had my selective service card. I was signed up like everybody else. I had a student deferment because I was still in high school. I was in a student deferment because I was going to college. But they, you know, finally we all applied to several places. And I applied to Central Missouri State, which is one of the traditional black schools in Missouri; Lincoln University; the University of Kansas--I got accepted there and a few other places. I got a scholarship to Yale [University], and then I got this appointment to West Point. And so, you know, a scholarship to Yale University. I said, "Oh wow." And the teachers are saying, "Whoa, I know you're going to take that." And then when I said, "No, I think I'm going to go to West Point", a couple of them said, "How can you turn down Yale? How can you do that?" And so I mean, I'm an eighteen year old kid, and I said "Well, that's where I want to go." "No, you can't do that, you got into Yale University. Do you know how many people from Central [High School] have gone to Yale University?" I said, "No, how many?" "None." So, I made my choice and went to West Point, and never looked back. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm glad I did. Speaker 2: Alright. Story_ID: 36020 Speaker 1: So, was there anything special, like graduation [from Central Senior High School, Kansas City, Missouri]? You were, you said a girl was the top student, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was the fourth in my class academically and overall. And we graduated about 400 and some. Interesting, my high school had 2,600 students and we graduated maybe 500, maybe 500. And so, boy, that's not a great graduation rate. But we were still a good school. And it shows how many people dropped out. A lot of people dropped out of school after, I guess you had to go through tenth grade. And they literally dropped out and went to work, because that's what they wanted to do. They were qualified to look--not like dropping out and saying, oh--. You know. Speaker 1: So, I take it there were plenty of jobs in the aircraft industry and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I mean, Kansas City had some manufacturing. Ford had a plant. I mean, it, yeah, there were jobs. If you left high school with a degree, or you left after the tenth grade, you could find work. Probably not the kind of work you'd want to do for thirty years, but you, you're seventeen or eighteen years old and, "I'm tired of school and I want to get out in the real world." So, for some people, that was an option, and they did it. So, we graduated probably less than, maybe around 500 out of 2,600. Now, that's an interesting number, 2,600 kids in that high school. I get to college, and the student body is 2,400. And when I told people, they'd say "Well, you came from out there in Kansas--" They didn't even know what Kansas City was like. "You came from Kansas City. This must be a big place to you." I said, "My high school had more people than this." And they couldn't believe it, you know. Or, the kids from New York City, "Oh, my high school had 4,000 kids in it." So, that was interesting. Story_ID: 36021 Speaker 1: Okay, so West Point [United States Military Academy]. How did you get out there? Did you--oh, you flew, for the first time. Speaker 2: I flew for the first time. I flew--we had some family friends who had left Kansas City [Missouri] and they lived in Long Island [New York]. And so, West Point is about fifty miles north of New York City. See, you fly into New York City. The first time I'd ever been on an airplane, and I flew there. I went out and met my friends. I stayed the night and headed to the city, got the Port Authority, and missed the last bus up to West Point, so I spent the night with about ten other guys sleeping in Port Authority (laughter). Speaker 1: This is 1964? Speaker 2: 1964. I'm in the big city. All I knew about New York was that there was an old TV show that talked about the Naked City. Well, I said, well, I'm in the naked city then. And we went on up the next morning and reported in on the 1st of July, which was the day we were supposed to be there. Speaker 1: Did you stay in the Port Authority, or did you walk-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, we walked around the city a little bit and then we went back and slept in the Port Authority. I mean, I had about ten dollars in my pocket. We all had maybe ten dollars in our pocket and didn't know anything about the city, and weren't going to try to get in a hotel. So, yeah, here's a bunch of eighteen year old guys, I mean, we just, "What are you doing here?" "Well, I'm going up to West Point." "Well, I am too." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But anyway, you're reporting to West Point, and that's a unique experience. So, you walk in, it's like nothing you've ever seen before or heard. All these cadets in uniforms and standing tall and straight, and they're telling you forget about that life you had, you're in a new life here, young man. Drop that bag and stand tall. And it was quite an experience. It was the same as basic training for the first two months in the summer, plus some classroom work, to get us ready for the academic year. A lot of physical training and a lot of discipline, learning how to take orders and not question, and learning rules and regulations, and all of that. Speaker 1: So, they start early in the summer, to get you ready? Speaker 2: They start--well, then, we started on the 1st of July. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, even to this day they start in early July, and it's called R-Day, Reception Day. And they get all the new cadets in, and they go through new cadet training which is locally known as Beast Barracks. And Beast Barracks is the time--if you combine two-a-day football practice with pledging a fraternity for two months straight, and being active eighteen hours a day and sleeping the other hours, that's Beast Barracks. I mean, it is a rigorous, tough, mentally challenging, emotionally challenging time. And a lot of guys, just after two or three days, said this isn't for me. I didn't know I was going to get harassed, I'm tired all the time, my muscles are aching, they're calling me a dirty worm. (laughter) And so, they quit. And my attitude was, well this isn't all that tough. You know, I've been sore and tired and worked hard before, and hey, these jokers can't break me down. And I knew a little bit about the military, so they didn't, you know, I was very proud. I knew how to handle a weapon, I knew how to do all that, and march. And in fact, one day after about a week there, this upper-classman grabbed me and said, "I see you got a little experience. Don't get cocky there, Jordan." I'm thinking, hey, I'm going to make it through this thing. But at West Point they also sort of caused a class. You and your class bond, because you've gone through some shared trials and tribulations. And you live with these people for four years, and afterwards that's a bond that exists for years. So, once a quarter I'm, my class that's located here in this district, in this area, has a lunch. And we get together and we have lunch and share time together. But that bond is one of the things that's distinctive about all of the academies, but West Point's the one I went to. And it's the bond with your classmates, of shared adversity and overcoming everything they throw at you. And it's done for a purpose. It's done to bring out character and teach you character. And I was introduced to their honor code. Their honor code is pretty simple. A cadet doesn't lie, cheat or steal and doesn't tolerate those who do. And so, these were values that my parents [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan], all of our parents had tried to pass to us. But here was an institution that said hey, if you want to be one of us, you don't put up with that stuff. You don't lie, cheat or steal. You're honest. Your integrity is your bond. And so, that became very attractive to me. It sounds pretty idealistic, but then if you're going to be a soldier, you've got to be idealistic. Story_ID: 36022 Speaker 1: Now, this is, this is one of the few professions, I can't think of another other than the military, where you can go to college and you will meet your college classmates in life over and over again. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, that's right, the service, the years. Speaker 1: You know, because I don't think in business that you'll ever meet your--you know, or you might see them. Speaker 2: You might see them. Speaker 1: But this is--you'll see these people again and again. Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, it's quite interesting. And I, there were people that I served with for thirty-five years after we graduated, and that I still associate with. If they come to me and say, "Hey I've got a problem" or, you know, or "This is what happened," I know that I can trust that that's what happened, you know. And it's more than just going to a school with them and going through some juvenile harassment and adversity and going to class. A lot of these people, I went to war with them and I fought with them. And so, when I got to Vietnam for example, I was a lieutenant. And a lieutenant is put in charge of a platoon of men, in this case about thirty men. And those platoons are in a company of maybe 120 men. There were three platoons there. All the lieutenants were my classmates from [United States Military Academy] West Point, I knew them personally. And so, it wasn't a case of coming in and getting to know who these other leaders were, and can I trust this guy? If I'm doing this and he's supposed to be protecting my rear or my flank, I didn't have to worry about it, because I knew them, and they knew me, and we trusted each other. It was quite a unique experience. Now, that's not always common. It just so happens that the lieutenant colonel that was in charge of that big unit had been our teacher at West Point. And when he saw us coming in there, he said, "I'm going to put them all together and see how they work. Here's a little experiment." Story_ID: 36023 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. Now, what was a typical day like at West Point [United States Military Academy] when you started there? Speaker 2: Okay, as a freshman, as a plebe, as they called them, a fourth classman, you had reveling, and the cannon would go off, you'd hear a bugler playing. You'd get up, and you'd have about five minutes to get dressed and get out in formation for head count, and this about 6:30 in the morning. And so, you're out there and take the, you know, it's a formation. The cadets all line up. They take a report. And then they dismiss you, and you go back and clean yourself up and get ready to go to breakfast. And in those days, they formed the whole corp up in companies. And we'd march over to this huge dining facility and seat the whole student body at one time. We'd have a meal. There's a little ritual at mealtime. You go to the same table everyday. There's ten people on the table. In those days, we were all male, so ten men on the table. Sitting at the head of the table, was what was called the table commandant. He was one of the senior cadets. And you'd have people from all four--you know, senior, junior, sophomore, freshman--on that table. And the freshmen were at the other end. Normally, there were three of us on a table. And so, they'd bring big platters of food and beverages and put on the table. And the freshmen at the end had duties. And so, if there were beverages, he'd ask everybody up there who wanted what beverage, and pour out the beverage and pass it to them. If there was a big cake put there, how many people want cake? All ten want cake. So, he had to slice the cake in ten equal pieces. And you'd hope everybody wanted cake, because you could slice a cake in ten pieces. If seven people want it, how in the hell are you going to get seven pieces? And somebody's going to say, "Who gets that big piece and who gets that small piece?" And of course, they harassed the freshmen down there, the plebe, just for the heck of it. And so, I mean, that was, it was like living through an Old English boys' school, with a lot of pranks and a lot of humor and a lot of harassment. And it's how cadets coped with the environment, humor. And you go to class. You go to class, and we went to small group classes. The typical class was only twelve people, twelve people and an instructor. So, I'd go to English class, there would be twelve of us. And so, you had a very intensive interaction with your professors. You'd go to math class, same thing. Calculus, geometry, whatever, algebra. And normally those classes had blackboards around three walls. And if it was a math class, they'd say, "Okay, take boards." You'd stand up there and they'd give you a problem and you'd work it out. And then you'd have to defend your solution in public, to your classmates. Classes ran all day. You'd go to lunch and finish up about 3:15. And then between then and 6:00, you either went to athletic practice if you were on a team, or you went to intramurals, but you didn't go back to your room and sleep. I mean, if you went out on an inter-collegiate team, you were on intramurals. And intramurals, they were in some cases tougher, because I mean, these are some guys who were big, strong and might have not been finesse players, but everybody had to play something full-time. You either boxed or you were a wrestler or you were a football player, or you played some of these strange games I'd never seen, like lacrosse or soccer. I said, what the hell, running around with a lacrosse stick and throwing the ball. And then you could hit the guy with the stick, too. Come on, hey, what kind of game is this? An old Indian game. Or, ice hockey. I'd never seen ice hockey. When I grew up in Kansas City [Missouri], I didn't play ice hockey. And so, that's what West Point was like. The academic load was tremendous. And the biggest challenge was time management. You didn't have enough time to get everything done, so you had to sort of prioritize. Story_ID: 36024 Speaker 1: Now, is the curriculum basically engineering? Somebody was telling me-- Speaker 2: In my day it was engineering. We all graduated with a bachelor's of science in engineering. It was heavy on civil engineering, fluid dynamics, electrical engineering--all general engineering with a healthy dose of the humanities. Today, they major in just about every subject that you'd find at a normal university. And I'd say only about a third of the people major in engineering. Foreign language--if you want to learn Mandarin, Chinese, you can learn that--Russian, Ukrainian. Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. It's probably is an off the wall question, but was there any African American history taught? Speaker 2: There was very little. I went back as a professor. I went to grad school. And I went back in 1975 and I taught African American history. That was one of my courses. I wasn't the first to teach it. In fact, they started teaching African American history probably a year or two after I graduated. But-- Speaker 1: And I'm wondering too, if any of the alumni sought out the African American students to really talk about the history of African Americans at West Point [United States Military Academy]? Speaker 2: While I was a student, from '64 [1964] to '68, [1968], a little of that, but not much. When I was a professor from '75 [1975] to '78 [1978], there was a lot. Not only because--I mean, I was part of the history department and I taught the standard history course, U.S. History, colonial to '65 [1965]. And then the second semester, 1965 to present--or actually not present, but through the 1950s, was when we stopped. I taught urban history, I taught diplomatic history and I taught an African American--. Each year I taught a two-semester, or was it one semester? I think it was a two-semester African American history course. But there were other things. There was research going on, and other things. So, by the time I got back there on the faculty, it was a growing concern, and today it continues. But as a student, no, there was very little. Story_ID: 36025 Speaker 1: Now, did you learn strategy, I guess, at [United States Military Academy] West Point, as a course, in terms of military strategy? Speaker 2: You learn, not strategy as such. You learn grand strategy. You have classes that talk about--for example, we cover all of the major battles. We had a course that taught Revolutionary War and [American] Civil War and World War II. And so, you learn these things, but in terms of the strategy and the applications that I used in the [U.S.] Army, those really came from courses that I took in the Army. West Point, like most universities, gives you knowledge at a broad base. It teaches you how to learn. When I was a lieutenant colonel, I had a tank battalion that I commanded. I went to Army schools to learn how to do that, you know. So, West Point's the basis, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. It's different from what a lot of people think. A lot of people think you go to West Point and you're studying, like, the great battles of history. Speaker 2: Well, I mean that's a very small part of the curriculum. I mean, most of the curriculum is English. I learned German there, engineering--gosh, statistics. I mean, you learn all this stuff. And the whole purpose is to teach your mind how to learn. I mean, some of that stuff, I took two semesters of law. We were required to take two semesters of constitutional law to understand the role of government, and the role government and the individual government and the military civilian control, all of that. But no, West Point is not the school for generals or whatever. It's a university, but it has military training, and it teaches you about your institution and the history of your institution and all of that, but-- Story_ID: 36026 Speaker 1: Now, were there, I know--were there special instructors, or did you have a special relationship with any of the instructors or the staff at West Point [United States Military Academy]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Every cadet has a faculty sponsor, or mentor who just like at any university, will look after that student and check on them. But over the years you develop inter-personal relationships also. It's interesting. In the early '60s [1960s], because there were very few African American faculty members--there were some--and they, we gravitated to them and sought their advice and experience. But because there were relatively few, an interesting phenomena took place. There were black non-commissioned officers [NCOs], sergeants, who were assigned to the post also. And many had been assigned there for years and years. And they didn't have a direct interface with the cadets. But they sort of took some of the cadets informally under their wing and helped them understand the [U.S.] Army, and provided that social outlet that in 1964, '65 [1965], '66 [1966], that some of these cadets didn't have. And so, on the weekends you might have a couple of hours free and get invited over for dinner and meet their family. The same thing would happen with officers, but there were just so many fewer African American officers. Now, it wasn't restricted to race. There were white officers who would invite you into their homes on the weekend and introduce you, and show you what their family life was like. Because I mean, we had no idea, you know, a soldier, what's his family life like? Does he have a family? Yeah, sure he does. So that's--. Were there ones that stood out? Yeah, there were a couple that stood out. But for the most part, all of the, without exception--without exception, all of the faculty members and officers I met while I was a cadet treated me fairly, and I saw no discrimination. Now, that's not the case with my classmates, because we're eighteen and nineteen year old men coming from different backgrounds. And I can remember a couple of ugly encounters where finally a guy said, "I'm sorry, I didn't mean to say that. I'm from Mississippi, and that's the way we do it. And I've never known anybody like you, and now I see that you're okay." And so, for us, it was all a learning experience. As a freshman, one of my classmates (laughter), one of my classmates was from Xenia, Ohio, I'll never forget it. He was just a good old Ohio boy. He was fine. My other classmate was from Marietta, Georgia. He had never seen snow. And so, we're all in one room together. Now, they moved the roommates around three times a year. So, I'm also living one time with an Italian from New Jersey, Joe Capella. And Mother Capella would bring up all of these boxes of Italian food on the weekends, and we'd just love it. We had to eat it over the weekend, because you couldn't keep it in your room during the week (laughter). And so, here's Larry Jordan, a little black guy from Kansas City, Joe Capella--I don't know if his family was Mafia or not, but he was pretty savvy for an Italian from New Jersey. And we still had the guy from Marietta, Georgia. That's a hell of a room. And the first time it snows up there, the guy from Georgia jumps out of bed that night and throws the window open and says, "I've never seen this." And after about ten minutes, we said, "Close the damn window." And the window stuck open and we couldn't get the damn thing closed. So, I mean you remember those funny things. In a way, West Point was a great equalizer. It brought people together who had never been around other folks before, and forced them to live in close proximity. It was interesting. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36027 Speaker 1: Now, what was the most difficult part of West Point [United States Military Academy]? Speaker 2: The most difficulty thing about West Point was putting up with knowing that I've got four years to go through this. First, they're going to dog me everyday in class. I mean, the academic load was heavy. I've got to put--although you enjoy it, man, I got to dog myself in athletics, whether it was a team or intramural, plus the regular P.E. [physical education] classes. I mean, they had some physical fitness challenges that just won't quit. And then I've got to put up with this discipline. And at those times, you didn't leave the place very often. You just couldn't leave and walk downtown when you wanted to. So, it was putting up with all of that. That was what, I mean, can I make it through this, four years of this? I mean, that's all people talked about. So, yeah, it was a challenge. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, but by--as you became an upper-classman, you got a little responsibility. You began to be in charge of things. And you began to train the under-classmen, and pretty soon you realize one day, you know what? This isn't too bad. I sort of enjoy what I'm doing. I think I can make it. This is a challenge, but I can make it. I wouldn't want it if it was easy. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you were, somebody told me you were a star man at West Point. Speaker 2: No, I was not a star man. A star man is someone in the top 5 percent of the class academically. You wear a little star on your coat. I was on the brigade staff. I was one of the highest ranking guys at the end of the four years. And I ranked in the middle, above the middle of the class. So, I mean, I started off really poorly, quite honestly, as a student. I worked hard, and I was coming from a background where I had done well in high school [Central High School, Kansas City, Missouri], and I expected to do well at West Point. But everybody at West Point had done well in their class. And I ran up against people who had come from some top-notch high schools. And I realized, I'm not the smartest cat on the street here anymore, I've got to work. And so, starting my sophomore year I worked my tail off, and I did okay. We were graded not only academically, we were graded on our physical fitness. We were graded on our leadership abilities. And so, I did okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36028 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, so, when you were, I guess when you were a senior, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed. Was he killed while you were still at West Point [United States Military Academy]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Dr. King was killed, Bobby [Robert F.] Kennedy was killed, right before my graduation. Those had a tremendous impact on us. But I've got to say as equal an impact was the Watts Riots [in Los Angeles, California], in '65 [1965]. We all entered West Point in '64 [1964], and we brought whatever cultural and emotional baggage we had with us. And I remember when the riots began in Watts and Detroit [Michigan] and others--and by this time we're all in our little cocoon. We're all isolated. We're, and as a class, you know, 994 of us came in together, I guess. By that time we were probably down to 800--. Speaker 1: You're going to think about it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We were probably down to 800. And we'd bonded by this time. And I can remember people saying what's going on, what's it all about in Watts? And I kind of understood. I mean, I'd come from Kansas City [Missouri]. I had a black classmate named Benny Robinson who was from L.A. [Los Angeles]. And I said, "Benny, what's really going on?" I mean, and I can remember him saying, "People are frustrated." And so, all the things that were happening in the country, whether it was ethnic controversy, or whatever it was, as a cadet, we were sort of looking at it through the eyes of the television and the media, because we weren't directly involved. We were so into what we were doing. We got through this place--when I graduate I'm going to be a lieutenant--and all the--. And so, what my contemporaries were doing--. Let's say at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], where they were concerned about the administration running the place, I can remember as a senior going down and spending time with a friend at Howard. And a third friend, who had been one of the other top ten graduates, a black guy at my high school [Central High School, Kansas city], had gone to school for a year and said it's not for me, and he joined the [U.S.] Navy. We were all together a weekend at Howard, and the students had taken over the administrative building. And so, we're saying, well what's this all about? Because I mean, ain't nobody going to take over the administration building at West Point. And my friend in the Navy said, "Ain't nobody going to take over the boat." (laughter) And we're saying, what's it all about? And-- okay. So, it was an interesting time. It was an interesting time, just being at West Point, being black. And I don't know how many people I helped understand that black people are just like you. And some, they may be different, but they have the same needs. They have the same desires and motivations, and in some cases, they may be a little better than you. Academically or athletically, they may be a little worse than you, but we're just people. And so, just being there made a difference, I think, to the place. And the fact that out of the ten black classmates that started, nine of us graduated. And people used to say, well, hey, we got, out of the 994 that entered total, we had 713 that graduated. So, I don't know what that percentage is, but 90 percent of us black guys graduated. Speaker 2: That's a higher percentage than the rest of the class. Speaker 1: Right, 90 percent. So, I said, we're pretty--. And it was interesting. Those ten, well, the nine, because the first guy left the first year. Those nine really bonded. We stayed in touch. Story_ID: 36029 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the riots in the country were taking place in Watts [Los Angeles, California], and then later, after Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed. Were they concerned, the black cadets [at the United States Military Academy, West Point], more than the others, because-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Well, I think it concerned the black cadets, but it also concerned the white cadets. By this time-- Speaker 1: Well, just let me finish, because this-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Did it concern you all as black cadets, because the National Guard was called to move on the black community-- Speaker 2: Uh huh-- Speaker 1: --which, you know, creates this confrontation between the military and the black community. Speaker 2: Right. I don't think we looked at that aspect too much. You know, by this time we, we said okay, yeah, the guards got to go help the police, I got that. We were more focused on, what kind of hatred causes someone to shoot a pastor? I mean, that's the kind--here's a civil rights leader who has espoused non-violence. He's subjected himself to harassment, beatings, jailings, and now somebody has to shoot him on a balcony of a motel. I mean, that's what struck people. Or, here's Bobby [Robert F.] Kennedy, who got shot down. So, yeah, I mean, the aspect of using the National Guard and military to re-establish, to help civil authorities didn't, that wasn't a big issue in our minds, I don't think. And it probably wasn't, because we were all products of our time. I mean, that same National Guard had moved into Little Rock High School [Little Rock, Arkansas] and escorted students. So, I mean, I grew up seeing the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and the federal marshals, and the guard escorting little black kids into schools and protecting them. So, I mean, yeah--. Now, the country as a whole, later during the riots, that's a whole different issue. I mean, we could probably spend two or three days just talking about how the riots affected this country, opened the country's eyes in a lot of respects, caused people to say, what have we done that has caused people to be so angry, to lash out like this? And so, I just haven't given that much thought here recently. I mean, when I was teaching history, I used to bring it up as part of my course, and make cadets confront it. Because all of those cadets I taught were like five, six, seven years old when the riots happened--eight years old--but they were old enough to remember, they were old enough to remember what their parents said about it. They weren't old enough to really think through it. And so, they, a lot of them carried a lot of baggage. And so, I felt my role as a teacher was to help them understand. Hey, look, there were some reasons why there were riots in this country. It wasn't just because people didn't have jobs and didn't want to do things. Do you think those people wanted to burn down their neighborhoods? Where are they going to live? There was true anger, genuine anger and frustration. And so, it's interesting. As a student during those years, in a way, I was sort of isolated because that wasn't happening around me. But I said I understand that, I understand why those people are frustrated. But it wasn't, it didn't turn us against the National Guard or the military. By the same token, the country was going to war at that time, and we were all focused on hey, I'm going to have to go to war here, too. Story_ID: 36030 Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is, '68 [1968], which is also a dramatic time, not only for civil disturbances here, but also for the cranking up of the Vietnam War. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: But the Tet Offensive was when? Speaker 2: '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Spring of '68' [1968]. Now, here's another aspect. By, in '65 [1965], [President Lyndon B.] Johnson committed large forces, began to commit forces to Vietnam. In late '65 [1965], early '66 [1966], we had some of the first casualties. We were having casualties, but casualties of people we had known as cadets. And so, they erected large grass plaques in one of the academic buildings outside of the auditorium and began to put names of fallen West Point cadets on that plaque, series of plaques. And it became poignant when we began to recognize people that we had known. The first class, I was the in the class of '68 [1968], so the seniors, when I arrived there, the rising seniors were the class of '65 [1965]. And I can remember distinctly when we saw the first name from the class of '65 [1965], and then the class of '66 [1966], and then the class of '67 [1967]. And these were people we had gone to school with and knew personally, and they were appearing on these. And so, the reality of the war came home to us. And we all knew we were going to go eventually. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But as a twenty-two year old young man about to graduate [from the United States Military Academy at West Point] and become a lieutenant, there was some adventure involved in that. It's hard to describe. I mean, we had trained for it. We wanted to become leaders. Nobody necessarily wants to go fight and die, but hey, this is my profession. I want to be good at it, I want to prove that I am good at it. So, it was an interesting dynamic, of recognizing and seeing the reality. Before that, it was all sort of theoretical, and it was sort of glory and okay do this. But now, there were people coming home in caskets that we knew. Speaker 1: Now--and the criticism of the Vietnam War, that it was a political mistake, was all over the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, by '67 [1967], '68 [1968]-- Speaker 1: Did that kind of dialogue exist at West point? Speaker 2: No. We were true, we considered ourselves true patriots. We were committed. Hey, they can do that stuff at Vassar [College], they can do that stuff, you know, at Rutgers [University], they can do that stuff at, you know, Penn State [University], but they don't do it at West Point. Speaker 1: So, could a cadet have survived West Point with the critique of the Vietnam War? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I mean, in fact, in classes, we discussed geo-political issues. Yeah. In fact, it's encouraged, critique of the administration. Now, a critique of the administration is one thing. To get out and then make a public declaration that I'm opposed to what the president and--. What you do as a private person is different from what you do as a, say, representative of the military. And so, if I want to be critical of--today, if I want to be critical of President [Barack] Obama, or if I want to be critical of the Republicans or I want to be critical of anybody, I can do that. But I will not do that and say, "Lieutenant General Larry Jordan is critical." I will say, "Larry Jordan is." Because, as an officer--I'm retired--but I'm still an officer. You know, I took an oath to the Constitution, and to follow the orders of the president, as approved by the [U.S.] Congress. And so, professionally, I separate those things. My right as a citizen is to do a lot of things. But my responsibility as a general, as an [U.S.] Army officer--professionalism--we follow legal orders, moral orders. We may not agree with them. Story_ID: 36031 Speaker 1: Now, was there any type of specific training about Vietnam at West Point [United States Military Academy] when you were there? Speaker 2: Oh, no. I mean, you had, we had military training, where it's summer training where we actually did military training. And so, it was designed to help you understand that kind of warfare. But the real training came after you graduated and you went to the [U.S.] Army schools. I went to the Army's ranger course. I went to the airborne course. I went to the basic course, and we learned all about weapons and tactics. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: So, West Point gives you your general grounding and your background. And then the courses, specific courses in the Army, give you those specific skills. Speaker 1: Okay. So, graduation. Now, describe graduation at West Point, briefly for us. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's a grand day. Early in the morning you get up and you take the oath of office as an officer. Then you prepare for graduation, which is normally done in the football stadium. You assemble there on the field. You hold class, and the whole stadium is full of other cadets--family members, you know, relatives, and so forth. And like most graduations, there's a graduation speaker. In our case it was the Vice President of the United States. Speaker 1: Now, that would have been Hubert Humphrey, right? Speaker 2: Hubert Humphrey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'll tell you a little story about Hubert Humphrey later. I got involved with him. But--and then one by one, you walk up to this podium and across the stage and receive your diploma, and sit back down. And at the end of the thing--and you've probably seen the news--you throw all these hats in the air. And it's a fantastic feeling, that I accomplished something very few people accomplished--finished four years at West Point successfully. And I graduated, and I'm a Second Lieutenant in the regular Army of the United States. And then you walk down the hill, normally with your relatives and girlfriend and parents. And the tradition is, as a new lieutenant, the first soldier you encounter that salutes you, you give them a silver dollar. So, I had my silver dollar in my pocket. I'd forgotten all about it. And this guy walks up and says, "How are you doing, Lieutenant?" And he gives me a salute. And I said, Holy Mackerel, it must be real. I gave that rascal that silver dollar, and I kept moving. Speaker 1: This may be a goofy question. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do people ever find their hats, or do they just let their hats-- Speaker 2: Some never find their hats. I threw my hat and I watched it, and I said I'm going to get that damn thing. And I grabbed it. I got my hat back. (laughter) Some people just throw them up and leave them. But most of us grabbed a hat, but I grabbed my hat. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your parents [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan and Napoleon Bonaparte Jordan] and everybody come down? Speaker 2: Yeah. My dad was passed by then. My mom was there, my sister [Joyce Jordan Moore], and, you know, aunt. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36032 Speaker 1: So, now, do you get assigned right away? Speaker 2: What happens is you graduate from West Point [United States Military Academy] in June, the first week in June. Actually, they graduate the last week of May now. The Corp has gone to hell, I guess. (laughter). That, by the way, is a saying. Every time somebody graduates, I mean, after, whatever your class was, "The Corp has gone to hell." (laughter). If you graduate in '68 [1968], hey, everything past was going to hell. If you graduate in '85 [1985], everything past was going to hell. But, I had about sixty days of leave because I mean, you don't take much leave. And so, they gave us about sixty days of time off. I went home to Kansas City [Missouri] and fooled around, looked up old friends, and I actually went back and spent some of my time working at my old job. And people asked me, "Why did you do that?" And I said, "I wanted to see those old folks." They said, "You're a lieutenant now. What are you doing down there cleaning offices?" I said, "I wanted to see that old crew. I'd done that in high school [Central High School, Kansas City]." So, I did that for about a month. And then after sixty days, you report in to start your schooling. I went to Georgia for ranger school, which is a tough two-month course. One of my classmates was my ranger buddy. You know, you're in teams of two. And this fellow was an interesting guy. He was a man by the name of Steve Herman. Steve Herman was an Orthodox Jew from New York City. I mentioned a guy before, but this is a different guy. When we were still students and moving around--good buddies--we had been roommates for awhile. We were visiting some post, and he said, I'm going to the synagogue. I said, "I've never been to the synagogue. I'll go to the synagogue with you and see what Jewish service is like." That's how close you got with these guys. I just wanted to see what a Jewish service was like. I went to the synagogue. Herman and I finished ranger school. Tough, tough environment. And then we had to drive to Fort Knox, Kentucky to take tank training, armor training. And we had to, we drove through Alabama. It was an interesting--this was 1968, late October or November. And Steve Herman had a kind of brand new Corvette. And I had a brand new Pontiac Firebird. And we both had New York plates on our car, because we were registered at West Point. And as we drove, as we started our trip, Herman said "I don't know about doing this." And I said, "What do you mean? We've got to go, we've got to drive through Alabama to get to Kentucky." And so, we get up there in some no-name town in Alabama and get some gas. And the local bigot says, "Where are you boys from, with those New York plates?" They gave old Steve Herman more hassle than me, because he was a New York Jew. This is 1968, and we're lieutenants in the U.S. Army. Just an interesting caveat. But anyway, we go on up, take tact [tactical] training, then we're assigned to our units. In my case I'm with Fort Hood, Texas. I've been to Fort Hood as a student, as a cadet, because part of our summer training was to go out for a month and train with a unit as an acting second lieutenant. And so, I knew Fort Hood. I enjoyed it. About 50,000 soldiers down there, all of them coming or going to Vietnam. It was a hell of a place. And so, I go back there in 1968. And I meet Miss Nannette Pippen, whose dad had been in the service, was in the service, had been assigned to Hood. And she had gone back there to go to college. So, that's where my met my wife. Story_ID: 36033 Speaker 1: Now, what is the story? Now, there's a story you said-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I had lived in what's called a BOQ, bachelor's office quarters, which is just an old World War II wood building, with a bunch of other lieutenants. And I said, this is not the life. I need to get off post and get a house. And so, another lieutenant and I rented a house in town. And this lieutenant was a little older than me and had been a college instructor for awhile before coming in the [U.S.] Army, and knew all the local folks. And so, we were having a good old time in our house there. And one weekend, in fact, it was a Sunday. He said, "I'm going to entertain a young lady." So, I said okay. When I came back to the house later, he's still entertaining, so I discreetly left. And I'd started getting undressed and taking my shirt off, so I threw on a smoking jacket, a silk robe, or whatever. I just threw it on, went out and got in my car and drove around and saw friends for awhile. And I came back late that night, and I said, this rascal is still entertaining. And he's just got to put up with me, because I'm tired. And I see these people outside my house moving around. And I said, oh, oh, somebody's trying to break in my house. And I get closer, and I see four young ladies. Well, they've been going around the house and knocking on the door, because my roommate had said come over some time. And they had been at church, choir practice, and they'd come. And so, I said, "Can I help you?" And they said, well, we're looking for so-and-so. And I said, "Come on in." And that's how I met my wife. And so, I said "Well, do you young ladies want a ride home to the college? I could take two or three." You know, I had a Firebird, I could only get--. So, only one of them wanted a ride, and it turned out to be her. Well, then, two of them wanted a ride. And I said "Okay then, well, you can ride in the back." No. Hell, all of them wanted a ride. So, I put two in the back and one in the passenger seat. And she said, "I'll sit on the console." And I said okay. And I got all of those names and numbers, and didn't call any of them for about a week, and then I had a break. And then I said, let me call one. I couldn't get the first one. I called the second one. I said, oh yeah, that second one sat on my console next to me. And I called her up. And the rest is history. Speaker 1: There you go. Speaker 2: I mean, it's interesting. It's just, and so, it's almost like a movie, in that I'm going to Vietnam in June of '69 [1969]. I know it, I've got orders. I'm in a relationship here, a whirlwind romance. And just like some of these old romantic movies, we looked at each other one day and said let's get married. And then I said, "Oh, wait a minute, maybe I don't want to do that. You know, I may not come back from Vietnam." She said, "We're getting married." And so we did. And that's just, that's not much of a story, but it's my story. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. That's a good story. Story_ID: 36034 Speaker 1: So, you trained [for the Vietnam War] from the summer, and you got out [of the United States Military Academy at West Point] in '68 [1968] to-- Speaker 2: I trained through the rest of the year. And so, in early December I went down to Texas, to Fort Hood, stayed with my unit, trained with my unit, ran a platoon. And you had to do that for several months before they assigned you to Vietnam. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your platoon was trained, and you trained-- Speaker 2: I trained them. But they weren't going to take that platoon to Vietnam. I mean, they were going to stay there in Texas. And so, they assigned me to Vietnam. I left my wife [Nannette Pippen] with her mom. Her mom was living at Fort Campbell, Kentucky, because her dad was in the service. When it was time to get married, I had gone, driven over there and asked for her hand, you know. And so, her dad was there and he was a First Sergeant, an Airborne First Sergeant, top soldier in his company. And she said, "Daddy, I'm going to have a young man come, and we're going to get married. He's in the service." And his question was, "What is he?" She said, "Daddy, he's a lieutenant." And his second question was, "Is he airborne qualified or is he a LID." That's what they called non-jumpers, a LID. (laughter) And she said, "Daddy, he's a ranger, and he's going to jump school, but he hasn't gone there yet." And he said, "Well, I guess he can come and see me then." And she said, "Daddy, can you get him a room on base?" And he said, "I'll give him a pup tent out back." So, this was my introduction to my future father-in-law. But we get along great. We're wonderful friends. We bonded immediately. Speaker 1: Did he give you a pup tent out back? Speaker 2: No, he got me a room. (laughter) That's just the way he was. And so, people used to ask me--I mean, we're great friends. We were both in the service, and he was so proud that his daughter married a West Point [United States Military Academy] lieutenant. He was proud of me. The people used to ask me, "How do you get along?" "Oh, your daddy's a first, how did you get along?" I said, "Great." From the first, we were on a first name basis. I called him First sergeant, and he called me "Hey, you." (laughter) But it worked well. So, the way the story went, we got married. It was time for me to go to Vietnam. Her daddy had been assigned to Korea in the interim. Her mother stayed at Fort Campbell by herself. I take my wife there. There's two waiting lines. I'm in Vietnam, my father-in-law's in Korea, the two wives are back there together. So, the next 32, 33 years after I got back from Vietnam, we were just assigned a multitude of places, saw a lot of the world together. We raised two boys and got them successfully through college, and here we are today. Story_ID: 36035 Speaker 1: Okay. Now in '69 [1969] when you were sent to Vietnam [Vietnam War], where were you sent? Speaker 2: I was sent to north of Saigon, to the 1st Infantry Division. I went to the 2nd Battalion, 2nd Infantry. I went Bravo Company, B Company. And I said, the Italian commander put myself and two classmates together in that company. The captain who was over us, was a year ahead of us at West Point [United States Military Academy]. And so, that company really, the leadership, really clicked, because we all knew each other and respected each other. Now, if we had not known each other, I think the same thing would have happened, because we were of the same profession, we were all trained. But it was just very interesting to me to be in that situation where the other lieutenants were my classmates, and the company commander had been a year ahead of us at West Point. I served my time, went to--if you ever buy a Michelin tire for your car, I was at the Michelin rubber plantation. I spent a lot of time there. Speaker 1: Now where is that? Is that in-- Speaker 2: Vietnam. Speaker 1: Vietnam? I didn't realize that. Speaker 2: Yeah. The Michelin family, French family, owned a huge tract of land, and Michelin was the largest rubber plantation in Vietnam. At one time it was divided into four sectors, and each sector had housing for the workers. It had schools for the kids. It was like a little city. By the time we got there, the war was roaring. Only about a third of the plantation was working rubber, still producing rubber. Nobody lived there, but they would come out and collect the rubber. And the Michelin family would come in and inspect about every three months, to look at it, what was left of it. But I spent my time there. From the Saigon River north, it was what we referred to as jungle. It was really thick forest with a lot of bamboo and a lot of bad guys--Vietnamese, North Vietnamese regulars and Viet Cong. And so, my job was to conduct operations, keep Americans alive, and dispatch bad guys. That's what I did. I saw a lot of the countryside and admired some of the people. I was amazed at the little kids, amazed at things I saw in that country. I learned a lot. I left there after a year, had a son. My oldest son was born while I was there. And I got a chance to see him when he was about two months old, when I had what was called R&R, rest and relaxation, for a week. I went to Hawaii, had a wonderful time, saw my wife [Nannette Pippen] for the first time in several months, and saw my young son. Story_ID: 36036 Speaker 1: Then when I finished my tour [in Vietnam] we came back to the [United] States, went to Fort Riley, Kansas. I was a company commander out there. Speaker 2: So, this is what year now? Mid-'60s [1960s]? Speaker 1: I came back in '70 [1970]. Speaker 2: Yeah, until 1970. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: '69 [1969] to '70 [1970] in Vietnam. In 1970, I returned to Fort Riley, Kansas. I stayed there until '72 [1972]. I commanded two separate companies. I had a great time. That was the first time I got a chance to take a trip to Germany. I went to Europe. I took my company there and participated in some exercises. I came back to the States. In '72 [1972] I went back to school, this time with the Marine Corps. I spent six months there, then we went to Georgia, Fort Benning. And I worked a job where I was coming up with training techniques and designing training devices. The [U.S.] Army told us to sit back, use your heads, use your brains, and just come up with new ideas. It was a great experience. Both the school with the Marines--because that was different--and the opportunity to just conceptualize. The Army paid us to do that. Story_ID: 36037 Speaker 1: In '73 [1973], the Army gave me an opportunity to go back to West Point [United States Military Academy] and teach. But I had to have an advanced degree to do that, so I had two years of fully funded graduate work [M.A. degree in history] at Indiana University. I was going to teach history and-- Speaker 2: Why history? Speaker 1: Well, I was interested in history. I just enjoyed it, and it was one of the departments that I'd done fairly well in, and they invited me back. And so, they would, they had a list of preferred schools, 40 or 50 schools. And anywhere that I could become accepted, they would fully fund that. And we had sent quite a few people to Duke [University]. I mean, they had more graduates from Duke than they needed, Stanford [University] and a few other places. I went to Indiana solely because of the faculty there. They had a great history department, and the man who ended up being my faculty advisor was a professor by the name of Robert Ferrell. And he was a great historian, in diplomatic history, U.S. diplomatic history. But when I got to Indiana--and I'm thinking okay, here's out in the Midwest, there's this no-place Indiana. But I found Bloomington [Indiana] to be a very interesting place. It's about an hour and a half south of Indianapolis [Indiana]. It, at that time, was one of the ten opera centers of the world. And you might want to say, well, why is that? The School of Music, they performed more opera and had more opera. But it wasn't just opera. I mean, Quincy Jones [also a HistoryMaker], I mean all sorts of musical talent came. Story_ID: 36038 Speaker 1: Let's go back to Vietnam for a second. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You were telling me some interesting things there in the break, about the people were different. Speaker 2: Yeah, they're basically two types of indigenous people in Vietnam. They're Vietnamese, ethnic Vietnamese, who were deeply influenced by the French and the French culture. And then there was a minority indigenous, Mountain Yards, who were more Indian in nature. When I say Indian, they reminded me of Native Americans. They were tribal; they were very proud people, stoic. But the Vietnamese tended to treat them as second class citizens. And so, I would notice that if we went into a Mountain Yard village, the people were very respectful. And they would not say anything until the village elder came forward and welcomed us. And then the children might come forward, even if we were there to provide mobile medical assistance, which we occasionally did. The Vietnamese villages were not quite like that. To me, they were less orderly, and I couldn't get past the fact that I looked at the comparison between the way African Americans had been treated in our country, and there were, you know, times--and the way the Mountain Yards were treated there. Speaker 1: In fact, they're darker. Speaker 2: Yes, they are. They're darker complected. The Vietnamese reminded me ethnically of Chinese, much more so than, for example, Koreans. But the Mountain Yards reminded me truly of Native Americans, although a bit darker complected. Speaker 1: Now, did you find, how did you find, what's your perception of how African American soldiers were perceived by the Vietnamese? Speaker 2: It was interesting. I think all U.S. soldiers in a lot of areas were embraced, at least openly embraced, perhaps because we were there in power in that area, or we had money to spend. But I didn't find that the Vietnamese as a people discriminated against African Americans. I didn't see that. There was a different environment totally. There were some things that they probably did not like about Americans in general--our behavior, our cultural norms, and things of that sort. But many of the Vietnamese embraced Americans very closely. So, I didn't sense any animosity there. But then again, I was in the countryside for the most part. I didn't spend a lot of time in major cities or any of that. We were in the countryside where there were small villages. Story_ID: 36039 Speaker 1: One other thing, and I'll move on. But there's a lot that has been written in plays and in books, even movies made, about the relationship between the African American soldiers and white soldiers. I mean the rank and the file in Vietnam [during the Vietnam War]. And they seem to mirror some of the same problems that were going on in the country. Speaker 2: Well, I think there were some of those, and it really varied from unit to unit. And maybe I was pretty fortunate. I was, like I said, I was in the 1st Infantry Division, Big Red 1, a famous outfit. And I had, in my company there were probably, it was probably 50 percent African American, 50 percent white. And you had other ethnic representatives. And we didn't have ethnic tensions. Everybody was focused on staying alive, taking care of their buddy. It's interesting. Soldiers don't fight for flag and country so much, the way we say they do. They fight for each other. They fight for their buddy next to them. I was watching television last night, as President [Barack] Obama presented the Medal of Honor to a young man, a former staff sergeant who had, in Afghanistan, saved a number of compatriots, and had gone out and risked his life to recover the bodies of others. And his point was, I wasn't going to leave their bodies there. We weren't going to lose them. We were going to take them home with us. And so, regardless of the war, soldiers fight for each other. They fight for their unit, the pride in their unit, mostly for each other. And they fight because they respect their leaders, and their leaders take care of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36040 Speaker 1: Now, one other point, just one other point. I'm thinking, and correct me if I'm wrong, but I think that this period of time is probably, I guess, the period of time when we had the largest percentage of African Americans in the U.S. Army. Speaker 2: Yeah, you did. You had a large percentage. It was a draft Army. And there are people who have criticized the draft. We have an all volunteer force today, and it looks a lot different. I didn't criticize the draft Army myself, because for the most part, soldiers came in, they were drafted. And they said, "What's my duty? I'm going to do it, and get it over with and go home." The truth of the matter is, in the early and mid-'60s, [1960s], late '60s [1960s], sometimes the people who voluntarily enlisted were not the best soldiers. The average person who was drafted said, well, I just want to get through this for two years, or do my best and get on out and go on with my life. And that was a good soldier. And the people who enlisted--for various reasons, some for good reasons--but some because they had this fantasy view of the world. They were going to be soldiers of fortune. And some, unfortunately, because as the old story goes, they were told, "90 days in jail or join the Army." And there were a few of those. But there were, there was a lot of ethnic conflict within the armed forces in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s]. So--problems on naval ships. I remember you had problems on some installations, Army installations, and particularly in Germany. What I saw was that, where there was good leadership, where it was firm but fair and everybody was treated fairly, those things didn't exist. But it's when people were not treated fairly, where leaders were not doing their job right, that's where you had problems. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36041 Speaker 1: Now, Indiana University, history. And you're talking about the great music program at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana]. Speaker 2: Yeah. They did have that good music program. And Bob Knight was the basketball coach out there. And so, basketball was pretty good, too. (laughter). Bob Knight had been the coach at West Point [United States Military Academy] when I was a cadet there. Speaker 1: Oh, so, did you know him? Speaker 2: I mean, we had, most of us had met Coach Knight. Bob Knight had been, before I got there, had been an assistant coach at West Point. I think Bob Knight was a soldier in the [U.S.] Army for awhile. But he became the assistant coach. He was the coach by the time I got there, and by the time we got to, when I went to Indiana [University] in the summer of '73 [1973], he was coaching at Indiana. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: But Indiana was a good school. I enjoyed it. 30,000 students on campus, a different environment. I'm a grad [graduate] student. I'm about thirty years old or so. And what made me different was that I was married with a family, and I had an income because I was still getting paid [by the U.S. Army]. The average grad student was scratching, because I mean, it's not an easy life, even with a scholarship or a fellowship. So, I was a little older than the average grad student by a couple of years. And I didn't have to worry about chasing coeds, because I had a wife [Nannette Pippen] and a kid. So, in fact, I had my second son there. But it was a good two years. Story_ID: 36042 Speaker 1: I did all my coursework for a Ph.D. [degree], but I mean, I didn't have time to do the dissertation. A funny story there. I'm with my faculty advisor. And I told you it was a guy by the name of [Robert] Farrell, a great historian, old cold warrior. And we're sitting in his office one day. And he says, "Are you ever going to get a Ph.D.? You've done all the coursework. You have thirty more hours of research time we can give you." I said, "I don't have another semester, or a year. And having the letters behind my name means about as much as what they chisel on my tombstone." I was a cocky young Vietnam vet. And he laughed at that and said, "Well, it doesn't matter. You've got all the knowledge. You've done the research." And I had my master's degree. But that got around the faculty, and there were a lot of young untenured faculty, younger than me, and as professors, making less money than I was making. They didn't think that was very funny, from what I had said. So, just amuse me. Speaker 2: So, what was your thesis on? Speaker 1: I did research on the black experience at West Point [United States Military Academy], and the integration of black cadets, starting with Henry Flipper in 1873, and the first three graduates, finishing up with Charles Young. And then, we had no black attendants or graduates until the late 1930s, when Benjamin O. Davis, Jr. graduated. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's quite, this is a history that's really dramatic. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Charles Young, I know we discussed him earlier. I mean, you seem to be drawn to the story of Charles Young. Speaker 1: Well, it is because those first three graduates really went through a lot. I mean, they were forced, they endured the same pressures that all cadets endured, but they were ostracized by the corp cadets. They lived in isolation, no roommates. They were only spoken to by their classmates and others in an official capacity. So, there was no social interaction. And there were pressures for them to leave, from what I've read and researched, both from cadets and from faculty members. So, those are my heroes. And they stuck it out, and as their careers showed in each case, they did things that were pretty great. Henry Flipper was court-marshaled for some accounting irregularities. As it turns out, unfounded. I was there in the White House when President [Bill] Clinton completely exonerated his record. Speaker 2: But he was not vindicated during his lifetime? Speaker 1: No. He was not vindicated. Flipper became a surveyor and engineer and did quite a few things, traveled abroad. He was pretty renowned, even after leaving the service. I have a print upstairs of Henry Flipper in the calvary when the Buffalo Soldiers were tracking the Indian Chief Victorio. In fact that's the name of the print, Tracking Victorio, by [Don] Stivers. And Flipper was cited for gallantry and for doing his job. But there were those who were convinced that no Negro, no African American, deserved to be a commissioned officer. And it appears that there were charges brought against Flipper at that time that just were unsubstantiated. But he wasn't vindicated during his lifetime. Speaker 2: So, how high a rank did he attain? Speaker 1: He was a First lieutenant, I believe, when he was, when he left the service. Now, Charles Young, as you know, became a colonel. And what interests me, is that when World War I broke out, Charles Young was the highest ranking African American field officer. Now there were some African American officers who were chaplains and other things, but Charles Young was a field officer, and was as you know, was told that he was unfit for duty and would be retired. And he fought that. And to prove his point, he rode horseback (laughter) across the country to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] to the War Department and said, "I think I'm fit enough." Speaker 2: From Xenia, Ohio. Speaker 1: Right. That's a hell of a ride on horseback. And I said, man, look at that. And at the end of the war, he was reinstated, interestingly enough. But that's just our country in those times. Yeah. Speaker 2: The time when most of the black troops were assigned to the French Army, I think. Speaker 1: Right, Hell Fighters. There they are, right up there. Speaker 2: Okay, right, right. Speaker 1: The 369th--but that's part of our history. And people used to ask me when I was teaching history, and then afterwards, "Now that you know all these things about your country, doesn't it anger you?" Well, all those things make us what we are today, collectively. They make us what we are. It doesn't anger me. I mean, it's an historical fact. I may not like what happened at certain times, but people are stronger because of it today. I mean, I truly believe that. Story_ID: 36043 Speaker 1: Who is the man, he had a more horrible story than [Henry] Flipper or [Charles] Young. He was, that's the one they chained to a bed and cut his ear off or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I studied the archives, and I don't think--I mean, there are a lot of apocryphal stories. I think he was chained to a bed by cadets, but he didn't lose a ear. But yeah, there was some terrible treatment. The secret is that terrible treatment occurred to white cadets, too, who were deemed as not acceptable. Now all that's changed, you know. That was the 19th century. That's the way things happened at some institutions, which include some civilian institutions of higher learning. And unfortunately, we still see cases of harassment and hazing today, even. It's unfortunate. Yeah, there were some terrible things, and you went until, from 1889 until the 1930's without any blacks at the academy. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, 1889 to 1930? Speaker 2: Yeah. A lot happened in the country during that time. I mean, we go back to the Jim Crow laws. I mean, we did a lot of things. Speaker 1: It was the highest period of lynching. Speaker 2: Right. But there were no, there were no black cadets at West Point [United States Military Academy] during that period. And remember, there's only a few ladies in West Point. You're appointed by a representative or a senator, or you get a Congressional nomination, and those--I mean, a presidential nomination. And those are few and far between, only for special things. If your dad or mom was a Medal of Honor winner, you can apply for a presidential nomination. Speaker 1: Who was the first one to come back in 1939, I guess, to start, I mean to--and how did he-- Speaker 2: Benjamin O. Davis, Jr. Benjamin O. Davis, Sr. had been a brigadier in World War II. He was the senior black general. His son entered West Point, I think, in 1936. I believe it was '36 [1936]. Speaker 1: So, B.O. Davis, Sr. had to re-invent the wheel. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he was. And he went into the Army Air Corp and later the [U.S.] Air Force and then, of course, retired as a 3 Star Air Force General, I believe. But after him, there came a few more in the '40s [1940s]. An interesting phenomena in the Army: There were, after World War II, some African American Army officers who decided to stay in the service. And by the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], there were seven or eight, and I can't name them all, who had become colonels. And they were the senior black officers in the armed forces. And, of course, they all knew each other. And I've got a very good friend whose dad was one of those, Carl Black. And both of his sons joined the Army. In fact, both went to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], because their dad had been stationed in D.C. a couple of times. And I've told both of them that they ought to write a book some day, because that's being lost. Those seven or eight black colonels were the seed form. They were the senior blacks in the Army, and they took care of people, put their arms around them. They knew each other. Their families, they were almost like extended families. In my case, growing up a generation later, it's been an interesting phenomena, because there's several very close friends that we sort of grew up in the Army together. That group was not my black West Point classmates, but a couple of guys from Howard, from Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland]. But our family, we'd been assigned to each other, our families have grown up together. My two grown sons don't have any sisters. My best friend in the world has two sisters, or has two daughters. They're the sisters my boys never had. They stay in touch now. I mean, my oldest is, he's forty-three [years old]. And he stays in touch with his adoptive sisters. So, it's a closeness, and we consider each other extended family. That's the way it is. Story_ID: 36044 Speaker 1: Now, let's pick up from where--now, you got your master's degree from Indiana-- Speaker 2: Indiana [University, Bloomington, Indiana]. Speaker 1: Indiana University, May 11, 1973. Now, I know the date because it's my anniversary (laughter). I told my wife [Nannette Pippen], "Hey, here's your anniversary gift, it's my diploma." We went from there to West Point [United States Military Academy]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was assigned to the faculty and taught for three years, until '75 [1975]. I mean, until '78 [1978], '75 [1975] to '78 [1978]. Did I say I graduated May 11, 1973? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: I entered in '73 [1973]. I graduated two years later, May 11, 1975. Speaker 2: 1975, okay. So you taught at West Point? Speaker 1: I taught at West Point for three years: history, standard American history, diplomatic history, urban history, black history. I had a great time. Story_ID: 36045 Speaker 1: We left there [United States Military Academy at West Point, after teaching history for three years] and I spent a year at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, going back to school myself. Speaker 2: Okay. And this is 1979, I guess? Speaker 1: '78 [1978], '79 [1979]. Speaker 2: Okay, Fort Leavenworth. And what were you studying in school? Speaker 1: I went to the Command and General Staff School [College; CGSC]. Excuse me, Command and General Staff College. That's what it was called. Now, that's the one that some people call the school for generals. It's really not, but that's what some people call it. That's where you learn higher level tactics and strategy, and the art of warfare. Speaker 2: Now, being selected, or being allowed to go to this school, does that imply that you're on the track to become a general? Speaker 1: At that time, it was implied that you were considered in the top half of your officer cohort. Nothing guarantees you to be a general. Statistically, nobody starts as a lieutenant and ends up as a general. Statistically, one hundred lieutenants start in the [U.S.] Army. Less than one lieutenant makes brigadier (laughter). So, I mean, growing up, most of us admired the senior leadership, but were realistic, and said oh, the good Lord will have to really reach down and help me. I mean, there are people who, when they're young, say "I'm going to be a general." I was always suspicious of those guys. I just wanted to be the best of whatever I was at the time. So, I'm out there at Leavenworth, learning high level tactics and strategy, and being happy that I'm selected. And I'm at least in the upper half, I think. They've got some interesting folks there during that year. The Shah of Iran fell. A lot of other things occurred, and we had Iranian students with us. There was, unfortunately, an Arab-Israeli flare-up. My Israeli classmates disappeared for a month, went and fought the war, and then came back to school. Speaker 2: So, the U.S. actually trains other foreign-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, we had international students with us. Speaker 2: International students-- Speaker 1: We had international students, probably from thirty countries. And that's the case in most of the schools. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 36046 Speaker 1: But after a year there [Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, at the Command and General Staff College (CGSC)] and having a great time, we, the family and I, went to Germany for our first trip to Germany. Well, my wife [Nannette Pippen] had been there as a child, and so it wasn't new for her. But as a family, it was. And we stayed there from 1979 to 1982. We had a wonderful time in Europe. We had a chance to travel all over to see, to visit places, show my children things that they had never seen. And probably one of the highlights for them is we, we either--we drove into Berlin [Germany] several times for vacation. And to get to Berlin, you had to drive through East Germany. We had to drive through the checkpoints. And even as young children, they observed and they saw us--. Because as an American soldier, as an officer, I drove into the checkpoint, and I can only deal with the Russians. We didn't recognize the East Germans. And so, we drive through the checkpoint, and that in itself was an interesting experience. But they looked over across the way, and they saw this huge backup. That was the East German checkpoint, that we could bypass. And any West Germans trying to enter were just being hassled. And any trying to come out were just being hassled. And so, that was a life lesson for them. As we drove through the checkpoints, there were big monuments with Soviet tanks on top of them. And just to see that, and to see what Communism was like up front, was an interesting experience. Anyway, we spent three years in Germany. We lived in a little town called Butzbach, which is an Old Roman outpost, for when the Roman Empire occupied that part of Germany, north of Frankfurt [Germany]. A wonderful old 400 year old little town with these half timber buildings that were so old they were leaning on each other, just quaint. And we really enjoyed Germany. We moved to Heidelberg [Germany], which is a wonderful old university town, big city. We lived there for awhile. So, left Germany, came back to the [United] States in '82 [1982]. Story_ID: 36047 Speaker 1: We [Jordan and his family] moved to the Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] area [after returning from Jordan's tour in Germany from 1979 to 1982]. I worked in the Pentagon, worked there for about a year. Speaker 2: What were you doing at the Pentagon? Speaker 1: I was in strategic plans and policy. I was a major, and I'd just been selected for lieutenant colonel, so I was going to get promoted. And I was fortunate enough to then be selected to go be a battalion commander. And I go right back to Fort Hood, Texas, where I'd gotten married. (laughter) And I commanded the hell out of the tank battalion. I loved every day of it, for two and a half years. Story_ID: 36048 Speaker 1: Okay, so, tank battalion commander at Fort Hood, Texas. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, this is, did you encounter, now being a historian, you probably heard stories of the 761st Tank Battalion. Speaker 2: Yeah. Now, you know, I'm skipping around here. But we're going to skip ahead a decade and a half. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, 761st. In 1993, I was promoted to a 2 Star General, and I was given the command of Fort Knox, Kentucky, which is the Armor School and Center. That's where we train all the tankers. We designed the doctrine and the tactics. We helped design the vehicles of the future. And it's sort of the emotional home of the Armor and Calvary. And the 761st, like a lot of World War II units, was commemorated there. And I remember one year we were honoring them, and we had some veterans come back. And we had a monument there that we dedicated, and had a reception. And there was a little lady there. She was a widow, and she was walking around looking at the displays. And I happened to notice that she said, "Oh my God." She's looking at a picture. I walked up to her, and I said, "Maam, are you okay?" And I'm a big hit with this group. I mean, hey, here's a black 2 Star General Command in Fort Knox, and these guys were all in the [U.S.] Army when there were people who said blacks aren't smart enough to drive tanks. They actually said that. George Patton--(laughter)--a lot of people don't like George Patton, but George Patton said, "I don't care what color they are. If they're good soldiers, I like them." He was kind of a gruff guy. But she's looking at this photo, and I said "Maam, are you okay?" And she said, "Sir--" And I said, "Don't call me Sir. Maam, please don't." She said "Sir, I've never seen this photograph before, and that's my husband." And I mean, that really took me. I mean, so yeah, I know all about them. They had-great outfit. But anyway, I skipped ahead on you there. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36049 Speaker 1: Alright. So, '83 [1983] and '85 [1985], Fort Hood, Texas, as tank battalion commander. Speaker 2: Tank battalion commander. I left there, and I was the longest serving battalion commander at the time when I left there. And I was assigned back to the Pentagon [Arlington, Virginia]. And I came back and spent a few months before I was selected to go to the National War College, which is also here in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. I attended the National War College, which has offices from all the services, and also has people from, civilians, from the federal government. One of the civilians in my study group was a secret service agent who had been charge of presidential protection. And so, at Christmastime, he managed to get all of us a very special tour of the White House. We had CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and Secret Service; commerce; and other people, but primarily offices from the four services. It was a great year. You learn a lot, you're introduced to a lot of the leaders of Washington, and most of the senior ambassadors from the other countries come and speak to you. You take a trip overseas. You take a couple of weeks and go someplace like China, Russia. In my case, I went to Greece and Turkey, because I thought those were very interesting places--two allies who don't always get along with each other, but they were both close to the U.S. But, that was a great year for me personally in my professional development, and it was a good year for the family in the Washington area. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36050 Speaker 1: After that [National War College, Washington, District of Columbia], I went over to the Pentagon again, for a year, on the Joint Staff-- Speaker 2: This is '86 [1986] now? Speaker 1: This is '87 [1987], '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: '87 [1987], '88 [1988], okay. Speaker 1: So, I'm in school in '86 [1986], '87 [1987], and '87 [1987] and '88 [1988], I'm in the Pentagon and working for one of my most appreciated mentors, a man who turned out to be one of my mentors. Speaker 2: Who was that? Speaker 1: General Fred Franks. Fred Franks, you might remember the name from Desert Storm-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Now, there were two Franks. Speaker 2: Freddy Frank, was that-- Speaker 1: Freddy Franks. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Freddy Franks had lost his leg in Vietnam, and had continued to serve in the [U.S.] Army. And some people didn't know he had lost his leg. But he was a 2 Star. I was working for him in the Pentagon. I worked there for about a year. Fred Franks was selected to go to Germany and be a division commander--18,000 soldiers, 19,000 soldiers. And he called me one night and said, "Would you like to be my Chief of Staff when I go there?" I'm a brand new colonel and had just been promoted. And I said, "Well, they wouldn't let me go from the Pentagon." And I had also been selected to be a brigade commander. So, I had a battalion of 500 men in Fort Hood [Texas]. A brigade has several battalions in it, and I'd get about 5,000 people. It's a nice promotion. But I hadn't been in the Pentagon long enough, and they wouldn't let me go. So, they said, "We're going to defer you for a little while, you've got to wait." But Fred Franks winked at me and said, "I think we can make this happen if you want to come to Germany." So, I went over there. It was the second time I worked for him. I was his Chief of Staff in the division for a year and a half. He went off to command the 5th Corp, which is the one he fought with in Desert Storm. And at that time, I went off to be a brigade commander in the 3rd Infantry Division, the Audie Murphy Division. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: And when Desert Storm came along, Franks took the corp down there. By that time, I'd been selected for brigadier general. And they called me one day and said, "You've got three days to turn command of your brigade over to someone else and be in Saudi Arabia." So, I went and worked for Franks as an assistant division commander, a 1 Star in the division, in his corp. And like I said, he was my greatest mentor. And we fought Desert Storm, and you know what happened there. I did all the war. We came back to Germany. My division was the last one to come out of Germany. We--excuse me--come out of Iraq and Saudi Arabia. We went back to Germany. I spent another year in Germany as a 1 Star. (Simultaneous) Story_ID: 36051 Speaker 1: [Can you go back to] Desert Storm just for a second, because there was a lot of--I remember the build-up for Desert Storm, and there was a lot of fear and discussion over here about what kind of war it's going to be. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it ended up being a-- Speaker 2: Very quick war. Speaker 1: Yeah, very quick. And some of the magazines, to their credit, had called it like that. They said well, this is going to be an air war on a flat surface. You know, what was your-- Speaker 2: Here's my take on the war. Starting in about 1979, we began to rebuild the U.S. Army. Because after Vietnam, the Army was sort of broken. I mean, we had lost--52,000 soldiers killed, a lot wounded. And after a war, the country just wanted to forget about that. We drew down, didn't have a lot of money. We lost a lot of our good leadership, our sergeants. And so, we had to rebuild. And we were like the rest of the services that had gone through this time of ethnic conflict and discipline, and a lot of other things. So, between '79 [1979], for the next ten years or so, we worked hard, rebuilt the Army, took training for leadership. So, by the time Desert Storm came along, the Army was training very hard in places like the National Training Center out in California, at what we call the Cadet Combined Maneuvers Training Center of Hohenfels, Germany. And we'd go there and work hard and practice our art. The average soldier said when they went through Desert Storm, they said it was easy. They said, "We had it tougher than that in training." That's why you need a trained Army. I don't care that size it is. We're going to get smaller here, because we're coming out of Afghanistan. And we should get smaller. The country can't afford it. But whatever you keep, you've got to train it well. And so, all of the fear about what's going to happen when they cross into Iraq, into Kuwait and then Iraq--the soldiers performed magnificently, and did what they were trained to do. And the leaders took care of them and did what they were supposed to do, and it was over in a hundred hours. Story_ID: 36052 Speaker 1: And did the command staff or the [U.S.] Army feel satisfied with what was done? Because I get the lingering feeling that [President] George W. Bush wasn't satisfied, although his father [President George H.W. Bush] seemed to be satisfied. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, I mean, his father, as Commander in Chief and president, decided it was time to stop the war, and they did. Now, as a soldier--and about an hour ago I said--look, coming out of West Point [United States Military Academy], we were just going to follow our legal and moral orders and go do our job and do what the nation asked us to do. As professional soldiers, when the order came to cease the attack in Iraq, then nobody questioned that. The national command authority--that's the president, the SecDef [U.S. Secretary of Defense]-- had decided and issued a lawful order to stop the hostilities. And it's not the place of an American soldier to question its political leadership or the will of the nation. That sounds kind of hokey and idealistic, but if you're going to be a leader in the United States Army, you'd better feel that way. If your civilian leadership says stop--you can give them your best advice, "Sir, we shouldn't stop here, we should continue the attack, we should do this, this is the outcome we want", whatever. But when the order comes to stop, no soldier is going to keep fighting. And no soldier wants to put others at risk just for some glory. Now, I, you know, I'm a political observer nowadays. And so, George W. Bush may have felt that he needed to continue what his father halted, and that may be the case. And whether or not we needed to go after Saddam Hussein, I mean, I'll leave that to other historians who have the virtue of time to think about it. You know, was Saddam Hussein a bad guy? Absolutely. Did we need to avert attention from Al Qaeda at that time? That's a good question for the pundits on Sunday morning TV. But it's a good question. But, as a soldier, nobody had a problem with stopping. Because when we, when the U.S. Army and its, and the other joint forces finished that 100 hours, there wasn't a hell of a lot left of the Republican guard. Speaker 1: Now, the [U.S.] Army is often used as foil for a political debate. When--I think when President Bush was criticized for invading Iraq, I mean, the country was, "You're not supporting the Army," like the Army just did it. And they criticize them, they criticize what the Army is doing, you know, which is not what the people felt who were doing the criticism. They didn't feel like they were, you know, beating our Army down. Speaker 2: I never worried much about that, and I don't think no soldiers worried much about that. I mean, we do our job, we do what the nation asks of us. And the politics and the politicians, that's, you know, they do their job. And the Army and other services sometimes are convenient parties to criticize and to point fingers at, or to use in some way, but that's beyond our control and most of us don't worry about it. We just do our job for the nation. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36053 Speaker 1: Now, alright. So, you were with [General] Freddy Franks until 19-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was. I stayed in Germany after Desert Storm until 1992. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm a brigadier general at this time. And it's time for me to come home. That's our second tour in Germany. I was there for four years that time. And we are assigned to Fort Knox, Kentucky, where I'm the 1 Star Deputy. I'm the commandant of the Armor school, and I've got a 2 Star commander living across the street, who's commanding the whole place. Franks, by this time, is the TRADOC [United States Army Training and Doctrine Command] commander. So, he commands all of the schools in the Army. So, Fort Knox [Kentucky], Fort Benning [Georgia], where the infantry guys are. [Fort] Rucker [Alabama], where the aviation is. A year later, by '93 [1993], I'm selected to be a 2 Star. I'm promoted, and I take command of Fort Knox. Story_ID: 36054 Speaker 1: Now, I just want to pause just a second, because I don't want to let this go by without ruling out--when you worked with Freddy Franks, you also were in contact with Colin Powell and Norman Schwarzkopf, I guess, and-- Speaker 2: Well, we all, you would encounter those folks. I did not work with Powell or Schwarzkopf on a daily basis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Schwarzkopf--when I was a cadet at West Point [United States Military Academy], Schwarzkopf was on the staff and faculty. In fact, I took a class from him. He was a major, Major Schwarzkopf. I remember him well. But no, you run into all these people. Colin Powell's a fantastic man. I know him now, obviously. But when I first met Colin Powell, I was a newly selected brigadier. I hadn't even put the star on yet. I was still a colonel. And I came back from Germany to attend a three week course, the general officer orientation course. We call it the charm school (laughter). You come back to this thing. And so, Colin Powell and other dignitaries and officials meet you, talk to you. And so, I met Colin Powell. I'm just one of forty colonels who were going to be brigadiers. I mean, just one of forty. So, we fast forward, that's '91 [1991]. No, that's 1990, the fall of 1990, because later Iraq goes into Kuwait, and then in '91 [1991], the war starts. So, you fast forward. It's after the war. We're all back in Germany. And by about June, we are, May or June of '91 [1991], we're about to close up part of Germany. Colin Powell comes over and he walks into this building where there were a couple hundred of us with spouses, wives. And he's walking through the crowd and you can hear the buzz. And he's walking through, saying hello to folks, "Hey Joe, how're you doing?" "Clarence, it's good to see you." And I see him coming our way and he's coming through the crowd. And I'm thinking, geez, there's Colin Powell, wow. And that's a fantastic memory. He walked up and said, "How are you doing, Larry?" He shook my hand and walked back. Now, I didn't stand out in his mind. He just remembered my name was Larry Jordan. That's the man's mind. (laughter) I mean, he's unreal. And in years since, and as I advanced in grade, I got a chance to interface with him at a number of social affairs with he and other gracious and wonderful people. I count him as a real hero of mine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Schwarzkopf, a lot of notoriety there. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, but I remember Freddy Franks, you know, during that period. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's still my mentor. (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I thought I'd raise those other two guys, just-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they're great. Story_ID: 36055 Speaker 1: Now, at Fort Knox [Kentucky], you're the commander of Fort Knox in '94 [1994], I guess, right? Speaker 2: I took, yeah, I took command in the fall of '93 [1993]. And I stayed there until '95 [1995]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, it says here, in '95 [1995], I don't know what this quite is, but you present the Army Task Force Report on Extremist Activity. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, then. That's actually, it's probably a little later. It's probably '96 [1996]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I finished my command at Fort Knox--and no leader likes to leave a command, that's, I mean, that's what you live for, it's great. You're in command at the place, you're responsible for all that it does or fails to do. You're responsible for the people. You're a combination of mayor, boss. You're a city manager. I mean, it's not just running the soldiers, you've got a whole city to run. I had 119,000 acres, and buildings, and so it was wonderful. But after that, after I gave up my command, I was assigned back to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], and I became the Deputy Inspector General of the [U.S.] Army. That's a 2-Star guy. And I was primarily responsible for sensitive investigations and also for over-watching sensitive activities. And one of the--that typically involved senior officials who were accused of misconduct, but it also included looking at special things that occurred. In late '95 [1995] or early '96 [1996], we had some homicides in Fayetteville, North Carolina. A man and a woman were killed. And some soldiers were implicated, and they were reportedly skin-heads, they were Neo-Nazis. And the Secretary of the Army, who was Togo West at the time, directed that several things should occur. One of those was that the Inspector General of the Army was to do an investigation of extremist activities, to see if we had a systemic problem, how great it was. And so, I got a chance to really look at that in detail, and I had a task force of about fifty people helping me. I discovered a lot about extremism in this country. I worked with a number of civilian groups. I worked with the Southern Christian Leadership, worked with Simon Wiesenthal Center, worked with [Ku Klux] Klan Watch and learned-- Speaker 1: Is that the Southern Poverty Law Center? Speaker 2: Right. And I learned so much about the extremist groups. They've always existed in our country, fringe elements. But in today's environment of communications, they can gain notoriety that they never could have achieved before. And I mean, we investigated a lot of places, looked at a lot of things. And I came away saddened that some of these extremist groups exist out there in our country, but heartened by the fact that not many penetrated into our Army. I mean, like any other organization, they're individuals. And when leaders were doing the right things, by looking and saying, "What are you doing with a Nazi flag in your walker," then, that stuff was squashed. When leaders weren't doing those things, you had individuals who got out of control. Speaker 1: Now, why, now, these guys were Army privates who were skin-heads, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Their beliefs were in racial superiority and in Hitler worship. They just didn't fit with what our Army's values are. Yet, they were able to fly below the radar. Story_ID: 36056 Speaker 1: Now, who were they? I don't remember the story, but who were the people? Michael James and Jackie Burton, who-- Speaker 2: Well, they just happened to have been two people. They were civilians down there that these guys had encountered. Some of these groups, and some of the extremist groups really did try to recruit soldiers, because they thought, "Well, soldiers, they got the training and--" Some of the things I learned were just, almost horrifying. You see these guys with Aryan tattoos-- and we interviewed some people. In fact, the folks at [Ku Klux] Klan Watch had a number of people who were former members of that, and had converted, and were helping. You see, some of these guys had a spider pattern tattoo on their elbow, a spider pattern. To gain their spider, they had to kill a human in the name of the cause. So, I don't remember the particulars, why those two individuals were targeted. Speaker 1: Were they black? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were African Americans, they were black. And because--when we got to criminality, I turned that over to the CID [Criminal Investigation Department] or whoever. But we were really--how prevalent are the extremists? What are their techniques? Why are some of these guys attracted? And it gets back to why did you join the Army? And a very small percentage of people are motivated to join the Marines or the Army or the Air Force or whatever, because of this image of being a soldier of fortune. Some of these guys, because of their upbringing, their backgrounds, their own personalities, they're susceptible to those arguments of racial superiority or exclusion. They fall in with the crowd, if that's what they're into. But I think the most distressing thing was that as I worked with these civilian organizations, I learned more about this ideology of superiority and white supremacy. They were often affiliated with strange religious orders that were of a like mind. One that I recall was the Church of the Creator. And the Church of the Creator's philosophy was that there's, I mean, they had a biblical interpretation that goes back to Able, and that there were sub-humans and humans, and that there was Aryan superiority. And so, when you have a group that has a political and a social outlook, and it's bolstered by a religious outlook, that's a very dangerous situation. It reminds me of Islamic extremism. There's nothing wrong with Islam. It's a religion. It's a good religion. I'm not Islam, I'm Baptist. There's nothing with Islam. But there's a fanatical side of it, just as with the Church of the Creator, white Aryans, that's a fanatical side of that religion. And so, I just, I was dismayed to find that that actually exist in various extremist groups in this country. Survivalists--they're under surveillance. I mean, if they don't break laws, then they're protected. Speaker 1: I think around the same period of time, around '95 [1995] or so, that's when the guy, I'm trying to think of his name now, blew up the Murrah Federal Building [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma] in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Timothy McVeigh. Speaker 1: McVeigh, right. Now, he was a veteran-- Speaker 2: Yes, he was. He'd been in Kansas. There was the story of the anti-government--And I was still at Fort Knox [Kentucky] then when that occurred. I remember it very well. But anyway, so that was the extremist task force. The bottom line--and I think the report's available today. It's been released under the Freedom of Information. But what we found is that in the bottom analysis, people--if you've got leaders who are doing the right thing and if you've got an institution that is aware--because as we interviewed soldiers--and we asked just privates and sergeants and specialists, "Are there bigoted people that you know?" "Oh yeah, so and so's bigoted." And then we'd ask, "What about this other person? We saw he has a confederate flag in his truck?" And the surprising thing is that they'd say "No, he's not a bigot. He's just proud of his heritage. His great-great-granddaddy was in the South Carolina so and so during the [American] Civil War." And it was at that interpersonal level where people reacted to people. Because I thought, okay, stars and bars, that's going to be a flash point. A black kid from Chicago [Illinois] told me, "No, there's nothing wrong with Old Joe. He's just proud of his great-great-great-granddaddy. But Sergeant Smith over there, he's a damn bigot." I mean, we get that. And so, personally, I'm less into symbols than I am into action and behavior and attitudes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 36057 Speaker 1: So, how long did you spend as a Deputy Inspector General? Speaker 2: I spent about a year and a half as a deputy, and then I became the Inspector General of the [U.S.] Army and got promoted to 3 Stars. I was there a total, between both jobs, four years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, I got to see all of the Army and different parts of it, the good the bad and the ugly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mostly it's good. Speaker 1: Now, I was told by one of our advisors on this project that the inspector general carries a big stick, and when he shows up, then people go oh, it's like the boogey man. (laughter) Speaker 2: (laughter) I used to walk in and smile at a group, and say, "I'm here to help you." Because that is, I mean, yeah, that's a cliche, "Hey, I'm here to help." And their cliche is "We're glad you're here." And they aren't glad you're there. (laughter) But the point is, we wanted to enforce what was right. And I as I told you earlier, there are several functions. One is assistance. When you're sort of the ombudsman for the Army--and I had an entire group that worked for me. That's all they did. We helped soldiers, family members, leaders who had problems, either individually or systemically, and then investigations. Story_ID: 36058 Speaker 1: Okay. In 1997, now, during this time as Inspector General [of the U.S. Army], what was the worst thing that you encountered? I mean, can you tell us? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. We uncovered a number of things. You know, I mean, to find that there are a few skinheads in the [U.S.] Army is bad. The other thing that occurred during that time was a sexual harassment scandal that involved Aberdeen, Maryland and a few other places. And what we found was that there were some, there were a very few drill sergeants who were sexually harassing some of the female recruits. But like every story, or every coin, there's two sides to it. And we found that while that was really bad, and we had a very few bad apples, there were no safeguards in place to prevent it. And so, I think we were able to point out and encourage the Army to take some steps that I've seen, to move forward. We also found that we didn't understand our young recruits very well, because there were female recruits who were not only complicit in that, but in some cases, the aggressor. And so, we uncovered that you really have to understand this gender issue better. And you also have to ensure discipline and professionalism. And then that just wipes it out. But that was a bad one. We discovered one of the--one of the other saddening things was, we went through a period of training accidents, where we were training hard and we just, in some cases, didn't have the safety procedures in place. And so, I feel good about the fact that we were able to look at that and fix that, and discover the root problems of those safety problems, and prevent them from occurring in the future. Speaker 1: With a safety issue in the Army, well, like it can be in civilian life--I think even more so, because of explosives and other things-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --can really be fatal. Speaker 2: I mean, I can remember three or four incidents that caused the leadership to say, "IG, go look at this." We had an incident where trainees were, what we call fast roping. You've seen pictures of helicopters, they'll drop a rope and the soldiers will grab the rope and slide down the rope. And it's high adventure, but it's fairly safe. And they were doing this. The helicopters were kicking up dust, and the problem, nobody could see that the rope was too far off the ground. So, when they got to the end, instead of hitting the ground and letting go of the rope, they fell another 20 or 30 feet--bad. And so, you know, we had the fast rope incidents, several people injured, a couple killed. We had a case of hypothermia, where some rangers were training, and they were going through streams, and the proper safeguards were not in place. And people didn't recognize the symptoms of hypothermia quick enough. Things like that. Or, we were training with the Marines and the Air Force--and you've seen all these documentaries about precision weapons and laser guided weapons. And they're great, very precise, unless the bomb, instead of going to the point that's being illuminated, comes back at the thing that's shooting the illumination. And we had an accident like that. And so, there's some changes you need to make to the equipment, to the training. But we did a systemic look at training across the Army and came up with what I think are solutions that have improved the system. So, yeah, there are a lot of bad things that happened, but on any given day, 95 percent of what I saw was great. The soldiers were working hard, the leaders were doing what they were supposed to do, trying to do their best. On any given day, there are one or two people who are doing something that just defies belief and imagination. And you say, "Why did that guy do that?" But we're all human. We're human beings. That's why they did that. Story_ID: 36059 Speaker 1: I know the [U.S.] Army has just approved women soldiers for combat duty. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't know if you know all the precautions, or the new rules, or what they have to do to make sure that takes place smoothly, but that's the kind of thing an Inspector General would do. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm certain that the current Inspector General will be deeply involved in that. I guess as an aside, can women fight? Oh, women have fought throughout history. It's a social and a political issue, not a military issue, to me. If the nation wants women in combat, then all the services will pony up and make it happen. Will it be easy? I don't know. I was on the faculty at West Point [United States Military Academy] when we brought the first women in, and it worked fine. It worked great. And the young people, men and women who were the cadets, made it work. And we, the faculty, were saying, "Oh, how is this going to work?" It worked fine. I was in the Army when we expanded the number of women. It worked fine. I visited the Israeli Army. I got on a tank over there and I was shocked that the whole crew were women. They don't fight, but they're the instructors. So, I'm not worried about women in combat. Whatever the nation decides, I think the Army can do. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36060 Speaker 1: Now, in '99 [1999], you were promoted to lieutenant general. Speaker 2: '97 [1997]. In '97 [1997], I was promoted to lieutenant general. Speaker 1: '97 [1997], okay. Speaker 2: And I became the Inspector General in '99 [1999], when it was time for me to retire, basically. I was asked instead could I take another assignment and go to Germany as the deputy commander of all U.S. Army forces in Europe. So, I had to be confirmed by the [U.S.] Senate again. Every time you move a lieutenant general or a general, the Senate has to confirm it. So, I went to Germany for two years. This is our third trip to Germany. I went to Heidelberg [Germany], where the headquarters are. And those were an interesting two years, because my commander, who was in Bosnia--because the Army had him there--we were on a peace keeping mission in Bosnia. And so, about every two weeks I was either in Bosnia or Kosovo, because we were supporting those units. I was moving around Germany and Western Europe dealing with our host nations and looking at our training in our forces. I spent a lot of time flying back and forth to the U.S. I normally averaged about fifteen trips a year back to the United States. But that was a good two years there, and we saw all of Europe, spent a lot of time in Germany and Italy, Bosnia, Kosovo. Story_ID: 36061 Speaker 1: So, in 2001, in fact, when 9/11 [terrorist attacks on the United States on September 11, 2001] happened, I was physically packing my house to move back to the States. And I didn't learn about 9/11 until later that day, and flew back to the United States to a changed country. I went to Fort Monroe [Virginia] and was the deputy at the training and doctrine command [TRADOC]. I helped prepare the [U.S.] Army for this new mission and new environment. And then in 2003, on my thirty-fifth anniversary of my graduation from West Point [United States Military Academy], I had my retirement ceremony here. Speaker 2: Let me go back a second just to training and doctrine command. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: What did, how did the Army have to change, in light of 9/11? Speaker 1: The way we had to change is, you know, after Desert Storm in '91 [1991], we had to draw down the Army. In '89 [1989] and '90 [1990], of course, the [Berlin] Wall had come down in Europe, and the Soviet Union had come apart. And so, the Army was already on the move to change. Starting in '92 [1992], we had begun to change. You know, you didn't have a Soviet Union anymore. You had to be ready for new missions. We weren't sure what all those missions were. Nobody had envisioned us sitting in Germany for forty-five years training to fight the Russians, and then taking those same soldiers and moving them to Saudi Arabia and Iraq. Nobody ever envisioned that. And so, when 9/11 came along, we knew that terrorism was a real problem. I mean, the [World] Trade Center had been attacked years earlier, on the ground. We had had other incidents around the world. But when 9/11 occurred, we realized this is a long war, this is a long conflict. And it's not sending 2,000 tanks against the Republican guard. I mean, as hard as that is, that's straightforward and easy. How do you fight this ideological enemy, who's determined to strike you at home and wherever he can get at you because he doesn't like your way of life? And so, we were working hard on what are the tactics we need, what type of equipment do we need? How do you train your soldiers for this kind of warfare, where you're trying to win friends among the population and at the same time, separate the population from the insurgents and take care of them? So, that's how the Army had to change. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 36062 Speaker 1: So, 2003, retirement [from the U.S. Army] comes. Now, were you ready to retire in 2003? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I mean, I made the decision, you know. Could I have stayed a little longer? Well, probably. But as I thought about it, I'd had a full and wonderful career. And I wanted to go out on a high. I wanted to go out, you know, it's like a professional athletic who goes, "Gee, it's time." And we've seen a few that play beyond their time, and it's not pretty. And I've never wanted the [U.S.] Army to say "Well, we don't need you anymore, go away." I wanted to leave on my own terms. And thirty-five years seemed about right. And you have to be unselfish. I mean, as long as I stayed around, younger guys weren't going to get a chance to move up. I'd done all, I mean, I'd done more than I'd ever dreamed of doing. I felt satisfied with what I had done and contributed to the nation. And as I told somebody a few years ago when they were retiring, "Feel good about what you did. You kept the wolf away from the door. Whether you fought or not, you kept the wolf away from the door. You protected the nation. You served the nation. Whatever it asked you to do, you went and did it, and you did it well." So, I was ready to retire. Yeah, it was time. Now, I'm here in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] and I work at a consulting firm. I'm still working with a lot of the same people. I know a lot of folks. The Army senior leadership today--I had an opportunity to serve with them--or they worked for me (laughter) back in the day. And so, it's, and I'm involved in a number of organizations that are still active and involved. The Association of the U.S. Army, I'm on their Council of Trustees. The Army Historical Foundation, I'm on the Board of Directors, and we're building a national museum at the U.S. Army. I'm on the Board of Directors of the West Point Association of Graduates. We're doing things to support the institution and support the alumni and support the cadets. So, I mean, I'm involved still. I love the institution, still take care of it. But this is a young man's game. I mean, I'm sixty-seven years old. I can't be jumping out of airplanes and riding tanks anymore. It's time for a younger man, like my son. He's in the Army, my oldest son [Larry Jordan, Jr.], carrying on the family business. Story_ID: 36063 Speaker 1: Okay, is he [Jordan's older son, Larry Jordan, Jr., who is in the U.S. Army] an officer? Speaker 2: He's a major right now. Spent two years in Iraq and one in Afghanistan. When they had the disaster in Haiti, he went down with, took the advance party down from the 82nd Airborne to help provide relief down there. So, he's seen a lot of the world. I think he's going to make a career of it. I guess in fifteen years, he probably has. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about your other son [Karl Jordan]? Speaker 2: My other son, it's interesting. He was going to go to West Point [United States Military Academy], wanted to go to West Point. And we were in Germany for all of his four high school years. The day before he was supposed to take his physical exam, he was playing football and had an ACL [anterior cruciate ligament] injury. So, that knocked him out of that. As it worked out, he went to college for a year, rehabilitated himself and ended up playing football at Syracuse [University] and was on a team with [Donovan] McNaab. But anyway, that's neither here nor there. But he didn't get a chance to serve, but he's in the corporate world now. He's the vice president of an insurance firm, and lives and works in Bermuda. Not a bad place. So, as a good parent, I've got to go down there a couple times a year just to check on him, to see him and the grandkids. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 36064 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what would you consider to be your major accomplishments, or your legacy? Speaker 2: Legacy, in two respects. Your legacy, my two sons [Larry Jordan, Jr. and Karl Jordan] and seven grandkids are my legacy. And I think I've hopefully made the world better for them and influenced them. And I know that the wife [Nannette Pippen] and I have been able to influence our sons positively. And the life that we gave them has influenced them and shaped them as men. And then what I told you awhile ago, you know, the only legacy we leave is in terms of the people we touch, for better or for worse. And I'm fortunate. I run into people all the time that I served with over the last forty years. And I feel blessed, because I've never had one who approached me and I had touched them for worse. So, I feel good about that. One little story. Back in the '80s [1980s], we were assigned here. I must have been a major or lieutenant colonel. I don't know what I was, a lieutenant colonel, I guess. And the family and I and one of these other couples we grew up with, took our kids down to King's Dominion down here. And we're in line, and you know how when you're at Disney or someplace, you snake around. And there's this guy who's middle-aged, got a beard, and he looks a little scruffy--and his wife. And they're looking at me. And I noticed that as we--. And finally, there's the door, and we're right across. And this guy says, "Are you Captain Jordan?" And I said, "I was Captain Jordan." (laughter) And he says, "Were you at Fort Riley, Kansas in the early '70's [1970s]? I said, "Yeah, I was the company commander." He said, "You put me out of the [U.S.] Army." And I'm thinking, I think I might have to rock and roll with this guy right here, you know. I got my family, and I'm thinking, okay, if he climbs over this pole, this rail, I'm going to catch him half stride. And that's when his wife said, "That's the best thing you ever did. It straightened him right out." And he said, "I wasn't a very good soldier, and you treated me okay, but you put me out of the Army and it taught me a lesson." I'll never forget that. At first, I thought I was going to have to rock and roll with this guy (laughter). But second, the fact that he and his wife, I mean this is years later. I left there in 1972, and this is '86 [1986] or '87 [1987]. And this guy says, "Are you Captain Jordan?" I'm just dressed in a tee shirt or whatever, and I said "Yeah, I used to be. I'm something else Jordan now, Colonel Jordan now." But-- Speaker 1: This is suburban Maryland, and that happened in Fort Riley, Kansas. Speaker 2: Right. (laughter). Go figure. But anyway, I mean, life is, my whole life has been episodes like that. Something happens. But it's the people you touch, that's your legacy. Story_ID: 36065 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back, again, at everything you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently, or wish you would had done? Speaker 2: No, I don't think differently. I wouldn't do a doggoned thing differently. I enjoyed the ride. My wife [Nannette Pippen] and I enjoyed this ride. We were pulling out these things where we were chuckling at some of the photographs, and remembering good times. But I used to tell--another thing I used to tell people--because in units, you have hales and farewells, welcoming new people and saying goodbye to the old. And they tend to be bittersweet, because you're helping new people come, and there are old people that you've grown to know and like, and they're leaving. And I tell people, "Don't worry about it." You know, because some of them would say, "I don't want this time to end. You know, I really like it here, I don't want this time to end." So, don't worry about. This is a time and a place and a special bunch of people, okay. It's a time, it's a specific place, it's a special group of people. And you can take that with you forever in here [touching his heart], and in here [touching his head]. You take it with you. You come back to the same place ten years later, the same place, and you get the same people together, but it's not the same time. And if you want to recapture the same time, it's in here [touching heart] and in here [touching head]. And so, you never lose it. We were talking about Germany the other night with friends. We were all there together. And in an instant, we were back in Germany, in 1988. We were all back there, mentally and emotionally, right like that. So, no, would I change anything? No, no. I think it turned out pretty well. I mean, the good Lord doesn't make the road smooth for you all the time. You've got to go up the rough side of the mountain at times. And so, that's character building. It's part of who we are. It's how you respond to adversity that defines you, not the adversity. Story_ID: 36066 Speaker 1: On that vein, we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My major concern for the African American community is the future of the black male, and the fact that the African American male, young African American male in this country, seems to be going backwards, not forward, in terms of incarceration rates, school drop-out, early death by homicide. I look at black women, and black women are progressing. And if you look at the demographics, entering college, for example, a much higher percentage of black women enter college than black men today. And that's a turnaround of 35 years or so. If you look at the success rate after the first semester, second semester, third semester, it is devastating when you look at black males, the way they fall off. You're going to create--I hate that we're creating a country that is more multi-ethnic than any country on earth. And that's probably a good thing, it doesn't bother me at all. But if you're concerned about the black community, will you have a black community if black women are better educated, have a better--a lower death rate, can't find partners from their own ethnic group that reflect their standing, their education, their values? What's the future? I'm most concerned about males, and just the tremendous problems that they are having finishing school, being successful, breaking into the wider society, and it's bothersome. When I look at--okay, I've got two knucklehead boys. I call them that, but they're great sons [Larry Jordan, Jr. and Karl Jordan], forty-three and thirty-seven [years old] now. I can't believe that they're that old. I'm not that old. But in between them, they have four sons and three daughters. And their sons are going to do great, because they have that father figure. They have the encouragement, and they have the opportunity as individuals who know they can go out and stumble and do whatever. But I think they're going to do great. I can go down here in southeast Washington and I can find so many young black men the same age, and they're not going to do great. Nobody's reaching down and picking them up. That's what bothers me. Story_ID: 36067 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Not that I can think of. Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as an individual who cared and did his best at everything; followed his judgment and the judgment of those that he cared about; wasn't worried about what the world thought about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 36068 Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell us about this. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me when I was a 2nd Classman, which is a junior, at the [United States] Military Academy [at West Point]. And it's in the spring of 1967 in New York City. And I'm at a black church that is honoring Col. Charles Young, the third black graduate of the Academy. Speaker 1: That's in New York in the spring? Speaker 2: Uh huh. Speaker 1: This is-- Speaker 2: This is during the same timeframe, and I was at the Military Academy. I was a member of the history department, and we were celebrating Black History Month. And I was giving a presentation on what I've called the Black Experience of West Point, which is something I had studied and worked on when I was in grad school. This is the day I was promoted to major. It was the end of my time at West Point on the faculty. And this is my wife [Nannette Pippen] and the head of our department, Col. Tom Greese. And so, I was finally a major, after ten years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is also at the Department. I was given an award at the end of my tour by the deputy department head and deputy Professor, Roy Flint. My two boys are there. They're now thirty-seven and forty-three [years old], (laughter), but they were pretty young at that time. This is the entire history department at West Point at that time. And I was fortunate enough to be a member of that. An interesting photograph. This was about 1966, and I was a student there at the Academy, and with an instructor. And one day they came in and took photographs for something. Somehow I got a copy of it. And then years later, I was sort of surprised when I found another picture next to it, which reversed the roles. In fact, this one right here, where I was the instructor and had the sleepy cadets in class, and was trying to teach them about--I think we were probably looking at the post-World War II era, and what was happening in society. And I was trying to get them enthused, but they weren't very enthusiastic. (laughter). Well, this is my command photo when I was a 3 Star. I was the deputy commander in Europe at the time. Part of my job in Europe was to work with our allies and the host nations. This was on one of my visits to Italy. We had forces in Italy, and I had a chance to become very good friends with the Italian chief of staff. Now this is towards the end--this is not towards the end, this is the end of my career. And I was at my retirement ceremony, with my wife and Ericson Sanky who was the chief of staff. We were there with the [U.S.] Army's old guard as it's called. And I took a retirement in June of 2003. This is early in my life. This is my mom [Dorothy Elizabeth Johnson Jordan]. I'm about a year and half old there. It's probably about spring of '48 [1948], I would guess by the weather and the car there. And that's in front of my old house in Kansas City [Missouri]. Speaker 1: There's the Cadillac. Speaker 2: Yeah. There I am with one of our cars on our trip up to Minnesota. And there's a smiling baby boy. It looks like about, like my kids were at that age, but that's me at age about six months. This is about the same time, growing up in Kansas City. I was a happy young man and loving life. I don't know who that handsome guy is, but they tell me it's me, and I believe them. The same guy, a few years later. I was debonair, I thought. I was going to go out and fight the world. One of the earliest Christmases I can remember. I told you that I was interested in being a soldier or a fireman or something else. I had my truck there. This is an interesting picture. This is my basic class. This is after we graduated and we went to Fort Knox [Kentucky] to learn. The interesting thing is, this class, about forty of those guys, maybe thirty-eight, were my classmates from West Point. The rest were distinguished graduates out of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. And when I look at that, there were three of us who became generals out of that. None of us expected it. Myself, a guy who became a dean at the military academy. He was a 1 Star. And then another classmate who became a 2 Star, as the division commander. So, an interesting group of people. Speaker 1: One more. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of a painting that was done at Fort Knox. All of the commanders received--they didn't receive--but a portrait in oil was done of them. And they managed to take a photograph and give it to me as a souvenir...