 Story_ID: 564804 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Jack Arnett Kirkland, A-R-N-E-T-T. Actually Arnett was the name that I was born with and when I finished high school [McKeesport Technical High School, McKeesport, Pennsylvania] I changed it to Jack, Jack Arnett Kirkland. Speaker 1: Okay. How do you spell Arnett? Speaker 2: A-R-N-E-T-T. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what's the story behind changing your name from Arnett to Jack and why Jack? Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And why not Arnett? Speaker 2: Well, I actually, I, I, I had a brother-in-law whose name was Jack and I always liked the name and when I, I was about to join in the [U.S. military] service I said now Jack is sounds more masculine, sounds more like a man so I'll take that name and then I, I knew that would offend my mother [Anna Marshall Kirkland] so I said I'll keep the name that she gave me so I'll just make myself be Jack A. Kirkland. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So did you have to go through any formal procedure to change it or just start calling yourself that that's how-- Speaker 2: That's, that's how it happened and, and going into the service the minute that you start with your AFC numbers [sic. Air Force Specialty Code (AFSC)] and all the rest of those kinds of gyrations that's how you get known because I was coming from a, a town where there was no street name or anything of, of that kind of designation so changing my name I thought was of no difficulty. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. It's interesting times those there. I heard other stories people just changing name. Speaker 2: Just change it yeah. Speaker 1: And if that's what they're called in the service that's what they're called. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I, I considered it an extension. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date is October 28 and the place is a, a village called Blythedale, B-L-Y-T-H-E-D-A-L-E but the people are from there call it (pronunciation) Blydale. They, they, they--the Blythe is, is obviously of people who don't know the area. They'll come and see the name and then they'll try to pronounce all of it. But we know if you're from there it's Blydale. Speaker 1: It's Blythedale, Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: Blythedale, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's, it's a, a just a, a small village, it's a little bend in the road, it's a very small area. Speaker 1: Well I'll ask you about that a little further on. Speaker 2: Okay. Um-hm. Speaker 1: But you were born October 28, 1931, right? Speaker 2: That's correct um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay in Blythedale, Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And sir what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a professor at Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] in the School of Social Work [George Warren Brown School of Social Work]. Speaker 1: Okay and any titles or certain titles or anything? Speaker 2: Well, not, not really specific titles. I, I have carried a number of titles here. I was the first co-director of black studies which is now African American studies. Speaker 1: Okay. Now and so what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is 15 October '07 [2007] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two thousand seven [2007]. Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: This is because it's oral history we ask this. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: These things seem like they don't--they have--are of no consequence but they are in terms-- Speaker 2: All right, I got you. Speaker 1: --'cause this will go down in history and somebody sees this-- Speaker 2: The say when did it happen? Speaker 1: --well and you're saying when it happened-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --which is important. I can say it but it's better for you to say it. Speaker 2: I see. Very good. Speaker 1: That's why we do it like that. So I ask you to spell names, I ask you for some dates and if you don't know them it's okay. I mean you get us as close as you can. Speaker 2: Okay. Um-hm. Speaker 1: So and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at, at Washington University, which is in St. Louis [Missouri]. Story_ID: 564805 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that I have to ask as a warm up. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But I think we're already warmed up but I have to ask them anyway. First one is--and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is do, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Not necessarily. I, I, I--well I take that back. I do have a favorite food but I get it so occasionally, it's called corn that's been scraped off the cob. My mother [Anna Marshall Kirkland] used to do that so I enjoy that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably blue, um-hm. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring and fall, but spring in particular. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I've, I've come to enjoy Scandinavia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Pause) No, not necessarily. Story_ID: 564806 Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Edward Kirkland] side. Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Annie, its well it's Anna, A-N-N-A, Mae, M-A-E. And her maiden name was Marshall and of course she's a Kirkland [Anna Marshall Kirkland]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Well, I, I'd have to refer to notes here because I don't know all of this offhand and as much as you might ask me for all in my family and her date of birth was December 10, 1900. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was she born? Speaker 2: Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what do they do? Any stories from that side? Speaker 2: Not really. I, I heard her talk somewhat about being in Alabama and there is a--it's a small area back there called Pratt City [Alabama] which is like most little areas that get annexed and it was annexed by Birmingham and so I know very little except that that's her home and that she--I was raised with her brother there in that area. Speaker 1: Okay. Any stories about your grandparents on that side or what were they doing you know what what do they do for a living? Were they farmers or did they work in a? Speaker 2: Well I had my grandfather that's--they call him Daddy Marshall. He probably did farming and he came to Pennsylvania later on and he did some work with, with families you know assisting families doing porter work and things like that so, and he was a housekeeper but I only knew him as an older man so I didn't know much about what he did as a youth. But he--but one of the things that I know that he was a very excellent cook. He had a recipe for sauce for barbecue that was revered up and down the valley so I know that he was good at that. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Any, any--is that as far back as you can go on that side? Speaker 2: Yes, that's, that's as far back as I can go and you know actually if you go back beyond him into slavery you know so it's very interesting, I hadn't thought about it that seriously how close I am to generations that were very close to slavery. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about slavery passed down through the family? Speaker 2: I think that they probably protected us by not sharing any of those stories yeah, which I think is sad because I think that would have been something that I could have had in my memory bank and something that I could have used probably as a teacher so unfortunately that wasn't so. Story_ID: 564807 Speaker 1: So did your mother [Anna Marshall Kirkland] have any, any stories to tell about growing up in Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Not really. I mean I used to hear her tease my dad [Edward Kirkland] about being a farmer and, and how tough it was. As a matter of fact she said that he had a cow that was so poor that my dad had to lean him up against the post to milk him. So you know times must have been really hard but that was the teasing king of way that they would do things. But no, we don't go far back with, with my stories. I imagine my oldest brother probably is closest to that than I am and he's passed and he didn't leave any of the stories as well. Speaker 1: Did your mother go to school in Birmingham? Speaker 2: She went to school there. She went to the third grade I believe and she was a very able individual. She actually ran a boardinghouse as a woman which was for workers and it was probably something very close to maybe a restaurant and a boardinghouse because she was able to provide the, the kind of sustenance that was essential for miners and she did quite well. As a matter of fact she, she was a, a very able earner of of monies as a result of that occupation. Speaker 1: Now this is in Blythedale [Pennsylvania], right? Speaker 2: No, this, this is, this was actually now there were, there were I have nine other siblings so my mother and my father actually were coming out of Alabama and they were following the Appalachian Trail which was the chain of coal and brothers and sisters were born along the way. So there were some born in West Virginia and some born in Pennsylvania and then I was born. I'm the only one in Blythedale back then. Speaker 1: Okay but your mother's boarding house was in? Speaker 2: Oh she--it was in, it was in Cooksburg [Pennsylvania] and-- Speaker 1: Cooksburg okay. Speaker 2: --and, and yes. Speaker 1: So she didn't have one in Blythedale? Speaker 2: No, she didn't have one there but she became a, a provider for many people there. We had a large garden and, and she was a canner. She canned extensively and many people were able to get through the winter as a result of the food that she was able to preserve. Speaker 1: Okay. This is something she did for--did she do it as a, as an entrepreneurial thing? Or did she do it as a charitable thing? Speaker 2: Kind of both well it was more, it was more charity. Now you have to remember now she's doing it in Pennsylvania when I'm fully aware of it when she has my other sisters who are having their families and, and the means are very meager there and so she knew how to preserve foods and, and to help and that small town there were a lot of other people who were able to benefit from her talent and skill and preservation of foods. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now did she have a story about why you know they're--what you said they were like following jobs-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Actually-- Speaker 1: --longer? Speaker 2: --they're following the, the coal in Appalachia and, and interestingly enough many of the people who ended up in Blythedale were known by my mother and father because they too were going along that trail from Alabama up Appalachia up through West Virginia and then ultimately into Pennsylvania. Story_ID: 564808 Speaker 1: Let me have you- get your father's full name and spell it? Speaker 2: Um-hm. My father's name was Edward and it was Kirkland [Edward Kirkland], K-I-R-K-L-A-N-D. Speaker 1: No middle name? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. Edward Kirkland. What is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth, he was born in 1898, that's February the 15th, 1898. Speaker 1: Okay and where (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he was born in Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you know much about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: Not a lot but I had an opportunity to go to Birmingham and to meet some of his sisters and had a, a very good reunion with them and he had a sister in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and her name was Aunt Nish [ph.]. Very lovely person and I have family in Philadelphia on my father's side. So what I know about them is just some of the names and places that I met them and you know fact that we're family and being family at that time was you show up and you you give some of the family tree and they were able to immediately recognize genetically some of that in you and it was you know it was old home week. You didn't have to worry about if there were enough beds it was just simply a matter of whether they had enough blankets so that you could have a pillow. 'Cause if there was space in the house, there was a place to sleep. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that was, that was the kind of life that we enjoyed. Story_ID: 564809 Speaker 1: Did your father [Edward Kirkland] have a chance to go to school? Speaker 2: My father went to I think the third or the fourth grade. Interesting story about my father, I was well I think as a coal miner with ten kids he was obviously hard pressed and I remember on one occasion when I was a junior in high school [McKeesport Technical High School, McKeesport, Pennsylvania] that I actually was going to leave high school and go in the mine and because I thought I could help him. Because at that time my, my other brothers had gone into the [U.S. military] service and my father said nothing when I told him I was gonna go in the mine and my mother [Anna Marshall Kirkland] I can remember her being in the kitchen cooking and she didn't say anything. I guess she was waiting for him to say something and so he, he after a while he said to me, "Well if that's what you wanna do, I can't stop you." He says, "But if that's what you really wanna do, then my life's been a total waste." And that, that just knocked me to my knees and a lot happened in my life as a result of that. I will never forget that. It always rings in my head that the man could be working that hard and often and under conditions that were just really incredible and then to know that, that he, he cared that much about his family that he would want them to follow into that working drudgery. Speaker 1: That's, that's profound yeah. So did he share any stories of growing up as far as--like growing up in Birmingham [Alabama] or what it was like in Birmingham? Speaker 2: He shared stories--I, I heard echoed many of the stories and they were stories of discrimination, there were stories of how African Americans had been treated and lynchings and other kinds of things. It was those kinds of stories that we were experiencing hearing for many, many years of, of youth and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I and my peer group, we heard a lot of that. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you remember any of those stories or no? Speaker 2: Well, they, they were not stories that were specific in terms of, of people. I mean I wouldn't remember them. But I, I, I know that as those stories were being told it were stories of people that they had seen, events that they were very aware of and you could almost still see the, the rhythm of, of, of emotion in them as they would tell them. Speaker 1: So do you think that's why your father and some of the other people left Birmingham? Speaker 2: Yeah, no question about it. You know he, he often said that he wanted a better life for his children but I guess he thought geographically that would make a difference but ironically when we got to Pennsylvania there were still, there was segregation there and certainly it wasn't at the same force I imagine as it was in Alabama but it was, it was noticeable and it was, it was painful. Story_ID: 564810 Speaker 1: So is there a story about how your parents [Anna Marshall Kirkland and Edward Kirkland] met? Did they tell a story about that? Speaker 2: They--not really. It's you know you're dealing with people who are farmers and they get to know one another and it's, it's, it's a, it's a story--there's probably some stories there but I really all I just tend to remember is that they got together and then got married and since started a family immediately and, and was hopeful that things would be best for them or better for them and for us. So no there's nothing of, of how they met or any of that that I would remember. Story_ID: 564811 Speaker 1: Okay now when you think about your, your parents' personalities, your mother [Anna Marshall Kirkland] and your father [Edward Kirkland], their talents and, and I guess you know things that they would do and not do, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Oh, that's interesting. I, I, I think I'm a good blend of both of them. I think my father is a hardworking fella, was very disciplined, he he was a, a person who, who tried things new and different and was very dependable so I think I take a lot after him. But on the other hand, my mother was a person who was very compassionate, very sensitive, very warm and I have some, some of that social work in me. As a matter of fact with ten of us in the house, she went on and adopted three more. Of course it was the unofficial adoption that takes place in the black family where I recall bringing a fella in because his mother had been in prison and he was kind of alone and, and you know really didn't know what to do with himself. So I brought him home and my mother let him stay there for about two or three days and she had done the research of whether he could go and be somewhere else with other relatives and so forth so you know I, I had to become a professional person to know that all of that took place. Anyway she did it and at the dinner table one day, we were eating and it's, it's what I call a black adoption ceremony. She asked me, the boy she said, "Do you like being here?" He said, "Yes." Said, you know, "You see how I treat my sons?" Said, "Yes." "So you know that when he does something that he shouldn't be doing that I might even spank him?" He said, "Yeah." So she said, "Do you think that you can handle or tolerate my treating you that way?" And he said, "Yes." And then she said, "Go on and eat your supper." That is the ceremony. Now he knew he was in. I looked at him and smiled and hey, he was there. He had, had another brother. So it was, she's, she's a social worker. She was a social worker. So what I do professionally is very--it may be some modification of what she did but it's, it's basic. Speaker 1: It's an extension of her I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah you either care for people and you try to help them you know. I may have more formal education and, and attempt to do things that might be a little more difficult because of the laws and all of that but basically and essentially it's, it's relatively the same. Story_ID: 564812 Speaker 1: Now you have ten brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have--well it's ten of us. Speaker 1: Ten of you. Speaker 2: So I have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nine--yeah. Speaker 2: --yeah I had five sisters and four brothers and today I have a brother and a sister. Speaker 1: Okay can you name them for us and where do you fall in the order? Speaker 2: I'm Uncas. I'm the last of the Mohicans. I'm, I'm, I'm the baby. Okay. So here they are. I have a sister named, named Mabel [Mabel Kirkland Drake], a sister named Bertha [Bertha Kirkland], a brother named James [James Kirkland], a brother named Aaron [ph.], a sister named Bernice [Bernice Wortham Moses], a sister named Henrietta [Henrietta Kirkland], a brother named Frederick [ph.], a sister named Gladys [Gladys Kirkland Ramsey] and a brother named Marshall [Marshall Kirkland]. Now if you came into the Kirkland household and called people by that name, now they might look at you and say, "Where'd you come from" because the only one that has a name that's not a nickname is Mabel. Bertha is B.K., James is Sonny Man, Aaron is Goat, Bernice is Siskat, Henrietta is Piggy, Frederick is Jabble, Gladys is Tiny and Marshall we let him keep his name too but somewhere in there we used to call him Mish as well so and my nickname incidentally is Bud. They would call me Bud. So it's a town that that would call people by nicknames as a matter of fact. If you, if you were coming into this little village [Blythedale, Pennsylvania] and you wanted to speak to someone or, or be with someone and you knew their name, you'd be hard pressed to find them (laughter) until somebody told you what, what to look for or who the nicknames because we had, we had some very strange names there. Story_ID: 564813 Speaker 1: We were talking about the nicknames of the people there in Blythedale [Pennsylvania] right? Speaker 2: Blythedale right. Speaker 1: So can you tell us a little bit about where you grew up? Was there a--now I've heard that the community is divided up into into a upper patch and a lower patch-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --can you tell us about upper patch and lower patch? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's, interesting because it was a town of probably maybe three hundred people and as a kid you know you would think, hey that's a huge population because you, you don't have that to compare with anything. I mean we really weren't into any large cities so we thought we had a thriving population because around us there were other towns that were even smaller. Oh yeah, like Industry [Pennsylvania] and Smithdale [Pennsylvania] and Scott Haven [Pennsylvania] and wow so-- Speaker 1: Wait was each town basically attached to a specific mine or something or, or? Speaker 2: Well actually yeah there's some truth to that. They went to different mine areas but the mine that that our parents went to was called Warden, W-A-R-D-E-N, Warden Mine and Warden Mine if, if you will, will check that out was, was the largest, I believe it's the largest coal mine in America. It's a huge, huge mine and so yes as, as you look at these little small areas. Now you have to imagine that even in these small areas where you have maybe a hundred people or less you still have a black section you see. So where we're talking about the upper patch and the lower patch, the reason you get the patches is because the lower patch where I was raised, they're--there were sixteen houses and they are--there were four and, and each row and there was four rows and the houses were, were built by the, the mine company, Warden Mine, so we were living in, in property that belonged to the Warden Mine company [Pittsburgh Coal Company, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. Story_ID: 564814 Speaker 1: And we're paying rent so later on of course we had a chance to buy our homes but this is a patch that is between the river and the railroad tracks. Now that, that has to surely set off some lights in your head because we're talking about the Youghiogheny River and the Youghiogheny-- Speaker 2: Youghiogheny? How do you spell Youghiogheny? Speaker 1: Well that's a, that's a good one. Y-O-U-G-H, is, is how we made the abbreviation so and we know--you know of course it's, it's an Indian [Native American] name because it was Youghiogheny, Monongahela [Monongahela River] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have those names-- Speaker 1: --Allegheny [Allegheny River] yeah so the Yough was, was the river and as we would would see it over-flood every year. It wasn't a question of would it flood, it was a question of when and so we--our parents would save up so that they could you know get new rugs or (pronunciation) nunoleum or whatever. Speaker 2: So your house your house would be flooded (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you notice what I said-- Speaker 2: --every year. Speaker 1: --nunoleum yeah, you notice what I said nunoleum not linoleum because you see as kids we thought it was that was the pronunciation. Speaker 2: Linoleum? Speaker 1: It was linoleum but we called it nunoleum. Speaker 2: Nunoleum okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah so we knew every, every year we were going to have to clean out the house and and that there was gonna have to be a, a complete clean out. That is someone is gonna have to go in with shovels. They have to take the mud out and so forth and such. Now that's every year and, and there were people that lived closer to the river than I lived which meant that they would come back as their houses would go into the water, they would come back and back until ultimately they would come to our house and, and fortunately our house didn't go under every year, but can you imagine that moving back and back and back? Speaker 2: So the bosses of the mine-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --of the Warden Mine-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --built these homes-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and charge y'all rent for them, they knew-- Speaker 1: Oh yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) this area was gonna flood every year. Speaker 1: No question about it. Story_ID: 564815 Speaker 1: Absolutely no question about it. But that's just, that's just for openers, then as I said you had the railroad tracks okay so it would be six--was eight tracks so in order to go to P.S. Number 11 [ph.] which was the public school that we went to, you had to up under those trains. And so our parents would walk us to the trains that would be you know idled on the tracks and, and often there was an engine on those trains which means that they could snatch and move out at any given moment and they would watch us crawl up under there and then head out for school and they would turn and go back home once they saw that we were on the other side and we were safe. I can remember that you know. I can remember my mother [Anna Marshall Kirkland] standing there and I can remember the, the expressions on her face as, as we would try to navigate that because on occasions I would get through; I crawl under one set of trains and then the next train would jerk and I'd have to wait between those trains, those trains before I could go and sometimes it would be a considerable amount of time. So your, your life was at risk just trying to get to school and get an education? Speaker 2: So the lower patch was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The lower patch was-- Speaker 2: --more inconvenient place to live than the upper patch? Speaker 1: Oh yes. The upper patch they were on the other side of the tracks, they could walk down what we call the hard road because it's--there was no road where we were. We call the concrete or the asphalt, the hard road, and so they could walk to school that way. But we had to wait on occasions for the train to either move or we had to crawl up under the train to get to school. Speaker 2: You ever have a close call? Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Crawling up under those-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes, oh yes. It's you know and it was just part of the, part of life. I mean nobody got really carried away with the possibility that-- Speaker 2: Did anybody actually get rolled over by a train? Speaker 1: No, there was one fella whose ankle, whose I won't say ankle, the heel got caught by a train and he walked with a limp after that. But no we, we were pretty skillful in being able to navigate under the, the trains. Story_ID: 564816 Speaker 1: So this is, this is the village [Blythedale, Pennsylvania] now, this is sixteen houses and on, on my street, there were McGuffans [ph.], there were the Richardsons, and there were a, another group Stoutamire and-- Speaker 2: How do you spell that last one? Speaker 1: Stoutamire? Speaker 2: Is it Stoutamire? Speaker 1: Yeah Stoutamire, you know like the picture. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there are a lot of black Stoutamire. It's a funny (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah well there's a lot-- Speaker 2: --a lot of them around the country. There's some in my home town. Speaker 1: Right. Well you know, (laughter) you know where we get those names from right? Well those are not accidental you know Kirkland certainly is not out of West Africa. Speaker 2: No but it's, it would be, it wouldn't cause as much surprise as a black person named Studemeyer [ph.]. Speaker 1: Yeah that's true. Speaker 2: It seemed like such a German type of name-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --people would if you saw the name you would assume it was a German not a black person. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Kirkland is most of the English names we seem to have as a people-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --is I guess because of the slave owners being mostly English and Irish-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and Scotch. Speaker 1: Scotch well mine is Scotch, mine actually means church land, it was not um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. But Stoutamire-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --yeah. So-- Speaker 1: So here's, here's this, this patch of houses near this--there's this group of young people and the reason I give you that row of the first row I could give you the names of everybody on all of those rows but I live next to McGuffans as I say and then on the other side of him was the Richardsons and the Richardsons had two sons and I can remember the mother and father Ms. Marie [Marie Poindexter Richardson] and Mr. Johnny [John Richardson] very well, but the two sons that they had one was Albert [Albert Richardson] and the other was Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Richardson] and now again nobody has a name that you would recognize so Albert's name we called him Scrappy. Well Scrappy you know you got that because he he was a small guy and he wanted to be a professional fighter you know and so he'd go and, and be just he'd be scrapping all the time and and we tease him because his, his chance of becoming world champ (laughter) you know is slim and none. But he was a guy that we, we were very proud of and, and liked. And then Julius, his brother, his brother was the guy who really played a major role in that town and his brother went away and joined the, the [U.S.] Army. He joined the part of the Army where they had the, well they had the, the horses actually. It-- Speaker 2: The cavalry? Speaker 1: --the cavalry yeah. Can you imagine that? I mean this is, this is and, and, and he went away and came back and when he came back I mean he he stood so tall and so, he was so elegant he was you know this is a guy who was--is very straight and very well-manicured. Anyway but he came back and, and was the model. The model of course was a person who could actually leave that town, bypass the coal mine and go into another life and another world and come back and show us what was possible. Now I was obviously much younger but that stayed in, in my mind that there was a way out and-- Speaker 2: So was he the first person in that community that you know of who that actually (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very first, very first. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And not only, not only was he in the cavalry, but he had a picture of his horse. (Laughter) He came and showed us so we were so impressed you know. Story_ID: 564817 Speaker 1: The fella across the street from him--there's another group of boys named, named Calvin [Calvin Johnson] and Melvin Johnson, obviously not Calvin and Melvin, one was Bubba and one was Shoulda. So Bubba was--or Melvin was a, was a very bright individual as well and he saw Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Richardson] and he kept reinforcing in my mind that there was a way out because Melvin was my best friend and, and so he went on, Melvin went on to become a Fulbright scholar and could speak German fluently. Speaker 2: Now is Melvin Bubba or Shoulda? Speaker 1: Bubba. Speaker 2: Bubba okay. Speaker 1: And, and he's passed. But he went on to have his own travel agency. As a matter of fact he went on to invite Julius and I to go to West Africa and I was there with him when he was drummed in West Africa as a chief which was almost an all-night experience. Speaker 2: Was this in Ghana? Speaker 1: Yes in Ghana so it was, it was, it was quite something and then Julius went with him at a later date and, and played golf over there. But, but they, I mean it's, it's amazing how a small town can find a, a image that can help them to move out and move beyond what we thought was possible. Story_ID: 564818 Speaker 1: But at the same time, there was a person that Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Richardson] saw that he thought was a person who had something going for him too. And that's a guy named Johnny Waters. Johnny Waters is a--was a coal miner and Johnny Waters would have been a sensational golfer. Can you imagine golfing when you are not mining coal? Can you imagine the--what that must do to your hands and all of that and so Julius had a good relationship with him and, and you know observed him and what have you but and, and after a while I need not tell you that Julius went on to become a world famous teacher yeah. But, but here's-- Speaker 2: Now how did they, where did they play? I mean now and did Johnny Waters get his--did he work at a golf course or something or how did he-- Speaker 1: No, it's just you know-- Speaker 2: --get interested? Speaker 1: --well but see not only that, but there were, there were--he was interested but here you're dealing with a, a man who can't play when the whites are playing. He's got to play after and there's nobody on a course and nobody in front of him whatever so and, and he was, he was tremendous. He would have been, he would have been the early Tiger [Tiger Woods] had he not had that kind of situation you know. Imagine 'cause I used to caddy. It was a little after that, but I used to caddy and when I would caddy, we would as boys we would get up and go to the course oh perhaps around five o'clock. We walked about four miles to the golf course and we walked maybe three or four miles around it and then we walked back home with a dollar in our pocket which was big money then. And, and here, here is Julius you know watching all of these activities going on here. Here's Johnny Waters you know playing and what have you and here I am going up as a caddy and I can't go out until the white boys caddy you see so even though we are getting there at five or six [o'clock] in the morning, we have to wait until the other boys go out and then we can go out. And today I would not hit a golf ball. I mean, that's not--most caddies are good golfers but I, I had had my fill of the way that the situation was at that time. Speaker 2: So you were kind of turned off by it? Speaker 1: Yes, very, very much because of that but after being in, in the [U.S. military] service and hearing about what Julius was doing, I was, I was very elated to see that that he and Johnny had gone on and stayed in the, in the sport and had done quite well. Story_ID: 564819 Speaker 1: Now, I was given some of these names Scrappy [Albert Richardson], Noble. Did we talk about Noble (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh Noble. Oh that's, that's you know when I was sharing with you how, how attractive, how neat, how, how harnessed he was in, in his uniform, he was a--it was just such a, a sight that people started to call him that Noble you know and, and it was, it was as though he stood above the crowd. It was though, they recognized that you know he was, he was on his way to being something that we could have some great pride in. Speaker 1: Okay so that was [HistoryMaker] Julius Richardson? Speaker 2: That was Julius, that was Julius and I had the pleasure of talking with Margaret [Margaret Richardson] his wife and Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] his, his daughter not too long ago and there was a, a, a funeral held for Julius at the golf course and his friends came and and, and, and paid respect. These were people who were well known in the field and, and it's, it's just--it, it was so great to have a chance to stand speak to the, the memory of a man who played such a fabulous role in my life. Story_ID: 564820 Speaker 1: Well give us some idea of what this--what life was for the typical person in that, that town [Blythedale, Pennsylvania]? For your father [Edward Kirkland] and others I mean. Was it a pleasant place to grow up or was it a hard place or what was it like growing up in that part of town? Speaker 2: Well, you, you know for kids you don't see much of what, what is. You, you see it as a kid and so we saw it as being a place that was unlike any other place. It was--we thought it was the greatest place in the world. It was a, it was a town where everyone was your mother and your father and they had their right to discipline you and and they if they caught you doing anything that you weren't supposed to do, they could deal with you right there on the spot. It was, it was what we miss today the whole notion of neighborhood. Everybody was a neighbor and there was the, the, the real feeling that as a matter of fact it was so close that, that you would think that if you're gonna get married, you should go somewhere else 'cause you're so close to, to the boys or girls in a town that you, you know you marry somewhere else and go out to another town. So it was very, very close. And living was tough, it was, it was hard. We, we but we managed to survive and you, you've heard a number of these situations where farmers--I'm sorry, where miners are having difficulty in, in, in various places Idaho and so forth-- Speaker 1: Trapped in mines, shafts-- Speaker 2: --right. Speaker 1: --accidents and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Right. And so to hear a whistle in a town knowing that something has happened would stop the whole town and it had no, it had no, no relevance whether it was black or white, it was the whistle and everybody stopped. Everybody dealt with it. And while it was a segregated town, it still was a very well mixed town because we went to as I say the, the elementary school P.S. 11 [ph.] and in P.S. 11 I had four teachers. I'll never forget them. We, we always recall their names when I get with anybody that I've grown up with and these teachers really loved us. They cared for us. They knew our, our families and I've gone back subsequent to that to funerals and those teachers would come to the funerals 'cause they, they were part of the family. So I, I never really experienced discrimination in the school that the, the teachers did all that they could with every student. There was a real appreciation for the individual there. Story_ID: 564821 Speaker 1: There weren't any black t- teachers, I take it, at all? Speaker 2: I, I never had a black teacher until I went to graduate school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were there any black--who were the black people of authority figures? Were there any preachers in town? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes. Well we--I gave you the, the sixteen houses. Actually of those sixteen houses there was fifteen houses and one church. And the church was Ebenezer Baptist Church [Blythedale, Pennsylvania] and that church was where I first learned to feel the Lord. It's where I got an appreciation of the Bible and where I learned from actually Albert [Albert Richardson]--Scrappy--who was my teacher and he taught the Bible and actually the, the way that he taught which was interactive, is the way that I teach today. I went on to to learn how to work with groups. It was natural for him. So I learned the science of what he did in an artistic manner. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it was and so there there were deacons, there were pastor, there was the elders, all of those people played major roles as big brothers or uncles or daddies or granddaddies. They were very strong. I, I can, I can remember a story which kind of still make- will make me laugh about one of the fellows who was a deacon and he had a cornfield and we boys would go out on occasion and steal corn and roast it and so this fellow was coming down the road and he saw that we were roasting corn and he imagined that we had been in his field so he asked us he said, "Boys what are you doing?" I said, "Well you know we were just cooking some corn." He says, "Oh, I'm so glad that you didn't take it out of my field because I poisoned my corn." (Laughter) And we coughed and spit and he went on down the road laughing. But, but, but the point is that he dealt with stealing and you don't know what the consequences might, might be and so forth and so we it was that kind of growing up that we enjoyed. Story_ID: 564822 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh my, sights. Well there were joints in town [Blythedale, Pennsylvania] you know. Those places where you, you could dance, you could drink. Speaker 1: How many places in a town with only sixteen-- Speaker 2: Oh with sixteen houses? Speaker 1: Yeah with sixteen houses. Speaker 2: I would venture to say there's probably about five or six. So everybody found a way to make a little money and-- Speaker 1: That's a third of the town. Speaker 2: That's right. There would be soda, would be some hard liquor, would be a juke box and other you know other things that would be sold like refreshments and so forth. Speaker 1: So you're saying this is formal and informal? I mean there are different houses, some of them were were some actually I mean there were six places but-- Speaker 2: But people knew where they were. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah so while they were, they were informal in in terms of being identified to the police, (laughter) but they were very formal, we knew where they were right yeah. So. Speaker 1: Okay. So what was it illegal to, to sell liquor in those days? Speaker 2: Oh it was illegal to sell liquor 'cause you know people didn't have license but also in a town like that you have people selling numbers and you know obviously that was illegal but you know people, people did that and they gambled. People are always trying to gamble themselves out of poverty and so that was just one of the avenues to find a way out of poverty. Story_ID: 564823 Speaker 1: Did you have any sense of how hard your fathers worked in those days in those mines? Speaker 2: No, I really didn't. It, it, it was sometime--actually it was one event that brought it home to me probably better than, than anything I can remember and it was a, a time when, when people were saying your parents should say that they love you, you know. Have your daddy say that he loves you and so forth and so on. And I went and asked my dad [Edward Kirkland]. I mean, I said you know, "Daddy do you love me?" He says, you know he paused and says, "Well I go into that coal mine every day for you," you know. And having said that, that was enough you see because I knew I you know I could see his, his hands. You know he would be working in water up to his knees on occasions and there would be days that he'd go in and work that he couldn't load coal therefore he couldn't make any money. He had to move slate and other stuff around and so what he said basically was if I do all of this for you, you know why would you ask me if I love you you know? It's, it's a given and that has you know, that has an impact on you because as you grow and you become a father yourself, you don't think that you need to do that because you think that it should you know trans- transfer but I think I've, I've failed to do as much of that as I should because I think it, it should be reflective on what you do as a parent. But you know, you know the craze that have you told your child today that you love him or her you know I think that, that kids needs to be able to perceive that that's so without having someone to tell them because you can tell 'em that and it cannot be so. Story_ID: 564824 Speaker 1: We were talking off camera about the f- the annual flooding, I just find it incredible but every year the place [Blythedale, Pennsylvania] would flood? Speaker 2: Every single year and you would--actually the, the of those sixteen houses you could on occasion see the houses at the bottom which the water came up to the chimney, actually came all the way up to the chimney so you knew everything in there was going to have to be thrown away. Speaker 1: Was there an annual effort to move into--to move your stuff to higher ground temporarily at least get it out of the way, or? Speaker 2: You had the choice of, of actually moving yourself up to the P.S. Number 11 [ph.] because it was up a little higher and so you could move up there and, and there would be some space for you to sleep until the water went down. But as far as moving stuff out, no. The best you could do and hope for is to move it upstairs and hope that the water didn't come upstairs but in many occasions, it did and there you could, you could see everything going down the river, you could see pigs, you could see cows, you could see all kinds of things out of houses going down the river. I mean just so you just knew that people had lost everything and that they would have to start over again and it just happened again and again and again. Speaker 1: Now when you think about that on some level one would wonder well why would they stay but I guess what they lost was not--had to be measured against what they would gain and they were actually--there was even though they weren't making a lot of money, they were making enough to offset the loss every year I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but you have to ask yourself the question, where you gonna go? Where you gonna go? There was no place else to go, you know. And, and so if, if, if there's no place else to go and you're in the flood zone, that's where you're relegated there was just on the other side of us was another group of houses which was a white community, they got caught in it as well but you talking about Appalachian now, you're talking about we're the ones who kicked off the War on Poverty. We knew poor before we thought poverty was a step up so here you, you talking about a situation where people are between a rock and a hard spot and mining is the livelihood and death is just part of the experience. Story_ID: 564825 Speaker 1: Now you're a trained social worker-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --now a professional, and it's been many years doing this when you look back on those conditions in those days, here's the Depression [Great Depression]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --where you're being raised? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the day before I don't know if there was laborer contract then with a union contract with the mine, with the mine I don't know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. The, the yeah-- Speaker 1: --with the mine I don't know if it was or not. Was it when you were coming up? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did they have a contract? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah and what that entailed and what, what's your analysis of that situation now I guess from a professional standpoint? Speaker 2: Well, they--when, when the miners were told to go out on a strike, that's what they did. And and eventually they got to the point where they could make a decent living but even in that there was still the racial lines and and so here you have a situation where miners are are going on strike, getting a little bit more money, moving up, but--and things begin to open up, things begin to look better. I have brothers now going into factories, mills in western Pennsylvania and it, it looked like things were going to break out, that there's going to be a real breakthrough. And what happened after a while was that the, the miners and those who worked in the mill actually put themselves in a situation by striking and and fringe benefits that the country started to close down the mines and ship out the factories. So if you go through western Pennsylvania today, Monongahela valley [Monongahela River valley] and you find that the steel mills are gone so it's, it's real ironic. It looks like as people began to move to a station in life where they can make a decent living, what living that they did is now going somewhere else and so you, you, you, you see a country looking for cheaper labor so we call it outsourcing now but you have, you have a situation where, where people who are poor or poorer than we were now actually moving up and it's because the work has moved out and they're able to access the work. So the, the question that you're asking me about unions, if--you would think that the unions would be bringing a better day but we have a society that is saying that it's not willing to pay that kind of money for the labor and that in order to get maximum profits, the best thing to do is to ship the labor somewhere else and, and to get it from people who are even more distressed than the people who were doing it at the time you know I was a boy. So isn't that ironic? So it's always looking for someone who's gonna do it cheaper and someone who will allow the the margins of profit to be greater. Story_ID: 564826 Speaker 1: Now was, was there a--when you were growing up was there a leader of the black community as such that people acknowledged or that--? Speaker 2: Yeah there was, there was actually when I was growing up you, you there was it's always there's the Republicans and the Democrats and, and they and it depended on who was in office who had the right to run the numbers. (Laughter) You see what I mean. Who had the right to have their joint opened without being raided and so forth so I identified politics really with the ability to make a living above and beyond what the, the working level would have participated in. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so actually it depended on yeah who was in power (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was--yeah, and, and there was always whoever was in power for instance if, if someone was giving a talk a Republican or a Democrat in the white community, well that person then when he came into the black community to give a talk it was a different talk and it was a matter of afterwards setting up drinks in the house. So as kids we just assume that whoever gave the best drunk was the person who, who was you know trying to get the vote. So we recog- we identified the poli- you know politics with, with collusion and, and, and you know ra- racketeering and all kinds of things very early. Story_ID: 564827 Speaker 1: Now, when you were growing up what did you like to do? What were some of the things that you liked to do? Speaker 2: Oh, well we were into sports. Like we played ball almost from beginning we got up to to bed. I would, would probably I would be working as a caddy and making that dollar that day. I would find myself swimming in the Yough [Youghiogheny River] and we were told never get to go into the, into the river 'cause it was dangerous, but it was hot you know what else you gonna do? And and it was a river that had a great deal of sulfur and you could imagine what that looks like because it was coming out of the mine. The water that went into the river was coming out of the mine and so we'd go into the river and swim and, and mother [Anna Marshall Kirkland] would tell us never to go in and we'd come out of the river and we'd have, we'd have sulfur all on us and my mother would ask, "Have you been in that river"? "No ma'am." (Laughter) She'd seen all that sulfur you know. Speaker 1: What does it look, yellow? Speaker 2: Yes, yellow yeah but you know and there's, there's no place to wash you know you just-- Speaker 1: Get back in the river and that's got sulfur. Speaker 2: --that's it, that's right. So that's, that's what we did and we would, we would walk up the--up to the little towns and maybe play some sports. We might even jump on a train and ride because they went by where we lived all the time. So it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You'd have to go between the tracks and get to school anyway so? Speaker 2: Oh yeah so-- Speaker 1: So, so you can get on the train and actually go to another town? Speaker 2: Oh you just jump on and, and ride on. But you see there was always what we call a railroad bull and they would be after you for getting on those trains and so on many occasions they would get at us and we would just simply haul it out, run and we knew we could outrun them so we--that, that never troubled us about being chased by the railroad bull. Story_ID: 564828 Speaker 1: Well were there any Pullman porters or such like living in your town [Blythedale, Pennsylvania]? People that were? Speaker 2: No. Actually you're talking about blacks who were at some level of work that we could hope to aspire. I never saw it. We, we you know the biggest town next to where I was brought up was called West Newton [Pennsylvania] and that's probably, it's probably maybe about two thousand people and I thought that was a huge area. And then I went to high school which incidentally here's a high school which is probably the best high school in western Pennsylvania and it's and I got there because of discrimination. There was no high school in the area except this high school. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's the name of that high school? Speaker 2: McKeesport, McKeesport High School [McKeesport Technical High School, McKeesport, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: M-C-K-double E-S-P-O-R-T. And so we were actually bused to the high school. I often say that I wasn't bused out of my neighborhood, I was bused out of my town and when we got bused to the school, I ran into concepts and ideas that I'd never heard of and the, the young people who were in the school were sons and daughters of the movers and shakers of the region and so you, you be in the classes with them and you would compete with 'em and after a while you discover that what they had on you was just some background information and that you could catch up and so I, I did that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now-- Speaker 2: --and many of us did. Speaker 1: Well let me just go back a little bit now. In grade school you said you had a pretty good grade school. You had four teachers right? Speaker 2: Four teachers yes. Speaker 1: And they were very concerned about your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, yes. Speaker 1: --wellbeing and-- Speaker 2: Well one teacher for first and second, third and fourth, fifth and sixth, seven and eight. So at the eighth grade, the ninth grade, I had to leave and go to a junior high. Speaker 1: What was the name of the junior high? Speaker 2: (Pause) I really, I really forget the name of the junior high. But the senior high I know is McKeesport High. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But with these experiences in grade school and junior high school, now were you able to--there was no discrimination against you, you said as a--because you were black they didn't stop you from taking certain courses-- Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: --and restrict what you learned? Speaker 2: No. Actually in the high school I was in then, I think there may have been fifteen blacks who graduated out of maybe fifteen hundred or something like that. Speaker 1: And no counselors told you you ought to be taking shop classes or something? You know don't take? Speaker 2: I don't remember even running into counselors. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know that well I first went in there I was in college prep and then after being there for a year, I, I didn't see college as being a place that I would go so I went into the academic program but-- Speaker 1: Basically general? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But after I graduated from high school, then I decided to get into the [U.S. military] service, and then-- Speaker 1: Now, now did you have a favorite teacher in high school or favorite subject? Speaker 2: My, I guess my favorite subject, subjects were oh literature and maybe, maybe science I guess but yeah, probably literature, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were you a good student? Speaker 2: I was a pretty average student. I think I could, I, I think that I could have done extremely well if I had thought that it was gonna take me somewhere. If I thought that high school was going to be the vehicle for me to go somewhere but I had arrived at a point where I said okay this is, this is where I would you know I'm going to go to school, finish school and you know I'll see what, what happens after that. But I had some hopes I was, I was a dreamer. I would go to the library. I would look into the 'Who's Who' and books like that and I could imagine my name being in there and that I had those aspirations. And then Mel [Melvin Johnson] who was Bubba went on into the service and went to school in the service and then I followed him and after following him I actually finished three years of college in the service. Story_ID: 564829 Speaker 1: Okay now you told a story about wanting to go into into the mine-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --was that while you were in school or afterwards, after high school [McKeesport Technical High School, McKeesport, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: When I--about going into the mines? Speaker 1: Yeah was that while you were in school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was, that was while I was, I was in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was a junior in high school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I told when my father [Edward Kirkland] had that conversation. Yeah I was in, I was a junior in high school and it was at that point my brothers were all in the [U.S.] military and it was pretty slow and I really--I had aspirations but I didn't see the possibilities and the possibilities were more of going into the service and that was the vehicle that I got on and realized. Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 2: Fifty [1950]. Nineteen fifty [1950]. Speaker 1: Okay. So you joined the [U.S.] Army right after? Speaker 2: Well I joined the [U.S.] Air Force. You had to have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Air Force okay. Speaker 2: --you had to have when I went into the Air Force you had to have equivalent of two years of college so they gave me a test or something and I joined the Air Force. Speaker 1: So you had to have the academic equivalent of two years of college to be in Air Force? Speaker 2: This was 1950-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was before, it was before Korea [Korean War]. Korea broke out I think after I had gotten into--well after I had been certified for the service. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had to pass a test is what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had to pass a test. Speaker 1: --yeah to show that you were qualified to-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: --be in the Air Force? Okay. Story_ID: 564830 Speaker 1: Where did they send you first in the [U.S.] Air Force? Speaker 2: Lackland Air Force Base in Texas [Lackland Air Force Base, Bexar County, Texas] and actually I came through St. Louis [Missouri] and I was carrying the food cards for the group that I was with and when I got to St. Louis, they wouldn't feed me with the whites and so-- Speaker 1: This is in the Air Force at a base or-- Speaker 2: Well this is while I'm traveling to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --go to the service. So after I, I got into St. Louis, like I said they wouldn't feed me and so finally they did give me something to eat and I, I got--had ptomaine poison, I'm pretty sure that's what happened to me. I had got a potato or something that was very bad. Anyway we got back on the train and as we got on the train heading towards Lackland, they had to stop the train twice because I was so sick. So I got to Lackland and I got--I was waiting for transportation to go but we got off the train waiting for transportation to go to the base and I saw one of the yellow school buses had the back of it had colored to the rear. I, I kind of said to myself I'm going into the Air Force and this is amazing to find a bus but it was you know, they had just eliminated the segregation in terms of separation of, of troops but they had maintained segregation in a different way that I learned and that was with blacks they had an asterisk by your name. So all through the service for my first two or three years, whatever post I showed up at, my name would be there but it would be an asterisk and there were places that there was an agreement that blacks would not go and and one of them I'm pretty sure was Newfoundland [Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada] and when I got to Newfoundland-- Speaker 1: You mean Newfoundland, the-- Speaker 2: The country right. Speaker 1: Oh okay. All right. The province of Canada. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah when I got there, there was one black family I believe in the whole country at least I only saw one. That's what we were told. And so that I believe that there was an agreement not to send blacks there but it was very few of us in the very beginning so I guess what I'm saying is while Truman [President Harry S. Truman] had given the executive order that segregation would come to an end in the [U.S.] military, I believe that happened in '49 [sic. 1948], I was still dealing with the aftermath of it by having an asterisk by my name. Speaker 1: Okay. Now with all the people that you knew that had your brothers had gone in the service, [HistoryMaker] Julius Richardson gone in the service. Did you have any idea that this was coming? That you would face the same kind of discrimination? Speaker 2: I, I didn't know I would face that but I had heard my brother had come back and told me about being discriminated, he was in the [U.S.] Navy, one who was in the [U.S.] Army, one in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and they had told me about all of this but there, they, that part of it they really wouldn't expose me to greatly. They would more expose me to the, the glamour of it but the reality was of course that many of them were in war zones and they were not suppose- they were not even permitted to have a weapon. Yeah, so I learned that later on. Story_ID: 564831 Speaker 1: Okay so how long were you in Newfoundland [Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada] I mean in Newfoundland? Did you stay there a long time? Speaker 2: Eighteen months yeah. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I made sergeant there. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So did you stay there for the balance of your service? Speaker 2: No, I, actually I came back to to the states. I had met, I had met a, a young woman in Alabama and I came back and I married. Speaker 1: Now you met a woman in Alabama (laughter)? Speaker 2: When I was stationed there. Speaker 1: Oh you were stationed in Alabama too, I didn't know. Speaker 2: Yeah I was stationed--actually my station was from, from Lackland [Lackland Air Force Base, Bexar County, Texas] to Lowry Air Force Base [Colorado] to Craig Air Force Base in Alabama, which was Selma [Alabama], and that's where I met her. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I left from there to go to Papa Air Force Base [Papa Air Base, Hungary] overseas. Speaker 1: So then you went overseas now? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Where did you go? Speaker 2: Oh that's, that's where I went you know where I was just telling you. Speaker 1: Oh to Newfoundland. Okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --all right I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So you made sergeant in Newfoundland? Speaker 2: Yeah I made sergeant in probably about oh maybe eighteen months while I was in the service um-hm, scout sergeant. Speaker 1: Okay, what you do in the [U.S.] Air Force, what were your jobs? Speaker 2: It was one of those jobs which was rare for blacks. It was in what we call medical supply where you actually were involved in, in buying and equipping hospitals and even field hospitals that would be set up and where they would be set up would be secret and so I was classified for, for secret. Speaker 1: Okay so you had a clearance and everything? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So well are there any experiences from that, from Newfoundland that you? Speaker 2: Not really. But I could--I have some other military experiences that actually I'd like to share with you the fact that I came out of the service in fifty--'54 [1954] and after that after coming out of the service, I tried to find work and it was very difficult for me to find work so what I did then was to re-enlist in the service. I re-enlisted and went to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base. Speaker 1: That's in Dayton [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes. And then from there I went to England and while in England I spent three years at going to school there. I went to the, the Maryland extension, Maryland university [University of Maryland] extension where you'd have professors from all of the major universities actually teaching on the campus and I, I managed to complete three years of college there and then I, I left there and was discharged and then came to Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] and finished my last year in international relations and then I worked as a program director at a settlement house called Huntington Family Centers [Syracuse, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now let me put the brakes on a little bit because we're zooming through. Story_ID: 564832 Speaker 1: Now how did you manage to choose--well are there any stories from England? I know you had never been to England before, here you are in England. Speaker 2: England (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's gotta be an African American sergeant in the [U.S.] Air Force in England going to school, there's gotta be a story there somewhere? Speaker 2: Well, actually not, not much of a story really. It was an experience that I, I will hold as being very valuable. Speaker 1: Now was your wife with you over there? Speaker 2: Yes, she was with me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you know we were fortunate to have excellent housing. After a while we met a lot of people, we had a lot of friends there. Speaker 1: Where were you in England? Speaker 2: Liverpool [England] in that general area. So it was, it was a, it was a great experience. I, I, I--the most productive and profitable was relationships with--that I had had with people you know. Again, I, I recognize there was a lot of prejudice, discrimination there because I had a fellow who helped me to find my first apartment and that took some doing but after that I was able to live on the base and it was a very nice place that I lived in and you know we went to--my wife and I just, just had a lot of social relationships with people so it was no, no big stories really. Story_ID: 564833 Speaker 1: Now how did you mind- wind up choosing Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York]? Speaker 2: I had an instructor who actually taught in Syracuse [New York] and he told me about the school and told me that it would be a good place and a good connection for me and I wrote to the school and they accepted my record and I was able to, to get in. I had a very good average. I was probably cum laude when I transferred my records and as I transferred my record to the university, they, they only accept the, the record of a C which meant that I couldn't graduate with honors. My record reflected that I had achieved that. Speaker 1: Okay. So you got your degree in international relations? Speaker 2: Right. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Why international relations? Speaker 2: Well, you know I, I had the, the dream of working in state department [U.S. Department of State] or something of that nature and I thought that that would be the best preparation, but in the meantime as I was coming out of school, one of my teachers, sociology teachers said to me, "Why don't you work at this settlement house [Huntington Family Centers, Syracuse, New York] and maybe this is something that you might want to do." So I went and worked at the settlement house. Story_ID: 564834 Speaker 1: This is in Sy- Syracuse [New York] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Syracuse, right. It's the Huntington Family Centers [Syracuse, New York] and I worked there and I really fell in love with that work. I worked with young people who were in public housing. I worked with individuals who were on the streets and I just learned a lot from a couple people who never finished college. They were very gifted people and they taught me probably most of what I know about social work. I, I learned what names to apply to concepts in school of social work. But they taught me how to utilize skills and to be effective. Speaker 1: Who were these people? What were their names? Speaker 2: One it's a lady named Laura Coulis [ph.] she is--she passed. She was a white lady. She didn't finish high school. And the other was Lucille Pritchard [ph.]. Lucille Pritchard was an African American woman who had a genius to working with young kids who needed to be brought out and to have good interpersonal skills and so forth so that was, that was, that was great. And then I, I also directed their summer camp which gave me a lot of exposure to working with, with counselors and, and people from different backgrounds and so it was great. Story_ID: 564835 Speaker 1: So before we leave Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], I'd like to--just want--now you got there just after Jim Brown left right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Jim Brown had finished that year and, and Ernie Davis was there and need not tell you that Danny Davis [ph.] was the dream, actually there was no let down because Ernie was, he was great. He was a, a great person academically. He was a great person socially and sport he was, he was without equal. I think if he and Jim Brown had run together would been some kind of a combination. Speaker 1: Now you were at--now you were out Syracuse when he passed right? When he got sick? Speaker 2: Yes. Um-hm. Yeah, he had leukemia. Speaker 1: Right. Right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: He never got chance to really play pro football (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh, no. Speaker 1: --because-- Speaker 2: No. That would have been, that would have been the dream team he running with the Browns [Cleveland Browns], he and Jim Brown yeah. Speaker 1: So well what did you do after--now you graduated from Syracuse in 1959 right? Speaker 2: Yes, that's very interesting because when I was in Syracuse, I was, I was actually the first, first black to graduate from that School of Social Work and I was-- Speaker 1: Oh, when you got your master's [degree] in social work? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And I actually was the president of the student body so I, I enjoyed that experience and I was-- Speaker 1: This is in 1961 now you go to the school of social work? Speaker 2: Right. See actually I'm, I'm working at Huntington [Huntington Family Centers, Syracuse, New York] and I'm also in school and so after I--one of the things that I did was, as I said was to direct the camp and some of the most prominent people in the field would come to that camp and-- Speaker 1: Like who? Like-- Speaker 2: Oh just some of the, the great writers in the field and, and you know the guy who, who headed the program was a well-known person in the field. Story_ID: 564836 Speaker 1: And so out of that I, I was, I was offered a position at Syracu- at Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri]. And when I came to Saint Louis University, I came as the, the director of a special program which was group work so I came and, and set up that program and a two--about two years later, that program began to proliferate in the school and the school changed the whole program so that what I was teaching became part of the whole. Speaker 2: Now what is the group work program? What is that? Speaker 1: It's, it's, it's teaching young people or teaching students how to change attitudes, how to help young people or people to deal with personality adjustments, it's helping them to learn democratic processes, it's helping them to be effective in, in all kinds of groups, focus groups or, or conflict interest groups and other kinds of groups, so schools typically teach as students are lined up in a row as you know. What I began to do was teach students to break into groups and to teach one another in groups and then I would lecture and then they would catch the lecture and they would process that lecture in the groups with their own experiences and that became a way of, of teaching that was very unique in universities and not only did I do it at Saint Louis U, but I do it here [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] and it's been copied. Story_ID: 564837 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And while I was there [Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri] incidentally I also taught the Peace Corps. I had traveled with the Peace Corps and I was the director of the Peace Corps program for community development and in that program, at, at one time, we actually trained all of the people who are in Latin America had come through our program. So it was-- Speaker 2: So you were training them here in St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 1: Training them here. Speaker 2: So is it--the Peace Corps now was established around 1960 was it? Was that when it started when Shriver [R. Sargent Shriver] did that? It would have to be after '60 [1960] because Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was elected (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: --in '60 [1960] so all right so Shriver started-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we're talking about '64 [1964], '63 [1963], '64 [1964]. Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963] probably. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah '63 [1963]. Okay. Did you know Sam Yette [HistoryMaker Samuel Yette]? Speaker 1: Sam Yette? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: Yeah he was director [sic. executive secretary] of Peace Corps at one time. First--he was black director of Peace Corps in '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963]. I, I knew when Shriver-- Speaker 2: He's a journalist. Yeah Sargent Shriver started it [sic.]-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. That's, that's who would call down when we were doing it, when we were processing the young people through that program. But we also actually you, you know you heard of Pruitt-Igoe [St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Right. The housing project? Speaker 1: Yeah well that's where we trained some of the Peace Corps people and I trained them--I was also the director of a settlement house in St. Louis and so we would bring them out of the university where they would be getting their academic training, bring 'em into the community where they would learn how to work with young people, how to organize them, how to put them into play activities and other kinds of things, things that they would be doing when they got into their own country site-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and that's, that's what they learned to practice here in St. Louis. Speaker 2: Now what settlement house were you director of here? Speaker 1: Plymouth, Plymouth House [St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Plymouth House okay. What years were you director of Plymouth House? Speaker 1: Oh would have been probably sixty--the, the mid to late '60s [1960s]. I would say probably '66 [1966] to '68 [1968] maybe. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Okay so so the idea is to take a model developed here in the United States and take it to South America? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Actually they, they were learning how to help a, a country or a city in for instance Honduras or anywhere in Latin America to take the model of a settlement and to use that in collaboration with, with school so they actually would help the families build schools and then have programs of settlement interaction where that they--where they actually could learn through that how to do some of the, the work programs that we do in this country. How to work with their children, how to, how to teach their children, how to help their children learn how to recreate and other kinds of activities. But we were also teaching their, their parents how to put together their economics, how to, how to change and modify their life situation. Story_ID: 564838 Speaker 1: This position with Peace Corps it seems to me is a singular kind of achievement in those days that you know why did they choose you over all the people that they could have chosen in the United States to do that or ask to do it? I mean what--? Speaker 2: Well I think it was because of some of the work that I'd done in, in Syracuse [New York]. That was the reason that I came to St. Louis [Missouri] and they--the fact that they knew that that had to be a group endeavor and that you, you can't teach people one on one but if you teach them how to work in groups and if you teach groups how to work with people, then you can multiply the process. In other words, if I were to teach ten, twelve people, they in turn could go out and get groups and teach them as well. So it was, it was the process. Plus the fact that I had come here from being involved in the Civil Rights Movement and I knew a great deal about how to help individuals and families to, to plan and to work through plans, of change and progress. Speaker 1: Okay now you didn't tell us about you working with the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: You see key is not to go backwards because we're not dealing with everything you know as it comes in chronology but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: --but that's important. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I think that was the most important aspect of my life working with the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Well how did you get--well you know it seems like a dumb question how'd you get involved in the Civil Rights Movement-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --as somebody black in the '50s [1950s] but how did you? Because some people weren't really in the movement, they were involved in a civil rights struggle-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --because just because they're alive but-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --how'd you get involved in the movement? Speaker 2: Well that's, that's a good question. I got involved in it primarily through urban renewal. You heard of urban renewal where they were tearing down houses and, and putting land in, in land bank and people were losing their homes and as a result of, of, of that we organized the people and we helped the people to protest and there was some things that, that people did in their protestations which I thought were very brave things. They would stop the, the tractors from going by actually sitting in the way. They would stop the bulldozers from moving by just simply being standing before them. In other words it was a, it was a effort to bring about change through direct action. Speaker 1: Now this was actually in Syracuse? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. And along with that there was a guy named George Wiley who had organized a welfare rights movement and they were doing things like rent strikes because people were not getting their apartments repaired in public housing and so forth and so on so what they did was to cause strikes to take place. That is the people wouldn't pay their rent to public housing but they would pay their rent to a, a, a source which was evident that they really were paying their rent. And as a result of doing that, the public housing was not getting their money and so it was--they put enough pressure on 'em to to make changes but here the protests were very large. I mean I can remember on occasions where people were in jail and I actually was coming from my place of work and picking up monies to bail them out and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Here in St. Louis? Speaker 2: No, no this in-- Speaker 1: Syracuse okay. Speaker 2: --Syracuse right. So, so if that is happening I'm saying to myself it must be some way to change what is happening in our lives as a people and so out of the protest movements came something that became my professional ideal and that is economic development and so right now today, that's what I do: economic development. But I don't wanna jump to that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --until I take you through what happened in the protest movement. Story_ID: 564839 Speaker 1: And so I, I come out of Syracuse [New York] then and I go into working with both Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri] and the Peace Corps and then I, I leave Saint Louis University because of the protest of students. Students protest that, that there are not enough African Americans coming to that school. At the same time, there's a protest at Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] that there are not enough African American students coming to this school and at this school, they had in both schools, they had locked the chancellors up in their offices and so-- Speaker 2: So this is what 19--? Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], '69 [1969]. Speaker 2: Oh okay so we all right so we all right. Okay. Speaker 1: Now you have to imagine, you have to imagine that you're, you're dealing with a situation in 1969, 1970 where you know you're, you're following public accommodations in '65 [sic. Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title II] right and here's a, a town where you're not getting sizable number of population of blacks into the universities and so the students protest. Story_ID: 564840 Speaker 1: Okay I guess what's confusing--you know we need to go--you had gone back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and we talked about how you got started in Civil Rights Movement-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --then we talked about the Peace Corps but it was kind of out of context but I want to put that in their first before we jump to the '70s [1970s]. Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: We just left the middle. We didn't conclude the Peace Corps story. Speaker 2: Okay well to conclude the Peace Corps story, I actually wrapped that up probably in about 1960- probably about 1967, '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay but could--did you see that the--was the work that you were doing at Peace Corps, did you in retrospect when you look at it was it--did you really, were you really able to use experiences in Syracuse [New York] to inform Peace Corps workers who'd gone into South American countries? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Someone might say well that's South America, that's not Syracuse, New York you know. What similarity could they have (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's the similarity? Well I use that similarity right now in, in my teaching because you're actually--when you're dealing with a colony, state, when you're dealing with people not having access to resources, when you're dealing with powerlessness and those kinds of concepts, how do you hurdle that so that you can be empowered and that you can have access to resources so that the generation that you are in is the beginning generation to make it better for the generation coming. So I'm, I'm, I'm looking at the Civil Rights Movement very much akin to the lack of opportunities and resources that people had in Latin America. So how do you organize people in a way so that they can overcome their deprivation or, or their poverty which was greater than what I had experienced? Speaker 1: So something else I think you said was important was now you were advocating a group dynamic approach to dealing with-- Speaker 2: Yeah in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) social problems-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --instead of so what you're saying is that one--see I'm a big hero I can't do it by myself-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I can't eradicate it by myself I need other people to actually-- Speaker 2: Right, right. And, and, and, and the way that they were doing it in Latin America was each farmer was trying to do his own thing. And so what we did was to help him to become co-ops and as a co-op they would maybe buy land together. Maybe they would buy seed together. Maybe they would harvest together. Maybe they would take their crops to sell you see what I mean so that, that it actually was showing them how to work more cooperatively and more collectively and in the process of doing that they would have more resources that they could apply back into their families and so that's, but that's essentially what economic development is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now only difference of course is that in economic development today it's done by cities and not by people-- Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or communities. Story_ID: 564841 Speaker 1: Yeah so over--well Peace Corps from what I know about Peace Corps and VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA] the fortunes and success of it seem to go with whatever administration is in charge if it's the Democrats or Republicans it's being a Democratic idea tends to be scaled down when Republicans are president. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Hasn't gone away-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --it's character changes dramatically when there's a Republican president. Was that the case as Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was going out in '68 [1968] were you--was that the case with you? I mean did you leave Peace Corps as Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] was coming in? Speaker 2: Actually Johnson was bringing in the, the War on Poverty and that whole era. But one of the things that was happening in that program as you know there were many people who were experiencing some rewards from the War on Poverty because they were working so forth and so on but that was not bringing people out of poverty. There was programs but they were not boosting people to a level of, of self-reliance and-- Speaker 1: Well what was wrong with--these are the Great Society programs we're talking about-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Model Cities-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I know a big one in East St. Louis [Illinois] here right across the river. Speaker 2: That's where--well that's where-- Speaker 1: It was a big program-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --and a lot of other cities, even my hometown Model Cities's a big deal. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now it's like a major, one of the major initiatives in urban communities that we're talking about. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What's your assessment of that and why didn't it work? Speaker 2: Well the Model Cities came after urban--okay so after, after Model Cities came also programs that were community development type program, but it was the same. The reason that the programs don't work is because the people are not in charge of the program, they're not in charge of the distribution of the resources, they're not in charge of mapping out and planning their own future. So they're always waiting for an influx of money so that they can do something that somebody else thinks that they should do. Story_ID: 564842 Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting. Now you have to explain it the dynamic of this because I know when I was, well as a kid I was here in East St. Louis [Illinois] for Model Cities region four planning conference they added organizing a regency actually when a president every local Model Cities had a target area and a planning council-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --of community people that were supposedly making plans. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now what were they doing? Were they-- Speaker 2: That's a good--well that's a very good point. But they were making plans but when I teach the concept I start off with control. Who controls them? And they-- Speaker 1: Well the dollar is the federal dollar. Speaker 2: --okay but you see but the dollars must be dollars that are, are coming into the community as a result of the effort of the people. And if the money is coming in that way, then the money can be spent the way that the people want to spend it. And what should they spend it for? They should spend it for incremental changes but they also should spend it for changes that expedite what is happening in their lives so that they are for instance if they're doing housing, that's fine, but they should do commerce, they should do some light industry. They should bring work opportunities into their community. But what happens is that they, they often have a, a situation where somebody is sitting somewhere determining something for them. They need to do that for themselves. But you see to do that means that they have to be able to control their own destiny, they're own resources and their own plan. Speaker 1: So Model Cities didn't really work that way? Speaker 2: No Model Cities couldn't work that way because there, there was the, the, the red tape of having to be approved this over there and you get the grant because of this and so forth and so on. Whereas the model that I'm talking about is that it's your model, you know what you want to do. You know what's best for you. And, and just to show you that it really doesn't work, we're the only group of people I know in the country that who cannot hire our own people. Speaker 1: What do you mean the--? Speaker 2: I mean just, just think about the Civil Rights Movement. If the Civil Rights Movement had been successful, wouldn't there have been commercial, entrepreneurial opportunities? Wouldn't there--I mean you know if you go to any city in America and you've gone to many of them wouldn't you be able to stand up at any city and ask the question: how many of these buildings in this city do black people own? The answer, that's right. So, so in order for any program to have any validity the question has to be who are the entrepreneurs? Are there entrepreneurs? How--what is the property base and if after the property base is limited after all of those years, then you realize that, that those are not programs but those are pacifications. Story_ID: 564843 Speaker 1: We were discussing the dynamics of Model Cities and why some of the projects, programs--I mean was there any Model Cities project that was successful on any level that you can think of that, that kind of work for the benefit of the people? Speaker 2: Well, you know when you say successful there might have been some degree of success but most of them ended up as employment type programs and people were very happy to to get work and then after a while when that program came to an end, they were back in the situation that they were in and their communities were no better off. Speaker 1: This is something I--just came to me but back in those Model Cities days I can hear the people at the planning council in Dayton [Ohio] at the regional meeting complaining that they could never use that money to buy any permanent equipment or anything that was gonna be permanent. Everything was rented, everything was you know temporary, borrowed from the government and vice versa, they could never get anything that was permanent. They were--people were complaining they couldn't get enough equipment to really do anything because of the-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --because of the--it all being on a rubber band goes right back to the government so. Speaker 2: But I think you got your finger on what the real problem was. The real problem as, as you heard me say control and you can't control somebody else's money. You can only control your money and none of these programs worked to accumulate their own resources. They were always tapping into some grant over there and, and, and being hampered by some restraints or regulations somewhere else. The only way that you can actually do what we're talking about is to have money that comes into your coffers that you can discharge, you can determine how it's going to be used. Story_ID: 564844 Speaker 1: Now an example what I'm talking about every community, well I often, I walk into the class and tell students that there are no poor people you know. That the, the community isn't poor, it's, it's, it's that the people don't know how to use the resources that are there. You can show me the poorest area and I'll show you a situation where there, there's some houses even though they may be dilapidated, there may be some business that might not be up to speed or whatever. The communities are wealthy. The, the problem is that the communities have not been developed for the people who live there. They've been developed for the people who exploit them. Okay so, so that's where the connection of, of what happens in this country and what happens you know in in other countries that I was doing with the Peace Corps. But now imagine this is the plan that I would teach imagine you walk into a community and you see all of that debris and the first thing that you start doing is buying the property. Buy it. And once you buy it, which is the land because the property is of no value, then you amass that land and you put a plan with the land and you start developing the land and you develop some commercial and some housing but you have to do that as a community now who could best do that in the black community? Black churches. But that's not where they are. They don't see that as being a, a responsibility or an obligation. Speaker 2: You mean with some exceptions. There are a few (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With few exceptions but you know for instance East St. Louis [Illinois] that you just mentioned is a town now of about twenty-eight thousand people. It used to be a town of ninety thousand people. I could take you to a surplus sale in a couple of weeks and you will see that they're auctioning off the land. Imagine if the 120 churches in East St. Louis had ten years ago bought the land, they would own it but the fact that they did not buy it means that they are going to have to leave town because they won't have parishioners because the people who are going to come in are not going to be like the people who are running you know the, the churches so that means that the churches are going to experience a total change of population when they could have done something about it. But you see, the model that I just gave you is a model where the people could control the land, they could control the value of, of its upbeat. They could control what was to be on it and they could be their own you know best tenants but they didn't do that. They won't do it. And as a result the, the town will be gentrified and East St. Louis now I'm tell you 'cause I'm, I'm glad that you're doing the historical thing, East St. Louis in ten years will be predominantly white. Speaker 2: And it hasn't been that way for a hundred years or longer (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Oh, it's, it's--oh, it's--well probably the last forty years when blacks first started becoming mayors of, of East St. Louis. Story_ID: 564845 Speaker 1: But, do you see how you can--you can't change it with somebody else's money that's the point I'm making. You must change--nobody's gonna let you use their money to change the flow of events. Speaker 2: We're talking about now just to be clear, we're talking about government money, not somebody else's money (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: --we're talking about government money, that is taking away our money. Speaker 1: All right well technically that's true but the reality of course is, is that the government is not going to support anyone's group or especially a black group, it's not gonna support a black group coming into an area and changing it, changing the flow of, of resources. And so the only way you can change that is to control it. And the only way you can control it is, is to either purchase it or to get it through some political means and some political means might be an alderperson could actually give to a church or an organization a building for a dollar. It's done all the time. And the building that's given or the buildings that are given could be brought back, could be rehabbed. People could live and pay rent, money could come back into the community you, you know its dribs and drabs but that's all that's in the community and once you collect enough of the dribs and drabs you have money. You know I, I tell my students you know if you have a, a, a, a sink and it's dropping water, it looks like nothing until you put a bucket under there and the next morning, the bucket's full. Well that's what happens in the black community. The black community does not feel that it's enough in it to be concerned about it but the reality is if they just dealt with that little bit that's dripping they could have great resources. But you got to control it and they don't. Speaker 2: Okay. So we have a community with a lot of drips but they're leaking out. Speaker 1: Leaking out or, or you know the way that I tell my classes is if you have, have a, a little stream coming through your land you blocked it up, you'd have a pond. If it was a big dam, it would be a lake you know. That's--but we don't see the stream as being important. We spend it. We use it for means other than for our own economic welfare. Story_ID: 564846 Speaker 1: Model Cities basically ended with the arrival of the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration in '68 [1968]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but you left before then you said before-- Speaker 2: Yeah. And Model Cities followed urban renewal and it you know once urban renewal was, was seen as taking the property away from the people and putting it in a land bank-- Speaker 1: Many people refer to that as Negro removal. Speaker 2: --that's exactly what it was. And, and, and well just let me just say that that there is a plan afoot today for--to, to move African Americans out of cities. The, the code words are things like loss which essentially means that that there's a movement afoot to bring back the city and as you in the movement that's afoot to bring them back, it gets its impetus from the price of gasoline and so if you can project that gasoline is gonna cost five dollars, six dollars a gallon in six or seven years, how are you gonna live out in super suburbia. And so the people then are moving back into cities. You graduate from a school like this. You can't afford to live where your parents are so where can you, where can you find a place for forty, fifty, sixty thousand dollars? The city. And if you can bring it back up to par for another thirty or forty thousand, you got a, a home that's worth $250,000. You can only do that in the city and that's what's happening. Well if that's happening then you have to ask yourself the question, what's happening to the people who are African Americans in cities? Well they are finding their way by exodus outside and the irony is is that the blacks got into cities leaving the South, leaving ten, twelve, fifteen, twenty acres just walking away from it, coming into cities and cities where [TW1]basically exhausted of industry and as a result the people, the next generation got poorer than the group that came in, they set them up into vertical ghettos which is public housing, then they tear down the, the vertical ghettos and now they're pushing them back out into suburbia and the next stop is country. So black people will have made a complete circle. They will have come from farms, rural areas and ultimately back into rural areas but with the exception of no crops, no stock because they're gonna be in little small apartments. Speaker 1: This is years ago Dempsey Travis [HistoryMaker Dempsey J. Travis] the real estate developer in Chicago [Illinois], black told me that we were heading for Soweto [South Africa] basically. He said that was the future of the black community. We'll be out far from the inner city on a dusty patch of ground (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's interesting. Speaker 1: --with a train coming out there to get you to come to McDonald's wherever you're gonna work and take you back-- Speaker 2: That's interesting. Speaker 1: --is that pretty much what you see? Speaker 2: That's interesting. I didn't, didn't know about that but I been Soweto and they--the South African model is the one that we're, we're drawing up for in this country. Yes, that's true. You know just, just imagine you know the model's already in place. It's the American Indian [Native American] you know who is on a reservation for all practical purposes you know. We're on urban reservations here in cities. Why not transfer to a rural reservation? And you know the, the, the classic thing that's happening of course is transportation and metro and all of those kinds of things you know you would, you would think that we would benefit from all of that but you look and see where we're being moved and pushed from and you'll find that that's not the place that we're going to stay. We're being pushed from those places. I'd like to take you and show you some of that in this metro area and there's not a city that you've been to where what I'm telling you is not true. Story_ID: 564847 Speaker 1: One of the first of the major inner city housing projects to be imploded was Pruitt-Igoe [St. Louis, Missouri]-- Speaker 2: Pruitt-Igoe, yes. Speaker 1: --here in St. Louis [Missouri]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --it was done in 1972 or '3 [1973] I believe. Speaker 2: Somewhat. Speaker 1: That's pretty early 'cause a lot since then Robert Taylor [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois], Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois], a lot of the rest of them have suffered the same fate but Pruitt-Igoe I remember watching the picture of it on TV then. These were like sixteen story high rises? Speaker 2: Yeah I think Pruitt-Igoe was fourteen stories. Speaker 1: Fourteen stores, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. They imploded them here and where did the people go, where did they go? Speaker 2: Well, the first settlement were people who moved kind of in the area back into other public houses but then the area that they moved back into become an area that is oh depleted and, and is ravished and it's declared an area that need to be eminent domained or something of that nature. So and that is what happens. But they're doing now a, a program called Hope VI you know Hope VI where the key is to get rid of density. So you can't, you can't push people out just willy nilly. You--it's, the numbers are too great. So what you do is you play two games. One is that you do vouchers. You tell people that you have vouchers and the vouchers are for county schools and that the kids will do better in county schools. If they accept those vouchers except that it's not enough houses for the people for who, who want to go to the county but in the meantime they, places that they have left is torn down and so they have to fend for themselves as best as they can but there's always never enough houses. Speaker 1: These--give me your thoughts now people who leave are cleared out of the projects usually get a Section 8 voucher they call it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: This entitles them to-- Speaker 2: To get them a like or something comparable in size or something like that. But you see that has to be there. I mean because someone offers you a--you see let's say for instance you have a voucher and you move from an area, there has to be something built for you to use the voucher. So just because you have voucher doesn't mean that you've got a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So no one's-- Speaker 2: --got a place to live. Speaker 1: --job to ensure that every voucher has a residence assigned to it? Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. Speaker 1: It's like paper money without a gold standard of backing up or silver. Speaker 2: You got it, you got it, you got it. Isn't that something? Speaker 1: So lon- your money is good as long as you don't go someplace to try to get the silver value for it. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 564848 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But then you have to deal with what, what is the greater good. The greater good is to get rid of density in the city so and, and, and the Hope VI projects, have you ever seen one of those? Hope VI, the next, the next phase for Hope VI-- Speaker 2: Is that a federal project or, or (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah it's HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]. Speaker 2: For HUD okay. Speaker 1: The next, the next phase for Hope VI you know that they, that HUD sold public housing, they're selling public housing. Well the next phase for Hope VI, just look at them. They have the potential of being fine condos. Speaker 2: Now Chicago [Illinois] this is all linked to what they call tax increments financing. Speaker 1: Yeah TIF, um-hm. Speaker 2: TIF where they--a developer will acquire a property from the--through the city, the city gets the federal hookup-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --to and, and then they develop it with so many units for Section 8 supposedly and then after ten years or so they can do whatever they want with it. They can evict all the Section 8 tenants-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --if they like or whatever they wanna do, right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Or, or they can get another mortgage you see. Yeah you know you just can't imagine a low income people being in the most prized area of the city. I mean no one in his right mind can imagine that. And so you, you see from the very beginning that the low income people were in the best area. All public housing that you know of or could imagine was in the desired area of cities. Now if you, if you're in a desired area, I say and the city is gonna have a heart transplant that you know you can't have a heart transplant without live donors and so somebody's gotta go somewhere and where they're gonna go is away from the area and that's being done daily. So now the, the, the question though once the people are moved out and away, are they gonna be better off or worse off? You know if they, if, if, if jobs and work is being created frequently in cities, well what's gonna happen to the people out there? Well you know if you out of sight, you're out of mind, right? And that's what's happening. Speaker 2: Well suppose we raise a lot of hell, we turn our radios up louder, we sell a lot of dope and stuff, does that get us any attention way out there? Speaker 1: Well when was the last time you ever heard of an Indian [Native American] committing suicide or when was the last time you ever heard of an Indian killing another Indian? The point is if you're out of sight, you see, nobody cares. So sound and noise won't do it. There's only one way it can happen. That's with economics. That is with economics and our churches are probably the last bastion of the collection of resources and if ideas do not come to churches for them to buy into and build up, then it's over. Story_ID: 564849 Speaker 1: Now, that's a big picture look at--and I wanna get back to that in a second, but you look at it on the small scale picture of the of the immediate wounds and such you know where people being shot and killed and the dope being sold and other all the other family problems-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and serious you know things that had to happen to people in that situation what-- Speaker 2: What can put an end to that (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) can, what can a social worker do about those things? I mean what can, can you put a settlement house out there in Soweto [South Africa]? I mean how does it-- Speaker 2: Well what the settlement houses were designed to help people to come to infiltrate, to move upward, to to give them social skills, to give them capability to to move up. What is crucial in a black community is hope right? And, and what is of importance is what, what are your friends doing? Now if and your friends are going to college, that's where you go. If they're going to jail, that's where you go. So the, the point is what is there to entice them to go on to achieve? Remember I was telling you about being in high school [McKeesport Technical High School, McKeesport, Pennsylvania] and I could have stayed in prep. You know I fell into that lull of you know why spin all my wheels? Is it gonna make that much difference? Now fortunately I got back into the groove but it's, it's, it's hard to be in the groove when the, the ghetto is changing drastically because as I was telling you about my childhood, that that was a neighborhood that that there were strengths there. There were people there. It was family. All of that was there. That doesn't exist anymore. Speaker 1: So you're saying nowadays there's no [HistoryMaker] Julius Richardson coming back as Noble. There's no, your father [Edward Kirkland], there's no father to tell you I'm working hard for you because you-- Speaker 2: And, and isn't that pretty much what you see? You know that so, so it's--you have to have those midget models that, that you can touch or you have to be able to sit on on the porch of someone who has been off and come, comes back to tell you what life is like and you respect them. And, and you get wisdom you know just by sitting in the presence and the shadow of someone. What happens when there is no wisdom bank? What happens when the opportunities for for work are are slim and none? Do you know that it's possible to run into a fifty year old black man today who's never worked? See that's incredible. Story_ID: 564850 Speaker 1: Now what did you, what happened in, from six--now '68 [1968] is you know the-- Speaker 2: The crucial year okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay so where are we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So from, from there actually and I told you about the-- Speaker 1: Early '70s [1970s] yeah you talked about the-- Speaker 2: --yeah bout the demonstrations-- Speaker 1: --we're talking about the yeah that's right. Speaker 2: --that took place at both schools? Speaker 1: This is the eve of the black studies where everything-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --the dawn of the black studies movement. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Everything is starting up now. Speaker 2: Exactly. That's when it's starting up. Now imagine here we're talking about 1970 and there's nothing in the curriculum you know that allows you to even think black so, so-- Speaker 1: Just dwell on this for a second. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Because I had last year took a course called the History of Social Science. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: They went through all the major social fears from Marx [Karl Marx] to you name 'em and there wasn't one black person mentioned in the whole history of social science. Speaker 2: They didn't tell you about Garvey [Marcus Garvey] did they? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: They didn't talk about Mar- I mean I knew about him but I just wondered when the teacher gonna mention somebody black. 'Cause he started off with 'The Art of War' [Sun Tzu] you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --to throw in another--somebody outside the western tradition. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: He said that was an analysis of social condition because he, he talked about every class on what did or how they all to relate to each other in 'Art of War' but not a single black person mention in the whole social science history. Speaker 2: Right, right. Well not only that but you've also, you're also coming you know I was telling you about Ebenezer Baptist Church [Blythedale, Pennsylvania], you're coming out of there without knowing that the people that you're talking about are black you know and that they're marrying black you know. Moses married an Egyptian you know. It's, it's once you understand that color is, is, is not the way that it's been presented to us, that for the first thirty-five hundred years of, of mankind on this earth, you know black people were in charge you know. That's not the way it's presented. What you do is get your, your history book and when you look at the first page, it'll tell you that early civilization began in Africa. You lick your finger and turn the page and you're in Greece. You've, you've, you've lost thirty-five hundred years by licking your finger and turning the page. Story_ID: 564851 Speaker 1: What happened in your life? What were you introduced to that presented to you and alternative view of this? Speaker 2: Well what was presented to me I guess that's a very good question because what was presented to me, I see I, I view it as, as heritage and culture. Those are two things. Heritage nobody can take from you. It's--if, if, if you're Jew and you wanna know something about your heritage all you do is go to the Old Testament you know there it is. So you know we're there too but we don't know it. So here you have a situation where heritage can't be taken from you therefore, no one can steal your identity but culture can be taken from you because culture changes with economics, it changes with situations, it changes with generations and as a result when I was a kid, my culture was so tight that I recognized that people thought lesser of me because I was black but as a group, we thought well enough of ourselves to be a fortress against that but what happens when you, when your culture is, is spread that is no fortress there anymore and you're out there as an individual or a family and you have to face that kind of confrontation. What happens then? It's much, much harder. There's no place to come back to and lick your wounds and say but we're as good as anybody. The only thing that would permit that would be heritage that you could come individually, sit down and say hey here is my heritage, here's but it doesn't exist anywhere. And that's what black studies was all about. It was okay, let's sit down and show that as a people you know that we have dignity, we have heritage that the chronicles of this country was not built on the European model, that it was you know that, that black people built Africa and America. I mean it's, it's so much that you can present and the literature, and the history and the scien- you name it we're there. And, and to try to pull it out one short month a year and call it Black History Month or something is ridiculous. But and even after you bring it out, you selectively bring out the blacks that you're going to highlight. You--as I was saying you're not gonna highlight Garvey [Marcus Garvey] because Garvey was an economist. Garvey knew what was basic. There's no way that a people can become successful unless they become economically oriented and turn themselves into utilizing their resources to help themselves. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now that, that--you don't--Garvey--you don't have to be anti-white to be pro-black. Story_ID: 564852 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. This is continuation of an interview we began in October. Sir, you are Jack Kirkland [HistoryMaker Jack Arnett Kirkland] of course (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: What is today's date? Speaker 2: What is today's date (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Date. Yeah. Speaker 2: It's December 6th or is it--? Speaker 1: I think it's 5th I think but is it 5th or 6th? Speaker 2: Sixth. Speaker 1: Sixth okay, all right 6th. Speaker 2: Right and, and-- Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007] right? Speaker 2: Oh yes, 2007 [December 6, 2007] and it's a Thursday and it's snowing out there and I hope to be able to get home safely. Story_ID: 564853 Speaker 1: All right so we, we were talking about--we left off around 1970 right? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970] yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's, let's pick it up from there. Speaker 2: Well, just before that let me make some comments before 1970. I was at Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri]. I came here as you recall from Syracuse [New York] and I became a professor at Saint Louis University. And 1969 I--there was a certain series of events that began to take place across the country and those events were the rumblings of students, especially African American students who were clamoring for African American studies. Well at that time we called in black studies and they wanted to as they would say blackenized the curriculum and as a result they did things to show their, their disdain for not being included in the curriculum and they did such things as to protest by not attending classes and then they went to the level of actually locking up the president of the university and keeping him contained for several hours and-- Speaker 1: Now did that happen here [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: No that happened at Saint Louis University-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: --and I had a great deal of support for the students who, who obviously wanted to have their history included and their presence in this country included in the experiences and to be chronicled in the curriculum of, of schools in America. And out of that experience, I had a, a niece who was in that protest. Out of that experience I decided to resign from the university of St. Louis and during the interval I--oh I was involved in a great number of presentations, talks and the like and, and one of those presentations I had the occasion to run into a, a man a psychologist, his name was Dr. Robert L. Williams and Dr. Williams had been asked to put together a, a program, a black studies program at Washington University and asked me if I would consider being an associate with him and so we--two of us began to put together a, a black studies program and it commenced in 1970. Story_ID: 564854 Speaker 1: Can I ask you this? Now what at this time--students were calling for black studies but did--were they calling for a real specific things or did they know what they were calling for in your opinion? Speaker 2: No, they, no they didn't know what they were asking for. It's, it's one of those situations when they, when they knew what they were being exposed to was certainly something that was not in, in, in concert with the culture. They just recognized that it demeaned their self-esteem. You know, how, how can you be a student, let's say for instance a student in elementary school and you're reading stories about people from different countries and, and different cultures and you never see yourself as part of that curriculum and you certainly are not going to have a great deal of interest in, in reading and, and interest of course is, is paramount. Being engaged is crucial to the learning process. So many kids were actually turned off and the individuals at the university knew that they could reflect back to their own past and recognized that that had happened to them and they were concerned about changing. They didn't know what it was in particular but they knew that it was something wrong with history and so that's why black history became the, the cry word but of course it was not only history, it was the whole array of curricula that needed to be changed so that the African American could be chronicled and included in the story of America. Story_ID: 564855 Speaker 1: How did you feel about it then personally? Did you, did you feel that, that there needed to be black studies in the schools or did you feel that--did you have an idea of what ought to be taught? I mean had you really thought about it? Speaker 2: Well, not, not in any great detail but I'm sure that, that you might be familiar with the demeaning kinds of stories like 'Little Black Sambo' ['The Story of Little Black Sambo,' Helen Bannerman] and a number of other kinds of experiences which would be oh the movies. You can remember I'm sure a lot of slap stick and blackface and, and just a lot of demeaning things that, that allow people to believe that what they see in the movies really is the culture of black people and so I, like many others, were, were concerned about getting correct information about the black culture and the black heritage as as well as getting to people a, a sense of pride and and for people to dispel the mythologies and the stereotypes about black people and you can only do that through education and you know as I tell my students, there's a difference between education and school. And if, if you are educated, you search for the truth and these mythologies are exploded. But if you go to school, school teaches tradition and whatever your parents taught you it's reinforced in school and it's not challenged in school and it becomes a fact. And so that's why we have the perpetuation of racism today because nothing or very little is done about changing minds with educational perspectives. Story_ID: 564856 Speaker 1: So you- your question then is how did I know what to do? Let me just suggest that in the beginning I probed into the research and started to look at ways to teach this material and I thought I was fairly well educated. I had gone to the better schools and so forth and as I was reading and discovering more and more about the black heritage, it occurred to me that if this is true what I'm reading, I'm reading about Africa, I'm reading about not only how we came here on, on ships and slavery but I'm reading about how we came here with the great explorers with, with Cortes [Hernan Cortes], with even with Columbus [Christopher Columbus], Pizarro [Francisco Pizarro], de Soto [Hernando de Soto] all of those people that you probably are familiar with as explorers well they had on their ships Africans who obviously were playing multiple roles. They were not only sailors but they were navigators and so forth and so on. So if you, if you can appreciate that the Carthaginians were the great navigators of the world and obviously you're dealing with a black people, that should be no stretch of the imagination that blacks had this capability but if you're not exposed to it and you're exposed time and time and time again at, at blacks being less than other groups, other cultures, then you actually began to believe yourself the stories or the lies that that you were told and so my, my first impulse was to say to myself this can't be true. Blacks could not have this glorious history because if they had, I would know it. Story_ID: 564857 Speaker 1: Now in, in your own life, who introduced you to what we would call black studies today or introduced you to books on black history and culture? How did you get introduced to those? Speaker 2: Well, actually to confess I'm, I'm actually getting enrolled in that at the time that we're talking now. I, I recognize that there had to be a a flip side to all of I saw but I--there was no evidence. I mean I don't know if you remember The Phantom and the comic, comic strips and the phantom came was always a character in Africa, always helping saving the Africans right? And, and, and then somewhere down the line, they, they--the phantom would become an older person, he would send his son back to America who then would learn how to use his prowess in the jungle and then he'd come back and his father would die and he would be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He would se- now that is interesting. He'd send him back and he'd learn American and European culture come back-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --to Africa-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --then dominate the Africans and save them-- Speaker 2: That's right, exactly. Speaker 1: --for their own good, right. Speaker 2: Exactly. (Laughter) It's incredible isn't it? Well but but the most incredible story for me was Tarzan. Now here's Tarzan and where did he come from? Well according to some of the mythology, a plane was flying over Africa. It crashed, everybody was killed but one and that was a little child, a little baby. Well, the logical thing that that might have happened or should happened was that if the the baby was found, then who else could find the baby but an African? And the African then would raise the baby. But no, an ape finds the baby. Why? Because if--and because we know Tarzan is brilliant. We know that he can fly on his, his, his rope express from any village to village and he knows the languages and, and he is just exemplary of intelligence. And so if, if indeed the ape brought him up, no one gets credit for it. But if an African had brought him up, then the African would get credit. So the, the best way to handle that was to say here's the white man in the jungle who has tremendous capability, superiority of intelligence and it's a natural innate thing because the evidence is he was brought up by an ape so it's just an outspring of the white intelligence. So it's--but and I'm sure that you have seen many Tarzan movies, well imagine youngsters time after time after time seeing movies like that and actually you do recall Tarzan had a monkey or a chimpanzee and and that the chimp was smarter than the village chiefs. (Laughter) So, so it, it--you were embarrassed, you were ashamed and so what you find yourself doing is pulling for someone counter to who you are. You start idolizing and embellishing another group or another person and you want to identify out of who you are because you're ashamed because of the situation. So all of those, those are flashbacks in, in, in the minds of I would say most African Americans and as a result of those flashbacks what happens in your relationships with black to black relationships is that you, you have, you have those stereotypes implode on you and as a result of that you hate who you are. Not only that but you hate the people who look like you and so a great deal of violence in the black community occurs because black people hate themselves. Well how can you hate yourself? Well you hate yourself on the basis of you don't know who you are so black studies or black history is a way of coming out, out of the darkness as it were and finding out that you are a person, that you have a heritage, that for three hundred--well yes, well for three centuries, three hundred plus years--no I'm sorry three thousand plus years, the, the civilization on the face of the earth was dominated by people who look like me. Story_ID: 564858 Speaker 1: Okay what I'm getting at is I guess, now you made a case that you know to most people, black people going to school I guess it was kind of self-evident that they weren't--well a critique of a white educational system-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --is that it puts down black people. Speaker 2: Right. That's-- Speaker 1: But I guess what I'm asking is like what, what did you find and what were the sources for the counter story, the story that you said you found it hard to believe at first-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --because you wondered, if you've been alive that long, well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --why didn't you know? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So but of course it wasn't being taught in school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But what were the sources for those kinds of stories? What, what books were you reading or what scholars did you come in contact with to make-- Speaker 2: Well it was so many so many scholars and, and they, they were white scholars who, who would write about the situations and, and black. You know the specificity of, of who they are is, is easily discernible but the message I think is, is the clear thing that's important here and that is that, that people who were perceived as being leaders in the field, who are great researchers were talking about and presenting to many publics from--in in the best and the most esteemed universities in the world, the, the true picture of, of ethnic groups in this, in, in this society and the true picture of of ethnic groups are that, that all ethnic groups have from time to time evolved on the scene and have--had their their greatness and the, the African for the great bulk of the time is the group of people who held the longest dominance and so just if you can just recall if you, if you were to turn your own history book. Remember when you you were in school and you looked at your history book, you would look at the first page and it would say something like Africa is the earliest civilization of man. I know you remember that statement. And then, then you lick your finger and turn the page and you're in Greece. And, and that is a period of time you know which is tremendous you know you, you turn three thousand years. Well why would that take place? Well it would take place because if, if someone is presenting to you who should be seen as the most intelligent and, and the most revered and so forth and so on of groups, why wouldn't a person present themselves? It's, it's, it's the most normal and the most natural thing in the world and if, if one group is presenting itself to the absence of another group and you are in school, mind you now I'm not talking about education, if you're in school, then--and, and, and the way that you excel in school is to repeat what you've been taught so over a long period of time you will accept what's in those books and so when you go back and you start reading about Ghana [Ghana Empire] and, and, and Songhai [Songhai Empire] and Mali [Mali Empire] and other kinds of civilizations and you, you, you look at what the African has accomplished during those, those three thousand years and you can definitively prove that this is what happened, then you can uncover all of that which has been denied and you can see yourself as a person who or as a group or as a, as a continent as being a, a, a, a group that has all of the, all of the, the glamour and the prestige that any other group has. Story_ID: 564859 Speaker 1: Well if you know just, just to, to show how devastating it is to deny people a, a real honest view of who they are, if you, if you were a, a Jew for instance, it couldn't be--your heritage couldn't be hidden from you because there it is. You know who, who you are. All you have to do is turn to the--what we call the Old Testament right and you, you look back and there it is. There was no book for us to go to. There was nothing for us to look at to get a picture of who we are. And so since, since there was nothing to look at we had go and dig, excavate the truth and bring it forth. Speaker 2: Well there's nothing in a wide distribution but there was some books and some experts too. Speaker 1: Oh, but, but those books were not in in the common parlance of schools-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --I mean so, so and, and not only that but the the fact that that you were concerned about getting a good grade. Even today for instance if you are with, with the given of Black History Month which we obviously know is is not only a short month, but it, it, it glorifies you know like Booker T. [Booker T. Washington] or W.B. Du Bois [W.E.B Du Bois]. Now occasionally a Malcolm [Malcolm X] or, or some other characters are put in there but the, the real truth of what happened in the whole black and African struggle and the whole African heritage, that story still isn't told. So not only is it not told but after you've learned whatever it is that you're to learn in that one month, it's not tested. And, and kids know that if there's no test, it's not important. So it would get back then back to why black studies and my intent or my hope was that once you glean out the information in the literature and the history or the sciences and, and you're able to lift it up and you're able to put a face on it and the face obviously is black in many, many instances, then then once you have put all of that together, why could you not transpose that into the curriculum? That would be the natural logical thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay. Story_ID: 564860 Speaker 1: Part of what I was trying to figure out also was how, I mean you and Dr. Williams [Robert L. Williams] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Williams right. Speaker 1: --had the task of putting together a curriculum. And I guess I'm trying to ask that based on what knowledge that you all had to--from jump street. What did you know and what did he know that could inform a curriculum and where did you learn it from? Speaker 2: Okay. Well Williams was a psychologist okay and I, a social worker. And obviously we, we learned a lot of this coincidentally and accidentally. We learned it in the struggles and the movements. We learned it in the racism that we were exposed to, the mythologies that I was saying we were exposed to. So African Americans learned a lot backwards. We know that for instance I was saying here you have a situation where people are sailors and they're coming across the waters and I've given you some explorers who were doing that though and if you were a kid in school you can't imagine a black or an African being navigator. You couldn't imagine Christopher Columbus having a navigator, a black navigator for his ship but the reality is that if you go back to the Carthaginians you actually will see the people who sail the world. If you go back into history you'll, you'll see here's a, a people who know the stars who can sail by the stars and so forth and so on. So there's enough--there are enough pieces around to put together to know that indeed the, the first sailors were Africans. Well if they're the first sailors it would stand to reason that they would be sailing with other people. You also realize that slavery is something that, that was not a fact of life in the, in the sense that that it--that we came to understand it. And so without the presence of that slavery and with the, with the knowledge that you get, you get the most with, with the best of of resources, we're talking about Europeans who use Africans, employ them, treated them as equals and and that they were involved in the process of of exploration. So you know that it doesn't take a lot to go back and put that together. It doesn't take a lot to go back and put together how foolish the notion is that's presented to you that, that someone is sailing to see if the world is round when all you have to do is, is recognize that you're talking about Africans not only who had clocked the the eclipses and had seen many of them and nothing ever went across that was square you know all of those, those objects that passed through one another are round. So Africans knew that. Africans knew that it took three minutes for the sunshine to get to the earth. You know Africans had the greatest math ability in the world. The--you know if, if you just look at the pyramids, you'll--what they, what they did in, in erecting the pyramid, is something that you cannot do today with the best machinery and the, and the most ablest of scientists. You can't come up with the same kinds of perfections in terms of how those pyramids were, were erected. Story_ID: 564861 Speaker 1: You and-- Speaker 2: Williams. Speaker 1: --Robert L. Williams developed the black studies program for the--what was it called black studies then or African American studies or? Speaker 2: No it was called black studies. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was later probably about two or three years later it was called African American studies. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And what did it consist of, early on? Speaker 2: Oh it consisted of poetry, history and, and it was actually courses that, that dealt with I would call economics because when I say I call it economics because we--I taught a course of, of exodus from poverty. How, how you can with economics move out of poverty into a, a better life. Psychology was in it, drama was there and then there were courses that were crosslisted with other departments and, and it was, it was, it was a program instead of a department and which created a problem because if it's a, a department then you can continue, if it's a program you cannot. And so while we had a great number of, of scholars in our, in our program, there were times when we lost people because they were not tenured. Speaker 1: Okay so how many teachers were in the program when it started? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I, I would say now this is, we're back in 1970 so I have to stretch my, my memory. I think somewhere around seven or about seven or eight people um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And you say it's multidisciplinary-- Speaker 2: Right. And yeah multidisciplinary and, and crossdisciplinary. Speaker 1: Now at the time what were, what were the numbers like on campus in terms of black students to the general population? Speaker 2: Very small. I would say probably less than one half of one percent and it was, it was extremely, extremely small. I, I, I believe I was probably the first African American male tenured in the School of Social Work [George Warren Brown School of Social Work, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]. And so-- Speaker 1: So did you have tenure when you, when you developed the black-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You didn't have it then? Speaker 2: No. I didn't have it then. It was, it was about two years later that I received tenure. Story_ID: 564862 Speaker 1: And, and the, the interesting thing is that we petitioned to administration for more students in the school and there was some receptivity to that and they actually did attempt to get more African Americans into the school. In 1971, '72 [1972] I, I believed from then to maybe '75 [1975] we really got a large number of African American students and a number of 'em from, from this particular region, from the St. Louis [Missouri] region which is currently something that the school doesn't do right now. It recruits more broadly than than the city so but the interesting thing, Larry [Larry Crowe] was that it was a school that was very racist and and when we brought students on campus we actually recognized that this was the situation and what we did was to take the students on the weekends in buses to to some of the summer camps and we, we taught them how to survive in an environment like this and, and so we would, we would give them some drilling about how you are to interface with professors. How you might very well be the one who is considered the, the expert on Africans since you're the only one in the--African American in the class and those kinds of things and the fact that African American students want to very much protect their integrity and the way that they would protect their integrity would be to say on paper what they thought and what they felt and the consequences of that obviously was you know not too good. So what we did was to teach them how to write two papers. Write the first one of what you feel and what you think and that's your paper. And then write a paper with what the professor would wanna hear. And so, so we we helped students learn how to stay in school. We, we taught them how to go to professors' offices and interact with them, to be known by them, to establish relationships with them. The, the, the basic stuff that is in keeping with how do you maintain your scholarship and so forth but you can see that that was something that really had to be taught because that's not where students were and the time of course was in the after flow of, of the Civil Rights Movement and they were very much concerned about being expressive and thought that doing anything that was less than saying exactly what was on their minds, was a violation of their integrity. So it worked out fairly well and the students formed their black organizations and so forth and so on and they, they actually did well academically and many of them are in top positions today. Speaker 2: So I mean does that always work not to challenge the authority in academic situation? I mean I guess isn't--well (laughter) I know things don't always work for black students where they work for other students. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But the university on some levels should welcome some challenge to the traditional-- Speaker 1: Well I agree with that-- Speaker 2: --not natural right? Speaker 1: --I agree with that but you have to also have some good analytic skills because there are some professors that would appreciate it and some obviously wouldn't but the environment here [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] at the time was one where you, you were walking very gingerly and that there was very possible to run into someone who would give you a grade based on the way you expressed your thought and that's not contrary to the situation right now on this or any other campus. I mean racism is not gone. It's, it's just taken on a different you know aspect you know aspect but it certainly is very much alive. Story_ID: 564863 Speaker 1: Now, you have a terminal degree and everything. Do you have a critique of, of the social sciences as taught in the majority of universities? Speaker 2: Social scientists? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I've, I've seen when you say critique of them, I--let me see if I understand what you mean. Speaker 1: Yeah, do you have a major critique of the way social science has taught for instance social work-- Speaker 2: Um-hm yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where the school is social work-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and you know how is, is there really a lot of science behind social science and social work and or does it need to be more science behind it or is it, is it informed by more feelings and prejudices than by actual study you know-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --research? Speaker 2: --yeah I think you get a lot of different responses to that. Here we we tend to think there is a science behind it. There's a lot of research that goes on in this institution [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]. We are very high on what we call evidence based practice and we believe that, that whatever is, is, is being taught but that there is you know that there's the evidence that it, it's useful, it's meaningful and that it's productive, that it accomplishes its purpose. It, it can be counseling or it can be working with groups or families or or communities or what have you. There's a, there's a body of information that allows us to think that we know something about that. Now that happens but you see, having said that, I could, I could turn to a--to the literature of science that is taught in the social sciences and and not be able to be effective in an African American community if I used precisely what I read because it's, it's, it's like many things, it's, it's, it's not tested on a African American population, it's tested on a, on a white population and so there are so many variations and so many differences not only cultural but the differences actually occur when you take off layers, when you take off certain tops of, of socioeconomic classes and you leave behind different classes you get a different phenomena and so even, even if you, if you read something that seems fairly accurate you may go and use that in a community that has--had topped off a population of, of strength and it's not workable. So it's always change taking place but my answer to you is that most of the social science information does not deal with the black perspective. Story_ID: 564864 Speaker 1: Now you were at some point you became like the head of the black studies department [at Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Or, or African American studies department (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Now when was this, was this--? Speaker 2: This was in 1974. Speaker 1: Seventy--okay. And how long did you stay in that position? Speaker 2: I was the director for two years and upon the end of those two years, I was--I had been working with a politician, a fellow named Senator J.B. "Jet" Banks and as I, I served as his campaign manager and he was was a, a state rep [representative] at the time and he was running for senator and he was successful and elected as a senator of the 5th District [5th Congressional District] and after his election he thought it would be good or nice or wise or whatever to ask me to serve as a member of the governor's cabinet. The, the, the--well he would have to of course recommend me and the person that he recommended me to who had been--who was governor was Joe Teasdale [Joseph P. Teasdale], his name was--they call him Walking Joe Teasdale. Speaker 1: Well why do they call him that? Speaker 2: Well because the way he got elected is that he walked--he vowed he would walk across the state electioneering and he, he really did. He did quite a bit of that and, and would show up in eating places and almost you know people got to see that he was a man of his word, that he, he would--he wanted to be among the people. And so-- Speaker 1: Now this is a white candidate? Speaker 2: --yes, um-hm. And so once he was elected and my name had been submitted to him then it went before the senate and I was confirmed. I, I--I'm, I'm sure that I was the first African American to be confirmed by the senate-- Speaker 1: This is the Missouri state senate [Missouri Senate], right? Speaker 2: Yes, as a cabinet member. Speaker 1: Okay this is in '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: Yes um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. All right now how did you get involved in politics in the State of Missouri? Were you sort of involved in it all along and then culminated with the involvement with the campaign of J.B. Banks? Speaker 2: Well actually I, I, I got into politics and it really wasn't politics in the sense because when you run for board of education it's, it's you know you're not running any party. But having been on the board of education I, I was into policy, I enjoyed policy and so I was also a, a writer and a supporter of, of Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] who became congressman and some, some other individuals who ran for office and so I wrote many position papers for Senator Banks and and as a result of my involvement with him and his support of me, I was nominated and I was confirmed for the position of transportation. Story_ID: 564865 Speaker 1: So what was that job like? Did you--had you--did you have to learn a new body of information. I mean director of the department of transportation? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was an interesting--well first the most interesting part about that job of course was when I went into the office and announced that I was the director of transportation. There were--you can't imagine the kind of disdain that was ushered forth and laughter because they really had never seen a black you know operating at that level. There had been a black before me who had been in the cabinet but he was not confirmed by the senate [Missouri Senate]. It was a in between appointment but this appointment they knew it was a four year appointment and, and the people in the office you know just thought it was a joke and it was, it was not so. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so they laughed in your face? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah and then they called over to the office of the, of the governor and the governor's office confirmed that I had been appointed and confirmed and then the next day I came back, it was a little different. But it was a situation where you can appreciate and we're talking about '76 [1976] where the the feelings were, were there about an office of this nature so or an appointment of this nature. So and, and on occasions I would go around the state giving talks which was part of--and I can remember going to the southern part of of Missouri, they call it the Bootheel and I had and in this position I actually had a pilot assigned to me and, and there was a plane and it was a single engine or double engine plane, and as we went into one town in particular, I can recall the the state police you know driving and taking us in and it was a big deal, flags flying and when we got to where we were to be I had two of my colleagues in the car with me, two men, and they opened the doors and the three of us got out and I started to walk probably to where I thought the affair might be. But they thought the two white guys with me one of them was the director of transportation so they--'cause they had told me to go ahead on in. The boys would take care of me. So I just went on in and when I went in the boys I think the youngest boy was about sixty-five. He was--these, these were blacks who were bartenders so it was, I mean it was, it was--there were many kinds of situations like that. So it was, it was still the, the, the after effect of, of the Civil Rights Movement. The residue of all of this was very much present. And, and, I don't know if you're aware of it now, but you're in a state right now that or in a city [St. Louis, Missouri] that is that is considered the fourth most segregated city in America. So it's you know and and I guess when you say it's the fourth most, if you, if you were to really line up cities, I guess you would, you would consider that there may be a great many of them tied for first and second place. So the fact that we're the fourth most doesn't necessarily mean that that we're number four. Speaker 1: All right now-- Speaker 2: But I resigned from the senate. I mean resigned from the, the, the transportation in seventy- let's see I went there in seventy- yeah '77 [1977] I believe. Speaker 1: So you were, you were only there a year? Speaker 2: No I was about eighteen months I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 564866 Speaker 1: What were your duties at the, as director of transportation and why did you resign? Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I went there from the university [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]. I went there, I was a tenured professor when I went there. I didn't really go to be there for an extended period of time. I, I, I actually went there to as a favor for the senator [J.B. "Jet" Banks] and, and to just give the the visual image that you could be black and qualified and have a position like that and, and, and could function in it. And so that was the purpose and then I came back to this university where I've been, where I'd gone on leave of absence. Speaker 1: Now were you able to accomplish anything as transportation secretary? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that you know first it was the fact that I was able to hire a staff around me that was African American, which is almost was unheard of. But what I, I learned there was how to look at a system, a governmental, governmental system in a, in a broad perspective and see how it functioned to get a sense of of how government can enhance or impede individuals, especially African Americans. So I, I, I think what I gained mostly was a, a understanding of, of organizations and power and and I guess also what I learned more than anything was that it's possible to to be the head of state and still not have the authority to do things unless whoever put you in that position permits you to do it. That was a real awakening for me and then I transposed that to the, to the fact that you can be president of a country and it's, it's whoever put you there is the one who can make decisions and you're not necessarily in a position where because you're there you can make decisions independently. So I, I, I knew that the people who were the the fund gatherers, the people who had caused the turnout of votes and hosts of other kinds of other things that they can make decisions that perhaps may be counter to what the elected person might want to make, but they are the ones who carry the day. That was--that, that shook me from my sixth grade civics concept. I, I thought that whoever was elected could with integrity vote or or command however something should go but that was not true. Speaker 1: Now do you have an example of that work ethic I mean, how it worked? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I can recall that there is a, a community that in St. Louis [Missouri] which is I don't wanna call these names but there was a community that had a, a church with a great deal of influence and money and they--we were on a plane and a call came through and, and you know this group actually helped a decision to be made about what kind of facilities should go into an area to turn it around. And the facility was an anchor and it was because the people had the money and the clout that was not necessarily the intention of, of what the governor wanted to do. I mean I'm sitting in, in board meetings and council meetings and cabinet meetings and all of those kinds of things and I see decisions being made and I, and I can--I know that those are decisions counter to what the governor wants to take but I can see the influence behind them. So those are some of the kinds of things that, that can happen and have happened. Story_ID: 564867 Speaker 1: When you came back to the university [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] in '77 [1977] did you start teaching right away or did they? Speaker 2: Yeah when I came back, I came back as the chair of economic development-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at the School of Social Work [George Warren Brown School of Social Work, St. Louis, Missouri]. And-- Speaker 1: So that's a non-academic kind of position right? Speaker 2: Yes, where at the chair? Which position you mean? Speaker 1: Well the chair of economic development if that's more (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it's, it's-- Speaker 1: --more of administration? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, that's right. But it's, it's a position of that--of direction and as a matter of fact with economic development you can appreciate that being in a school of social work. You don't normally associate economic development with the school of social work. You tend to think of it as being something that should be in, in the business school or something of that nature. But economic development from my perspective was a way to teach students how to save neighborhoods, how to turn neighborhoods around, how to give people power in neighborhoods, how to put them in a position where they could not be pushed out of an area so that then became my thrust and my mission and that's what I do currently. Story_ID: 564868 Speaker 1: So it true that you--were you the founder of the economic development program of the Washington University School of Social Work [George Warren Brown School of Social Work, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Yes. I, I was, I was founder, first chair and it's a, a program that is a little different and as much as--I wouldn't say little different it's, it's, it is very different from traditional social work. Because traditional social work works with individuals, families, institutions, communities but the thrust of, of economic development is to empower people to have resources that they can use to turn around their neighborhoods, turn around the areas in which they live and can actually change their whole, their whole economic direction and poverty as you know is a stark reality in the African American community, of course it's pervasive and, and people constantly are saying yes you know it's we want to do something but we don't have anything and yet the reality is that the communities have plenty. The, the community is wealthy, the people may be poor but the community is wealthy and, and these communities they have all kinds of things. They have buildings even if they're burnt out, they have, they have commercial areas even though they may be dysfunctional. They have a lot of things that they can go in and rebuild and the, the chief thing that they have of course is land. And land is, is very valuable. So if, if they were to galvanize the economics and be in control of their own economic situation, then they can control their destiny. But the, the most important part of that of course is organizing their strengths and, and planning how they're going to proceed and then committing themselves to, to a, a, a plan which is over perhaps a five year period of time which would be amended from time to time but with that kind of clout, they are in a position to, to determine who will be elected to support them because they would be a voting population, they could determine what kind of school that they would have because they can have a great deal to say about who the principal would be and other kinds of things. They can determine their own security and safety because they can put pressure on the city to to change and modify how that city, how that, how that city administration relates to that segment of the, of the city but they can do nothing without that power. They can do noth- they can do nothing singularly, but they can do a great deal once they coalesce and the coalescing is around economics and that's very different and so I see that as being the most important tool in social work because when people have the, the power to change their situation and they have the, the vision to provide for themselves, services, opportunities such as jobs and so forth and so on and to to put a lot of pressure on cities to provide services which would be streets and lighting and host of other kinds of things, then, then the people recognize that that they can determine the same as whatever any progressive city can determine. It's just a smaller segment but they certainly can, can do all these things. Story_ID: 564869 Speaker 1: And I, I have, I have you know some experience with this having served and consulted a number of, of communities and one that I'm currently consulting right now which was a community that had absolutely nothing, which was the fourth most crime ridden district in the city and currently they are developing housing units, four hundred of them and, and they have gone from zero dollars to operating now with a budget of 70 million. Speaker 2: Now what's the name of that community? Speaker 1: Neighborhood Council [St. Louis, Missouri]. It's in the, it's in the 4th Ward, I'm sorry the 3rd Ward, um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I taught the person who's running it is a former student of mine and, and I send students there now for the students to get a understanding on how to do that. Her name is Shirley Emerson. Story_ID: 564870 Speaker 1: Now in '88 [1988] you received the most outstanding teacher award from the college of the School of Social Work [George Warren Brown School of Social Work, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You've been featured in--as a great in the great teachers series of the St. Louis Sun-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and I'm sure there's probably a lot of awards and, and things attendant to this. Now are you, are you still working full time now? Are you? Speaker 2: Yes, I'm full time professor, right. Speaker 1: Okay all right so you haven't you know, you're near retirement or anything? Speaker 2: Well, I, I could retire in the moment if I wanted to but there's some things that I really wanna do and that's why I'm staying and I'd like to share with you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 2: --what those are. Story_ID: 564871 Speaker 1: As I have said I'm concerned about economic development because to me there's something that's going on in this country that's, that emanated from that whole urban renewal situation and as you know that's how the Civil Rights Movement got started in urban renewal. And I observed that as a, a person who at that time I was a, I was a chair of an education committee in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. That's where I entered into the Civil Rights Movement, that was probably in the, in the early '60s [1960s]. And what I saw in the urban renewal situation was land that was being banked. That's--they call it land banking which basically means that you just tear down the houses and you don't do anything. Well if you're gonna bank land, what are you banking it for when you're banking it for the future. And so whose gonna live there? Well the people who live there won't be living there that's for sure and so I followed that--mind you now this is the early '60s [1960s] and here in 2007--and I've seen a pattern that has taken place in this country which I think is very, very painful for me to see and that is that the plan it seems to be how do you get rid of poor people? And how do you move them out of cities? Well you can't just go in and, and bulldoze them anymore because that was one of the plans of course and then urban renewal was followed by Model Cities and all kinds of things so people recognize it and it must be another way of doing it. And so that other way is to recognize that the poor people, low income people, African Americans in particular, are in the best areas of a city, they're in public housing. Public housing if you look at it anywhere in America, it's in the best location and so how then do you bring down public housing? You just can't do that willy nilly and so it's a matter of concentration, it's a matter of an intensified population because if you go to tear it down, you'll get people protesting in the streets. So the better way to do it is to offer people vouchers and to encourage them to move out in what they perceive to be suburbs. That's one way. Another way of course is to come back after you get rid of a great deal of density, to tear down those buildings because people are not there to protest and after you do that, you put smaller buildings then because you have to occupy the land and you, you build what I say are the prototypes of the next phase which is to have condos and the people who live in condos are not going to be the people who are living in what we might call Hope VI or any of that today. Story_ID: 564872 Speaker 1: So I, you know I have observed this process over a long period of time and the, the next phase then after, after you get rid of people that way, is to do whatever eminent domain that you can and that typically is with transportation. It's, it's with, in this city, it's with metro, it's with ways of finding a, a, a, a, a way to move through low income communities and, and the low income communities I'm gonna reference in just a little while is in East St. Louis [Illinois]. But something has happened to even expedite that and what has happened to expedite it the price of gasoline. And so with the price of gasoline being three dollars a gallon, I wrote articles and published articles twenty years ago saying that gasoline would be three dollars a gallon. I project in the next five years gasoline will be five dollars a gallon. So if you, if you have a situation like that, it's very obvious that you can't live far out. You have to live as close as you can to the inner core of the city. So what is happening is that young people are graduating from, from colleges. They can't live where their parents live, it cost too much money. The only thing that's available is city, the city. I teach a class called The City: The New Frontier because I see that being the area that is being taken now and the, the, the call word for taking cities are lofts. You know if you hear the word loft you know who's, who's on their way out. And so here you are beginning to see not only African Americans of course, almost--you're dealing with all poor people but they're being pushed out of cities into rural areas. At, at one time, when I first came here, blacks could not live beyond Kingshighway [Boulevard] and that was in the city. Now they live where I live and that's way out in Chesterfield [Missouri], a long way out. Okay so, so there's this, this movement of, of people moving on and beyond and beyond and the people moving in and in and in and the people who are moving in are the people of means. The people being moved out are the people of lesser means and, and that becomes the phenomena. Actually, you're, you're seeing the model of, of Europe where in Europe, the city is the place to live and if you're in the rural area, you're out of it. We're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That- that's like the model of South Africa too? Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: The whites in the inner city, and the blacks are in Soweto [South Africa] out in the outskirts. Story_ID: 564873 Speaker 1: Right. So, so understanding that, now you know I understood that for many, many, many years as I say to you, I then bought land in East St. Louis [Illinois] with the intent of, of developing it and developing a village and having a, a, a opportunity to hold people within that area and to control that area. That's very unusual because blacks really don't, don't have land you know as we were talking about black history one of the things that, that I was aware of in black history was that maybe twenty years or so after, after blacks were freed from slavery that blacks owned 15 million acres of land, but today blacks own less than than one and so the land situation is, is very pathetic. That is we don't own land. If you don't own land, it's very difficult for you to have any clout in a society and my, my whole thrust in, in East St. Louis is to, is to build a model, the village is the model and if you think about it, if you think about African American churches across America, you'll find that they're all typically in areas that are depreciated, that are ghettoized and so forth and so on. Most of them are. With that being the case, then the, the, the African American pastor then if he/she knew how to take their area of land and reclaim it like I'm suggesting, we could save where we live. We could save the area and, and, and literally make it an oasis because the land in the cities becomes the most desirable place to be but you can see that if you, if you, if you don't have any kind of organizational structure to do the things that I'm suggesting, then the land gets taken, the people get dispersed and they find themselves a rural people. So one of the things that I plan to do is have an institute where I can bring pastors from across the country and teach them how to reclaim their areas, how to have economic development within their areas so that they can actually be in charge of their own destiny, that they can not only preserve a culture and a people, but they can become a viable part of the society. So that's you know if you're the short and quick of it is that I learned a great deal about how to do economic development when I was with the state in transportation. I come back to the city and establish a, a program for economic development and I train students to do economic development. I consult in economic development. You can see I've been across the world. I do that with economic development and that becomes my way of, of making whatever contribution that I hope to make. Speaker 2: Okay. So, so you're developing these plans to train the ministers, you know, as we speak then? Speaker 1: Um-hm, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and also I'm, I'm developing this land and the land will be developed into--it'll be commercial, it'll be housing, it'll be--it will be probably condos, it will be services like assisted living, skilled nursing center, daycare, all of those kinds of things and, and it will have, have the aspect of, of being a, a, a living village where people can have the aspect of, of neighborliness. You grew up in a neighborhood, right? And you realize that neighborhoods no longer exist. Well we hope to make this and keep this a neighborhood and, and bring people in and train them so that they can see how they can replicate what, what we have. Story_ID: 564874 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question and you've probably answered it in the course of what you've already said but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: My, my hopes are that we really come to understand that this is a society that, that appreciates a people who are entrepreneurial and I hope that we become more entrepreneurial. I hope that as we become more entrepreneurial that we are in a position to employ more of our own. We're the only people who don't employ our own people. I hope that that we become more cooperative in the sense that we, we lace together, tie together our institutions. That is let's just start with churches. I would love to see churches work together. I would hope that, that as a people that we would be able to do more in relationship with those of us who are suffering abroad. It's, it's, it's nice that, that we have white brothers who, who are pastors, who do things on behalf of people who are suffering abroad. I'd like to see more African pastors, African American pastors who are involved in eliminating or at least minimizing the suffering by doing something collectively. So you know that's, that's, that's for openers. Story_ID: 564875 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything different that you would do major if you could? Speaker 2: I wish that I could have done what I've done faster. (Laughter) I'd like to be sitting here face to face with you at forty, at forty years old and, and, and be where I am and have that kind of time hopefully to, to do many of things that I would like to see done. I'd like to have the opportunity to to train people to do a lot of things that I'm very familiar with at this point which might even be called cloning. Yeah so it's, it's those kinds of things because there's so much to be learned and it has to be learned so quickly. So I, I regret that it took so long to learn these things. Story_ID: 564876 Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point again, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: (Pause) I guess as I, as I--my legacy, I guess maybe I would think that, that it would be twofold. One would be I believe I probably tied about ten thousand people. That's a lot of people out there in the world who have heard the things that I've said and are implementing those in various kinds of ways. I think that the other thing would be something that I'm working on right now. The model that I'm talking about. The, the opportunity to, to teach pastors how to save their communities, how to help the people that--well help them spiritually, they know how to do that, but to be able to help them economically. To me that's the, that is the most pressing and the most important thing to be done and I believe that I have a model and I believe I'm leaving behind a model that can possibly permit that to happen. Story_ID: 564877 Speaker 1: Now tell us about your family? Speaker 2: I have three children. I have a son Jack [Jack Arnett Kirkland, Jr.], a daughter Adrienne [Adrienne Kirkland], a daughter Kelly [Kelly Kirkland] and my son works in the, in industry. My daughter Kelly is a beautician and my daughter Adrienne is a social worker like me. She didn't learn much. She went on and followed me. Speaker 1: You say your son is in the industry, what industry is that? Speaker 2: He, he works in a, in a industry that's in refrigeration um-hm. So and then my wife she is a volunteer, her name is Iris [Iris McWherter Kirkland]. She's a volunteer at a children's home and then I have two--I have three grandchildren. One is on his way to studying carpentry, another is a registered nurse and another one is is still in elementary school and then I have two great-grandchildren Jade [ph.] and, and Jaylen [ph.] and so they are very, very young, two and fourteen months. So I've and I, I see them all the time because they're here. So I had Thanksgiving dinner with them and I enjoy family life. I have a great esprit de corps with my children and we--with my two daughters in particular, you know how sons are, with my two daughters I, I call them every day. My son talks to me when he thinks he has a need. Story_ID: 564878 Speaker 1: Before I ask my last question, I have one more question. And that is: have I--is there anything I have not asked you that you- we need to raise before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I think, I think we've covered everything that I would see as important to cover um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay all right. Well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Yeah that's a good question. I, I guess I'd like to be remembered as a warrior, a person who saw things that were wrong and, and wanted to right it by helping people to see what they are doing to themselves because there's when, when, when someone is doing something that's that's wrong and harmful, hurtful, they're doing it to themselves. And if there's some way that I can help them to see that they're not inflicting pain on somebody else but they're doing it on themselves, that's, that's what I would want to be remembered. I, I do that in my multicultural education and I, I've, I help people to see that if you are an oppressor, you know, ultimately that gets revisited to you and yours. And so one is to let them see me as a warrior and a person who is able to help people to see that what they're doing will revisit--be revisited to them and the other is to to see that I am compassionate, that I'm concerned, that I want everyone to have the best advantage that they possibly can have and actually do what I can do to facilitate that. Because I'm a facilitator. A, a warrior with a heart, a person who's concerned about all people and a person who truly wants to see every individual have the best advantage that's possible with no one operating to negate and to deny. That's what I want to be remembered as a person who is that kind of a warrior. Story_ID: 564879 Speaker 1: Yes this is Paul Simon. He was running for president at this time. Would you know about-- Speaker 2: Would that be about 1980 I guess? What do you think '80 [1980] or '84 [1984]? Speaker 1: Somewhere you know in that time, but anyway I, I know that he had a committee to elect him and I was on a committee from St. Louis [Missouri] and this, this, this man was a very personable individual who I believe if elected would have been a, a statesmen. Speaker 2: This is a, a, a picture of Senator Banks [J.B. "Jet" Banks]. We call him Jet. He was a speedy fellow, very fashionable, a flashy dresser. A man who wore jewelry and in a very fashionable kind of way, a tremendous senator, a tremendous humanitarian and I'm flanked between him and, and the governor, Walkin' Joe Teasdale [Joseph P. Teasdale]. So that was when I was being confirmed just after being confirmed as the director of transportation for the State of Missouri. Speaker 1: This is 1977 right? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm--no it's '74 [1974]--I'm sorry, '74 [1974], '75 [1975] um-hm. Speaker 1: Let's get this whole thing because it's a flier for the program, black studies program, it's got name and date. Speaker 2: Yeah this is a, a picture of Paul Robeson and he was a, a, a man of great stature in the black community and I wrote a, opinion, statement about him with a historical flair and it was published in the American newspaper [St. Louis American]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a, a picture of I guess a cartoon or a, a--well a cartoon like resemblance of a situation where I was the chair of a very large organization called ACT [ph.] which was in protest against the University City [Missouri] board--school board of education for not actually having the, the black experience within the curriculum. Speaker 1: And this is a picture of my presenting on a panel, a paper and to the right is Senator Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy]. I don't identify the man in the middle but it was a very interesting dialogue and out of it there was several publications that, that I'm very proud of. Speaker 2: And this is a, a picture of of a fellow that I'm sure everybody is very familiar with, Muhammad Ali and he's flanked on the--both sides by myself and Monte Dawson. Monte Dawson was the director of student education service at the time. Speaker 1: And this is a picture of, really of my home boy. He and I were born and raised in a town called Blythedale [Pennsylvania]. A very small town that I talked about early of about five hundred people and Mel Johnson [Melvin Johnson] was a individual who became a very confident entrepreneurial. He was the fella who had a travel company that took me to Africa for my very first time in 1972. Speaker 2: Is he Coulda or Shoulda? Speaker 1: That's Bubba. Speaker 2: Bubba. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh you got some kind of memory man. You got some kind of a memory. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This, this is a picture of my--presenting a paper on hunger and Ted Kennedy was at this conference and I was not supposed to present but the group that I was with protested and then the, the panel consented and allowed me to give a paper and subsequently that paper was published in a law journal. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is, this is a picture of, of me when I ran for board of education in University City in 1968--'76 [1976] and I was the first black elected to the board of education. University City at the time had a, had a school system that was ranked in the first ten in the country and I was the first non-Jew ever elected to that board of education. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Um-hm. Yeah this is a, a picture of myself being the recipient of a--of an award and it was an educational reward. I was taking a, a course from the Maryland university [University of Maryland] while I was in the [U.S. military] service and I had some, some distinguished, some, some distinguishment and that was the certificate that was handed to me for grades, outstanding grades...