 Story_ID: 506234 Speaker 1: Our special HistoryMaker guest today is Tanya Kersey. Tanya, welcome to The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Let's go back and start and ask you first and foremost, have you signed your release form? Speaker 2: I have (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes, I believe it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I have signed my release form. Speaker 1: Let me have your full name at birth and would you please spell it. Speaker 2: It's [HistoryMaker] Tanya-Monique Kersey; that's T-A-N-Y-A, M-O-N-I-Q-U-E, K-E-R-S-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. What is today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, today is July 8, 2007. Speaker 1: In the year of our Lord, okay. And, what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: March 22, 1961. Speaker 1: And where were you born at? Speaker 2: New York, New York. Speaker 1: The city so nice, they named it twice; New York, New York. Specifically what part of New York were you born in? Speaker 2: I was born in Sydenham Hospital in Harlem [New York, New York], which no longer is. Speaker 1: You were born in Sydenham Hospital? Speaker 2: I was born in Sydenham Hospital. Speaker 1: I was born in Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh. Speaker 1: Sydenham is spelled S-Y-- Speaker 2: S-Y-D-E-N-H-A-M. Speaker 1: Now defunct. Speaker 2: Now defunct, yes. Speaker 1: In Harlem. 124th Street and Edgecombe Avenue--no, St. Nicholas. On 24th and St. Nicholas Avenue (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) St. Nicholas. Speaker 1: I bet that was nice, being born in that hospital. Speaker 2: I think I, me and my sister [Lisa Kersey] were born over there because when, years ago, when my family immigrated to this country, they set up shop in that part of Harlem. So, that's why we're all going over there. Speaker 1: Where are we today? Speaker 2: Right here and right now? We're in Beverly Hills, California. Speaker 1: In your home? Speaker 2: Yup. Speaker 1: Okay. Beverly Hills. Speaker 2: A long way from Harlem, huh (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yes, a long way from Harlem. Story_ID: 506235 Speaker 1: Here's a couple questions. We call them People magazine questions. First and foremost, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Ooh, my favorite food. Oh my gosh. I know what it is. It's from, The Cheesecake Factory has got this raspberry truffle cheesecake with the chocolate on the bottom and the whipped cream. That's probably my favorite food. I just absolutely love it. Speaker 1: Raspberry truffle cheesecake-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: With chocolate. Speaker 2: With chocolate on the bottom. Speaker 1: On the bottom. Speaker 2: From The Cheesecake Factory. Speaker 1: And fast--from Cheesecake Factory. No plug for Cheesecake Factory, of course. But they do got some good stuff over there, for sure. Speaker 2: Yes, they do. Speaker 1: Yes, they do. Okay. What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: White. Speaker 1: Why that color? Speaker 2: It's pure. It's just clean. Speaker 1: I'm listening to those birds out there. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I forgot about the birds. They talk. Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Any specific reason? Speaker 2: Not too hot, not too cold, and it looks really pretty, but I like fall back east, because of all the trees. You know, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] I like spring and back east I like fall. Speaker 1: Back East. Okay. What is your favorite vacation spot? Speaker 2: Mexico, Cancun. Speaker 1: Number one, Cancun, Mexico. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Any specific reason? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh yes. I love the blue water, love the weather. The beaches are fabulous and I love the coral reef. I mean, it's so close--oh--and there's no sharks. Because the coral reef comes out of the ground no sharks can get over, so I know there are no sharks, so I will go swimming. I won't go swimming anywhere else (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I thought this one out. Speaker 1: I see you have, I see you have. What is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't even say that on camera. Speaker 1: That good (laughter)? Speaker 2: Can I say hell? Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Oh, I say hell to the no. Speaker 1: Hell to the-- Speaker 2: Hell to the no. It means absolutely, positively not, no. It's not like hell no. It's hell to the no. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Where'd you get that phrase from? Speaker 2: Oh, I've been saying that. Everybody knows that's from me because I'm just like, "Hell to the no." It's like absolutely not. Yeah, that's my saying. I know you wanted something very prolific and everything (laughter), but that's just being honest. Story_ID: 506236 Speaker 1: Let's get into a little bit of where you came from. Let's talk about your mother. What's your mother's name? Speaker 2: Cynthia Kersey [Cynthia Wallace Kersey]. Speaker 1: Spell that please. Speaker 2: C-Y-N-T-H-I-A. Speaker 1: Any middle name? Speaker 2: Nope. Speaker 1: Okay. And, the question that comes to my mind is, before we get any (unclear) what are your earliest remembrances when you were a child. What were some of your earliest remembrances of just life itself? Speaker 2: Probably in my grandmother's [Gwendolyn Miller Fieulleteau] house, 118 West 131 Street [131st Street]. My grandmother was Panamanian, wild, just thought I'd describe her. She was totally nonconventional and I would be at her house and be eating spaghetti in the morning and I just remember being with my grandmother because she took care of me as a child, so I grew up speaking Spanish, you know. I grew up with the Rosary beads and all of that, and it was very exciting. Speaker 1: You still speak Spanish? Speaker 2: No. Lost it. Speaker 1: Lost it, doggone it. Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember my dad [Al Kersey], and my grandfather, oh--it's close--my grandfather too, was Jamaican and a track star. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Franz Wallace [Franz C. Wallace, Sr.]. He actually ran against Jesse Owens in the Olympic trials and came in fourth with a hamstring pull; otherwise, he would have probably been in Munich [Germany] with Hitler [Adolph Hitler]. Speaker 1: Wow. Splendid, okay. Speaker 2: So my mom was the first generation born in America. Speaker 1: So your background and heritage is Jamaican. Speaker 2: Panamanian and Jamaican. Speaker 1: Panamanian and Jamaican. Speaker 2: Yeah, they came over here at the turn of the century. They built the Panama Canal. My grandmother has thirteen brothers and sisters, and they came to this country in 1904, I think it was. Story_ID: 506237 Speaker 1: We'll come back to them in just a little bit. What were some of your earliest sights, smells and sounds that you can remember? Speaker 2: Sights, smells and sounds. Sights would be my parents [Cynthia Wallace Kersey and Al Kersey] because they were crazy, fun, definitely not your typical parents. I partied with my parents. Sounds--New York City [New York, New York]. Smell--hot dog vendors on the street (laughter). Speaker 1: Is that with the sauerkraut or the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course with the sauerkraut. Speaker 1: No onions? Speaker 2: A hot dog is not a hot dog without the sauerkraut (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, god. That's the one thing about New York City you can never forget. Speaker 2: You know, but I wonder do they have turkey hot dogs now? I'm sure they probably do, because so many people eat them. But again, New York is New York. So, they're not trying to do this L.A. [Los Angeles, California] thing, you know, where you're gonna have turkey and veggie burgers. They probably are still the same old New York, you know, hot dog. Speaker 1: Beef hot dog, right? Where's the beef. Speaker 2: But they were so good back in the day. Speaker 1: I used to love the way--it was like an orchestration. They would take, they would go in there and get the bun and they would--can you describe that orchestration if you remember it? Speaker 2: Yes, I mean, it was loud because they would clink open these metal containers and they'd take out the bun and they'd take it out from another one, they'd open and close it, and then they'd put the hot dog in it, then they ask you what you want and they would, like slop on the mustard and then just pile on, you know, but it was, like you said, it was like a song that they sang and people would wait in line and he would just keep on doing it and doing it and doing it and they were the best hot dogs you've ever tasted in your life. Just tons of stuff. The red relish, you know. They don't do that kind of stuff anymore. You don't find that anywhere, and not the way they, because they had like a stick which they would slop the mustard on. They'd pull it out and they'd slop it on. None of this pump stuff. It was the real deal. That was just like, you know, going to Shea Stadium [New York, New York] or going to, you know, Yankee Stadium [New York, New York], same kind of thing with the hot dog vendors. Speaker 1: I got insulted recently. You know, we have Pink's [Pink's Hot Dogs, Los Angeles, California] here in Los Angeles. Speaker 2: You have-- Speaker 1: Pink's. Speaker 2: What's that? Speaker 1: Hot dogs. Speaker 2: Okay. Is that what that is? Speaker 1: That long line (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I see that. Oh my--you know what? Every, I never understood what that was. That line is always--are they that good? Speaker 1: Well, a lot of people think so. They've been doing it for a long time. Speaker 2: Is it just hot dogs? Speaker 1: It's just hot dogs. They have all kinds of varieties of hot dogs. They have a New York hot dog, and they try to do exactly what you just described a moment ago. Unfortunately, it doesn't have the same taste. Speaker 2: Do they have turkey hot dogs over there? Speaker 1: I believe they do. I believe they do. Speaker 2: I gotta go over there one day. I see that line all the time. I thought it was Mexican (laughter). Speaker 1: It's hot dogs. Speaker 2: Wow. Is that the only place? The one on, was it La Brea [Avenue] or-- Speaker 1: It's on La Brea. To my knowledge, it's the only one-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --it's the only, that I know of. There might be another one around town, but it's always a line, as you say, always a line. Story_ID: 506238 Speaker 1: So you--le- back to your mother, Cynthia Kersey [Cynthia Wallace Kersey]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Where was your mother born at? Speaker 2: In New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Do you know the date when she was born? Speaker 2: Sept- February 21, 1934. Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-four [1934]. In New York City--any particular part of New York City? Speaker 2: Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: She was born in Harlem! God. Harlemites. Okay. What were some of the early thoughts about your mother? What did she do for a living? Speaker 2: She was a school teacher. Speaker 1: School teacher. And what grades did she teach? Speaker 2: She taught all grades. She worked for the New York City Board of Education [New York City Department of Education] and she taught everything from kindergarten through eighth grade over the years. My biggest memory of my mother as a teacher was, do you remember the old rexograph sheets? Before they had copy machines they had this blue thing and that, I mean they were all over our house all the time, because you know, when you work for the New York City Board of Ed, they don't give you anything, you know, and luckily my father [Al Kersey] made the money. So my mom did it because, like she wanted to give back, basically, and so my whole childhood was my mom being a teacher and me and my sister [Lisa Kersey] helping and just being a part, we were part of her career in different ways. You know, whether it was going into the classroom and helping or whatever, but even as a young kid, I remember sitting up there just helping with homework and putting things together and organizing and things like that. Speaker 1: You said board of education. My mother used to call it B-D of E-D. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: She worked for the school system (unclear). When she was a school teacher, did she ever teach you? Did she ever give you lesson? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Never gave you any lessons-- Speaker 2: Not really. No, they had us in good schools and, you know, she just depended on them to teach us. My father taught us, because he made me read the newspaper every single day of my life before I could go out and play, but my mom didn't. Story_ID: 506239 Speaker 1: Your mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] had a very exciting life. She met your hu- her husband, your father [Al Kersey], at--when did she meet him? Speaker 2: My father was her brother's [Franz C. Wallace, Jr.], one of his cronies and nobody wanted my father to date my mother, because my father was a wild man and my mother was a little sweet angel, and what he did, I don't know how they stayed married so long because they were just total opposites, but they loved each other to death and it just worked itself out, and it was funny because my uncle and my father's friendship almost ended over my father marrying my mother. 'Cause they were best friends. You don't marry your best friend's little sister, especially when you like drinking and partying buddies together, you know what I mean? So, yeah, that wasn't pretty (laughter). Speaker 1: Wow. Now, they stayed married for how many years? Speaker 2: Forty-two years. Speaker 1: Forty-two years. And they had how many kids? Speaker 2: Two. Speaker 1: You and-- Speaker 2: Me and my sister. Speaker 1: And her name is-- Speaker 2: Lisa Michelle Kersey [Lisa Kersey]. My father only wanted daughters. Speaker 1: L-I-S-A? Speaker 2: L-I-S-A and then M-I-C-H-E-L-L-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Forty-two years of marriage. Wow, that's a long time. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 506240 Speaker 1: What are some of the memories you had as growing up in Harlem [New York, New York] with your mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] and your father [Al Kersey], and holiday time in particular? Speaker 2: Our house was the party central, so everybody was at our house. My father was the exquisite host, you know. We just always had tons of booze, tons of food, you know, everything was free-flowing. They had a group of friends called the over the hill gang and back in the day, people got together in social clubs that were loosely structured and there were probably about ten couples and we vacationed together, holidays together, everything, so all of us kids grew up together out of all of their friends and we just constantly, our house was busy with people. You know, in New York [New York], in Harlem in those days all the neighbors spoke to each other and got along, so my neighbors used to cook and, you know, my next door neighbors were from Barbados, you know, and they used to make us rice cakes and all of that, so my childhood was amazing. It was absolutely amazing. I just had a great time. We lived in the Riverton [Riverton Houses; Riverton Square, New York, New York], which is kind of the bougie part of Harlem, you know, where Suzanne de Passe was my babysitter. She lived upstairs on the eleventh floor, I lived on the seventh floor. Just, you know, an amazing, amazing time. That was not the Harlem Renaissance in the '60s [1960s], but it was close to it as you could get for us growing up there. A lot of kids came out of that time. But our holidays were great. Santa was always wonderful, you know, Thanksgiving, we grew up with tons of family around, so everybody would congregate at our house, you know, the entire family on both sides. My [maternal] grandparents [Gwendolyn Miller Fieulleteau and Franz C. Wallace, Sr.] were divorced, but they still all came together; so just everybody was at our house. Story_ID: 506241 Speaker 1: Now, your mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey], back to her again, talk about her sister. She have any sisters and brothers? Speaker 2: She had one brother. Speaker 1: Had one, your mother had one brother. And his name? Speaker 2: Is Franz Wallace II [Franz C. Wallace, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Spell Franz please. Speaker 2: F-R-A-N-Z, and Wallace, W-A-L-L-A-C-E. Speaker 1: And this gentleman was a sprinter. He was the one who almost made the team-- Speaker 2: No, that was her father [Franz C. Wallace, Sr.]; this is her brother. Speaker 1: Oh, this is her brother. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, this is Franz Wallace II. Speaker 2: Right. Her father was Franz Wallace. He was the runner. Speaker 1: And she had no sisters. Okay. Your mother, when she was socializing, how about her social life. What did she do? Speaker 2: When her parents divorced, she lived with my grandmother [Gwendolyn Miller Fieulleteau] and my grandmother was a bit kooky. For some reason my mother was always really broke, she told me, and she was too proud to go ask her father, so she like went without winter coats and stuff, bizarre. I still never understood it. You know, my grandfather did really well and, but she just did. She was a really proud West Indian woman, so she sacrificed a lot. Speaker 1: West Indian. There was a West Indian Day Parade in New York City [New York, New York] on a regular basis. Speaker 2: Yeah. Actually, my mom's uncle, my grandmother's brother, is the founder of Carver Federal Savings Bank [Carver Federal Savings and Loan Association; Carver Federal Savings Bank, New York, New York], which is the number one black bank in America now. Speaker 1: His name-- Speaker 2: Is, oh gosh, he's a (unclear)--oh, Miller, George Miller [sic. Walter A. Miller], Miller family. I'm sorry, I had to think for a second. Yeah, so that's kind of my family's legacy, you know, very strong West Indian background, entrepreneurship. Everyone says I got it from him. They said I should have been his daughter, because I'm so much like him. All my family always says you're just like George Miller. Speaker 1: Explain his relationship to you and what he did again. Speaker 2: He was my mom's uncle, my great-uncle, my grandmother's brother. He came to America, he's the one who actually brought all thirteen brothers and sisters over from Panama and Jamaica, and when he came here, he was an entrepreneur and him and three friends got together and started Carver Federal Savings Bank which, you know, black owned, first black-owned bank in New York City and, unfortunately, he died two years after the bank was formed. Speaker 1: So, he never was able to realize-- Speaker 2: Never realized it, I mean, but of course his kids do, my cousins, and everything, who I am very close to, and we've actually had a family battle for many years because they took his picture down out of the board room and, you know, this is part of corporate consolidation. They forget the roots of it, so we had to go back to The New York Times and all the papers and everything because, basically they tried to write us out of our own history sometimes. But, that's the history and it's there and they can't take it away from us, so we're still doing certain battles in court over it. Speaker 1: Wow. Still doing battles. Speaker 2: It's what happens (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you think you'll win? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Do you think you'll win? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. I mean, it's doc--it's everywhere. I mean, you know, when the bank, the data bank opened, it was like the front page of The New York Times. You know, he's all over the place, so, it's just that, it's just part of how when corporations take over businesses like that. You know, it's like they want to forget that a man or men started it you know, and just seems like it's this big corporate enterprise, and it's not. There's a history to everything. Story_ID: 506242 Speaker 1: Now I had the pleasure of meeting your mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey], and she was a little short lady, a little lady-- Speaker 2: Petite lady. Speaker 1: Petite lady (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lady, though. Speaker 1: Talk about her physical dimensions and what that was for her. Speaker 2: She was petite. She was 5'1", and I don't think she ever weighed more than 105 pounds, but she was a lady, lady. She wouldn't walk out of the house without her makeup and just everything together. I don't even know if my father [Al Kersey] ever saw her not looking perfect, together. You know, it seems like she got out of bed just looking wonderful, and she taught me that, you know, to always look good even if you, you know, are walking down the street. I just, I never, ever remember my mother looking bummy, never, which is amazing when you think about it because, you know, we all go to the gym and work out and look, no--my mother had on makeup until the day she died. The day she died, yeah, which is a great legacy to leave your kids, you know, 'cause I never even realized it until afterwards when they were doing her eulogy and the minister was talking about what a lady she was and how together she was, and I said, wow. She always taught me about being a strong, proud West Indian; and she truly, truly embodied that. Speaker 1: Strong, proud West Indian. Story_ID: 506243 Speaker 1: It's interesting when you talk about West Indian culture because, again, being black, we all came from the same roots, that being Africa, except that the boat stopped over there for some people and some--the boat came this way for other people. There's a very uniqueness about West Indians and Jamaicans. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. I mean, we've, on that side of the family we've gone back to two generations before my [maternal] grandmother [Gwendolyn Miller Fieulleteau] and some of my cousins, I can't even get. I mean, they are just really--oh, what's the word for it?--I hate to say arrogant but they're just really strong in who they are, you know what I mean? Like I think probably a lot of black Americans get put off by that, but it's about a pride that they have. And I grew up with that. I mean, my grandparents, my [maternal] grandfather [Franz C. Wallace, Sr.] was from Jamaica. He was very, very snooty. He was, talked about high yellow people and that whole generation, and until the day he died too, he was in the baker's union, and when he retired, they kept him on. He was an editor. That's where I get my writing skills from. He edited the New York bakery union's newsletter for like forty years, and they kept him as a board member after he retired, which was never done in history before. Just a proud, proud black man, but from Jamaica. Speaker 1: Yes, a lot of people I know as African Americans, who are top achievers come from that part of the world. Speaker 2: Well, absolutely. Look, and you know what? I just always wish my mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] had lived another year. She would have seen Sidney Poitier at the opening night of the film festival [Hollywood Black Film Festival], and my mother, I think he was probably the most important person that she did not know ever. She just loved him because of where he came from, and she could relate to that. Story_ID: 506244 Speaker 1: Yes, I did have the pleasure of meeting your mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey]. What a lady, what a lady. And, you know you said she always wore makeup--here in California, you live in Beverly Hills [California]. Folks down here, this is California. You just put any old thing on and go to the garbage can. In New York City [New York, New York], to go to the garbage can, you get dressed up to get the garbage out. Speaker 2: It's totally different. Totally--I mean, I remember when my father [Al Kersey] first came out here and we went downtown and he just couldn't believe it. He said, "People going to work without socks on." I mean, that was a big thing. He went back home and he talked about that and cracked jokes on that for years to come because, you know, he lived down, he worked down on Church Street, right across from the World Trade Center [New York, New York], you know, so his whole life was seeing men in suits and socks and all of that. He just couldn't believe that people went to work without socks or without ties. Yeah. It's very different East Coast than West Coast. Speaker 1: Where did your mother go to college at? Speaker 2: She went to Hunter [Hunter College], in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: On 68th Street and Park Avenue? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Lexington [Avenue]. Speaker 2: Lexington, yeah. Hunter. Yup. Speaker 1: So, she's a graduate of Hunter College. Did she do any further studies? Speaker 2: Besides her B.A.? Speaker 1: Beside the B.A.? Speaker 2: No, because she got married and started teaching. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Always wanted to go, but she never did. Never needed it. She ended up doing twenty-five years in New York City Board of Education [New York City Department of Education], or more. Speaker 1: And her degree was in-- Speaker 2: Teaching. Speaker 1: Just plain teaching. No specific science like we have today? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Hunter College. Yeah, I remember that down on 68th Street and Lexington Avenue. Yeah. Boy, she, like you say, she was a classy lady because, again, you didn't see, at that time, in that part of the city, I know that a lot of blacks didn't go to Hunter College. Speaker 2: No. But that was because of her parents [Gwendolyn Miller Fieulleteau and Franz C. Wallace, Sr.]. You know, that proud West Indian thing. You know, you don't tell them that they can't do something. You send your kids to where you want them to go, and that's just how it was. Speaker 1: Yes, Hunter College was more for the upscale, white persons who went to school, I guess. It was in a nice part of town anyway. Speaker 2: And she did that with my sister [Lisa Kersey], too, because my sister went to Ethical Culture [Ethical Culture Fieldston School], which is up on the Upper West Side [New York, New York], which, you know, is like one of the most exclusive schools in New York City, and so it carried through from parents to parents and to kids--me, no, I went to school [P.S. 41 Greenwich Village School] in Greenwich Village [New York, New York], because I wasn't having the private school thing, but they tried to do that. You know, they just thought that it was to get a good education; and I realize now that that's come through the generations because I did it to my kids [Monique Kersey-Love and Brittany Kersey-Love] too. Story_ID: 506245 Speaker 1: Tanya [HistoryMaker Tanya-Monique Kersey], I, I don't want to belabor the point, but we're just going to talk about this for just a moment--the loss of your mother. Can you talk about the incidents that happened leading up to that and (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was diagnosed with stomach cancer in 2004--2003, I guess it was, in May. They told her she would live for three months. She, being the strong Christian woman she was, decided that wasn't going to happen. Ended up living eighteen months, actually, but because of the diagnosis, we had our first ever family reunion, probably the first and last. Literally in three weeks the family got together and all met down in Florida for a family reunion. I had never even met half of my cousins before, so my mother pulled all of that together, because of her, because so many people loved her and we moved here to Beverly Hills [California] right around that time so we'd be close to Cedar Sinai [Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California] as well, and you know, just was there every day for her and watched her leave this earth. It's really weird, because talking about being proud in who you are, even to the last minute when she couldn't do anything for herself, go to the bathroom, anything, she still, you could see the pride in her eyes. When they came in to change her, she would not have it. She would not have it. She'd cover up herself. It was the amazing thing. I couldn't believe it. Right before she died, she said to me and my sister [Lisa Kersey], she said, "God didn't answer my prayers." I said, "What are you talking about?" She says, "Well, you know, I've been a good faithful Christian and I prayed that God would save me and spare me, and I prayed for a miracle," she said. "He didn't give me my miracle." I said, "Ma, yeah, he did. They told you that you would live three months and you lived eighteen months. That was your miracle." And when she, when we said that, a look came over in her eyes and she literally passed away like two or three weeks later. I think she was holding out for her miracle and when she realized she already had it, she could let go. But she didn't want to leave, because she wanted to be here for me and my sister and for the grandkids, since my father had already died she wanted--did I grow up--my grandparents, my first grandparent died the year before my father and I was in my thirties. My kids know their great-grandparents, so she wanted them to have that experience, and that's a hard thing when you have kids, not for them to have grandparents when you had them. You know what I mean? Because you want them to have that experience. Grandparents are great. Speaker 1: I witnessed the fact that you're able to talk with your daughters [Monique Kersey-Love and Brittany Kersey-Love] a little later, but I witnessed the fact that as they were growing up, because of the physical size of your mother, they were as tall, and they'd exceed her in height and they always had a love. She always was like a magnet. She just drew people in. Those of us who were friends with you who knew your mother, where if you knew Tanya, you knew Tanya's mother. Speaker 2: Yeah. She was a granny to everybody, yeah. I mean, I had friends that freaked out when my mother died. I didn't realize, but you know when my father died too. You know, through my Infotainment Conference and when I think I had written something about it in the paper, people were calling me from all over the country talking about my father. I was like, you're kidding me. I couldn't believe it. People were coming to my, would come to my house when my parents were in town to see my parents. Stop by my house and I used to get mad, you know. It's like they would be at the door and I'm like, "What are you doing here?" "Oh, I came to see Al [Al Kersey] and Cynthia [Cynthia Wallace Kersey]." I was like, okay. You know, so yeah, they had that effect on people, which is a good thing. Speaker 1: Yeah, a special lady. I'll never, ever forget her. Mothers, as we, we all, I lost mine [Mosetta Smalls] two years ago. Speaker 2: I remember. Speaker 1: And losing your mother is, by far, that's the lady who brought you here. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's very traumatic, you know. I think you block it out though at first. Didn't you like, you almost, it takes time to kind of come around and to understand it all, you know, because even when you're older it's such a profound loss because, like now I find myself when I was cleaning out her stuff, she had saved everything from my entire life. I found things, you know, my first tooth. I was blown away. But now, with my kids I noticed when my parents were alive, I would save everything and send it to them. Just because I knew that they're grandparents were there, and they would ooh and aah over it and, you know, and that's probably the biggest loss is not having somebody to send that stuff to. You know, my daughter just graduated from high school. Besides sending it to my sister, I didn't have those parents to send pictures and that's a big thing, I think. It's probably the biggest loss. Someone to think, they really keep track of the history. You know, so I basically took every--I couldn't believe the stuff my mother kept. She had my entire life documented and I took all that stuff. It's sitting in a closet now. She took great care of it. She was a great steward of it. Me, I don't know what to do with it, because that was her job. You know what I mean, I expected her to be around documenting it longer, so now I have to figure out what to do with it all. I mean, every diploma, every award, every picture, every everything. That's amazing. Story_ID: 506246 Speaker 1: Back to your mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey], and (unclear) would you talk about a surprise party that you gave her one time? Speaker 2: This was for, let's see, wow, I can't even think. This was in 2004, so she--it would have been her seventy , no, it was her seventy-first birthday and she had already lived seven months past, you know, the three months that she was supposed to live, and first what we did was we had our first family reunion, so we all met down in Florida, first time ever. All the West Indians from Barbados and Trinidad and Jamaica and all over the world met down there, for my mother. Everybody wanted to do as much as they could before she went, and then so her birthday was coming up and she had not seen my, her brother [Franz C. Wallace, Jr.] and everybody and we just wanted to do something special, so I got her best friend, my godmother, to fly in, got her brother and his son to fly in, and my girlfriend, Lisa Wayans, had all my friends to surprise her, and she was absolutely positively shocked. My sister [Lisa Kersey] came out, my niece [Cayla Jones] came out, you know, just the whole thing. She just was blown away. It was something my father [Al Kersey] would have done, you know. But it was amazing. Everybody came. You were there. You know, just all of my friends, everyone just came to honor her on her birthday and it was great. Speaker 1: The food was great. Speaker 2: We had the food catered and everything, and then she turned around three weeks later and surprised me with a surprise party at my place. I'm walking down the stairs thinking I'm going out with my girlfriends and everyone yelled surprise. I had never been surprised in my life until that point. I couldn't believe she did that. I don't know what possessed her to do that. That was kind of out of character for her, but I think she wanted to do it because we had so surprised her. I will never forget that. That was great. And we sat up in the dining room late at night just talking and laughing. She had it catered again, we had great food, the whole bit. She was something else. Speaker 1: Are there any plans? Have you thought about maybe doing some kind of a testimony to her or some kind of a reward or something that-- Speaker 2: Well, at the church that she belonged to, she donated like $15,000 worth of books and tapes, and so they are building a library and her name will be on it as well. So I'll be down there when they do that, and she donated basically most of the materials for the library. Speaker 1: What church was this? Speaker 2: New Covenant [New Covenant United Methodist Church, The Villages, Florida] in Lady Lake, Florida. Speaker 1: Lady Lake? Speaker 2: No, it's in Leesburg [sic.], L-E-E-S-B-U-R-G, Leesburg, Florida. Speaker 1: Will have a library named after her. Speaker 2: A portion of the library, like the research section of the library. It's a New Covenant library and then they'll have, like, you know, the room. You know what I'm saying? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: One of the areas named after her (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. What a woman, boy. She did a lot of things for us, her presence, she gave us you; lot of things. Story_ID: 506247 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father. Speaker 2: Oh, Lord (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ah, your father. Let's talk about Mr. Kersey. What is his name, please? Speaker 2: Al Smith Kersey [Al Kersey]. Speaker 1: Is that Allen or just Al? Speaker 2: Al, A-L. Smith, S-M-I-T-H. Kersey. And everyone just called him Smitty, S-M-I-T-T-Y. Speaker 1: Where was he born at? Speaker 2: He was born at, you know, I didn't find out where he was born until he died. He was born in Warrenton, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Warrenton? Speaker 2: W-A-R-R-E-N-T-O-N. I didn't know where he was born, I didn't who his father's name [Roosevelt Danles] was. I did not know anything, until his death certificate came over. Even my mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] didn't know. Speaker 1: When was he born? Speaker 2: He was born April 22, 1932. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did he do as a young man? Where did he go to school at? Where did he grow up at? Speaker 2: He just made it through life. You know, my grandmother [Peggy Epps] had, he was illegitimate. My grandmother was half Cherokee Indian [Native American]. She was just young. She was seventeen and when she was a kid she was sitting out in the cotton fields and one day her mom just picked up and walked and never came back, and left her and her two sisters. So, she had a hard upbringing, and she didn't know how to raise a child. So, she left my father down in North Carolina, to be raised by family and they treated him horrible. He had an attitude about that for his entire life. They treated him like he was the dark sheep in the family. He barely got to eat. He got the scraps off the table. He was always in trouble. They were so thankful that he finally graduated from high school and they basically told him he would never be anything, so he had a really, really hard childhood and my grandmother was not there for him and so he went into the [U.S. military] service . That was the only way that he could try to make something of himself, and I literally have pictures that he sent and letters that he sent when he was aboard, but he was so angry because of his upbringing that when he got into the service, he just was intolerable so he spent most of his time in the brigs with bread and water (laughter). He always talked about that. He was an angry black man, you know, and he finally out of the service and moved to New York [New York] and that's when him and my uncle [Franz C. Miller, Jr.] became friends and he met my mom, but nobody ever thought my father would amount to anything, and he ended up being the epitome of the George Jefferson success story. He went from nothing to having everything. So, he was an amazing man, you know, and I didn't find out the story of his life until much later on in life and me and my sister [Lisa Kersey] were in tears, 'cause that's your father and to know that your father felt that much pain as a child is horrible, but yet (unclear). I never understood why he was so mean to his mother, and then I understood. Because she deserted him. Speaker 1: Wow. So he was in the [U.S.] Navy in the brig a lot, huh? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How many years did he serve in the Navy? Speaker 2: Just what he had to and got out (laughter). Speaker 1: Didn't like the Navy much, huh? Speaker 2: No, no-no-no-no-no. Speaker 1: Didn't say, "Go Navy," huh? Speaker 2: No. He wanted to come to New York to make something of himself and prove everybody wrong, and he did. Story_ID: 506248 Speaker 1: Now, what is your grandmo- what is his mother's name? Speaker 2: Her name is Peggy Epps. I call her the gun-toting grandma. Speaker 1: Peggy, P-E-G-G-I-E [sic.] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Y. Speaker 1: Oh, Y, okay. Speaker 2: E-P-P-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And you call her the-- Speaker 2: The gun-toting grandma (laughter). She was a barmaid in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], and she could pistol-whip you in a second if you mess with her. Speaker 1: She really carried a gun? Speaker 2: Let me tell you, to this day my grandmother is straight up, got that whole South Bronx barmaid attitude. She is a tough, tough lady. She could tell you stories about the people that she used to run with and gangster types and all that kind of stuff. She, she's the-- Speaker 1: Now obviously, even though she did your father [Al Kersey] wrong, she had a relationship with you. Speaker 2: Actually no. I did not speak to my grandmother until I was seven years old. I would be at her house. I hated her guts. I never knew what it was, and then I found out that when I was three years old she was--no, when I was two, she was babysitting me and I wanted to wear a dress and she wouldn't let me wear that dress. From that day on, I did not speak to her. I hated her guts (laughter), and my grandmother would cry every time we would come over, because her first grandchild wanted nothing to do with her. I would be in her house, but poker face. She would come to hug me, I would push away, I mean, the whole thing. At seven years old, I finally broke. Speaker 1: Is she still alive? Speaker 2: Yes, she is. Speaker 1: She's still alive. How old is she? Speaker 2: She's ninety-three, ninety-four. Speaker 1: Wow. And she's living where? Speaker 2: In Yonkers [New York]. Speaker 1: Yonkers? Okay. Interesting. Have you talked to her lately? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Every time I talk to her, she says, "How are those bad kids?" She's old school. She's so old school. And you know, when, years ago I could deal with it. Now, it's just like you gotta come up off that. You know, it's beat those kids. Knock 'em up side of the head. Very old school way of being. So yeah, but we talk. Story_ID: 506249 Speaker 1: You know, sometimes people are opinionated about the way that we were raised back in the day. Didn't hurt--it didn't hurt you. It didn't hurt me. Speaker 2: No, but I was never whopped, believe it or not. I used to always think I was whipped, because once my father beat me so bad he scared me to death. My mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] said that was the only day I was every whipped in my life, but I remembered that so when people talk about being spanked, I would say, yeah, my father used to spank me all the time. My father spanked me one time (laughter). But that one time made a difference. Speaker 1: And I think that's, as a father myself, I know sometimes, I only had to spank my children once, but the threat, when I was, if they know that if they ever don't do what I told them to do, they'll behave themselves. Speaker 2: I think for me, because I remember what had happened, I just thought he was gonna kill me. That wasn't a fear of being whipped, it was a fear of dying (laughter). Speaker 1: I mean, literally of dying. He had me with his hands around my neck. He was gonna kill me. Speaker 2: Smitty [Al Kersey] had his hands around your throat? Speaker 1: One time he beat me. He sat on top--because I stole money from him. (Laughter) I was like twelve maybe and, like over the weekend I went and kept going into his wallet and on his dresser and taking money. So come Monday, in school in Greenwich Village [New York, New York], went to school, cut school, took all my money with my friends and went out to Brooklyn [New York] to Prospect Park and hung out, and when I got home that was it. It was on. And he wanted to know where that money was. He was going to tear me to bits to find that money, and he literally was going to kill me. I was never fearful of him really af- --I guess intuitively I knew that it was because of what I had done, but yeah, it was frightening. Speaker 2: You was cruising for a bruising when you did that. Speaker 1: I was. But I was, I was a tough kid. Story_ID: 506250 Speaker 1: How about her husband? Peggy's [Peggy Epps] husband. Your grandfather. Speaker 2: I did not kn- never knew my father's father because he was illegitimate and my grandmother only knew his name, and I didn't find out his name until my father [Al Kersey] died-- Speaker 1: Which is-- Speaker 2: --which is Roosevelt Danles. Know nothing about him, my grandmother knew nothing about him after she had my father. My grandmother's, I don't even know what my grandmother's maiden name is. I could ask her. Epps was her married name. She married Johnny Epps [John Epps]. I grew up thinking that Johnny Epps was my father's father. He wasn't. It was just that he was a stepfather and he was my father's sister's [Lucille Epps Varner] father. He was, you know, his sister's father. Speaker 1: So Roosevelt Danles, D-A-N-L-E-S, was your, was Peggy's second husband? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Never married him. Speaker 1: Oh, illegitimate. Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother [sic. father] was illegitimate by him. But Johnny Epps, that's what her last name is, was her husband they had my aunt. Speaker 1: Interesting. The little small details about that--extract them. Speaker 2: Well, 'cause, you know, I started interviewing my grandmother to write a book about my family because I just thought it was interesting, you know. One-half coming from being immigrants to the country and, you know, being successful between my [maternal] grandfather [Franz C. Wallace, Sr.] running track and my great uncle [Walter A. Miller] with the bank [Carver Federal Savings and Loan Association; Carver Federal Savings Bank, New York, New York] and all of that. You know, I've got a cousin who's an internationally known artist and, you know, just all of that kind of stuff, and then my father's side was totally different. I just thought it was an interesting story to tell, because it was going to end up with me. You know, everybody wants to write their story. Speaker 1: So, Peggy, who did she eventually marry? Speaker 2: Johnny Epps. Speaker 1: Johnny Epps. J-O-H-- Speaker 2: N-N-Y. Speaker 1: Epps, E-P-P-S. Speaker 2: E-P-P-S, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Mr. Epps, is he still living? Speaker 2: No, he died. Speaker 1: Okay, deceased. Speaker 2: He died, actually, in maybe 19- he died a couple years before my father. My father was so mad because he had to pay for the funeral and he said that man never did anything for him. He was an angry black man. I mean, he was great fun. You know, you knew him. He was a cross between George Jefferson, Richard Pryor, and Bill Cosby, all put together. He was crazy, he was wild, a party man, but angry still. Speaker 1: (Laughter) I love the way you describe your father (laughter). Speaker 2: No, he was crazy. I mean, I partied with my father. My father, when we were-- Story_ID: 506251 Speaker 1: We're talking about Smitty [Al Kersey], your father. [U.S.] Navy man. Fiery black man. Mad at the world. But he met this lady and she--did, do you think your mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] cooled him out? Speaker 2: Oh, no. No. I think that he was exciting to her because she lived a very humdrum life. You know, she was your librarian type. She was the sweet--she didn't drink, she didn't smoke, she didn't do that--my father did everything. He used to drink, he smoked, partied. When I was growing up, I knew when my father partied because I would wake up and he'd be sleeping in the bathtub (laughter). He would go get wasted and sleep in the bathtub. And my mother, you know, they just had this that they loved each other. That was the bottom line, you know. He used to joke about her and he was the king of the castle. He was the man of the house, you know, talked about my mother, but on Christmas, man, that woman made out like a fat rat. He would go, he would buy her everything. I mean, he did everything for my mother, and for me and my sister [Lisa Kersey]. He always wanted girls to dote on and he doted on the three of us his entire life. There was nothing that I ever, ever wanted. We did family vacations together, my mom was a counselor in the summer, we went to family camp. My father would come up every weekend. We'd be in a little villa together. We used to vacation; I mean, you know, we had a house down in Wildwood [New Jersey]. We'd be up in Nantucket [Massachusetts]. You know, then they bought a time share in the '80s [1980s]. We went every Christmas. We went to the Poconos [Pocono Mountains]. We went to Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida]. He loved his family. And he did everything. Maybe it's because he didn't have that when he was growing up, but I mean, I went everywhere. I did everything. And even when I was grown and I had kids [Monique Kersey-Love and Brittany Kersey-Love], my kids spent four summers in a row with my parents. All the videotape footage I have with my kids is with my parents. You know, they raised my niece [Cayla Jones]. My father loved his girls, loved his family. You know, that's a great memory to have when you think about it. I mean, how many kids camped with their father every summer, yeah; or vacation with their parents? Partied with their parents. Story_ID: 506252 Speaker 1: Now I'm trying to place in my mind exactly where you guys were at that time in life where he and your mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] were married and then you came along. Were--you were living in Harlem [New York, New York] at that time. Speaker 2: We're living in Harlem in the Riverton [Riverton Houses; Riverton Square, New York, New York] Speaker 1: In the Riverton, okay. Speaker 2: And had us back to back; we're two years apart, me and my sister. And she was done after that. Speaker 1: And your sister's name is? Speaker 2: Lisa Michelle [Lisa Kersey] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You told me that before. Speaker 2: Because my parents had me about four years after they got married. They got married in '57 [1957], and they had me in '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-one [1961], hmm. Tanya [HistoryMaker Tanya-Monique Kersey] born four years after marriage. 'Cause being in Harlem and being a man, I can remember the many things you could do, the many places you could go. There's Snookie's Sugar Bowl [New York, New York] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my father [Al Kersey]-- Speaker 1: Smalls Paradise [Harlem, New York]. Speaker 2: Small's Paradise. My father was out there. I mean, even when I was young my father was at the bar. I was around the corner and my mother would say, "Go get some money from your father." I knew right where to go. Go around the corner to the bar. He wasn't alcoholic or anything like that. He, this is just what they did, you know, and it's funny because they knew how to drink responsibly back then. You know, they would go have their drink, get a little bit lit, have fun, and they'd go home. They didn't go out with somebody else. They came home to his family, you know? I mean, it was amazing. Speaker 1: What did your father ever tell you about your mother? Speaker 2: He just joked about my mother so bad, constantly. Just talked about her like a dog, but in love and funny, you know, because he adored her. I mean, he would tell me, you know, how they first got married and she boiled hot dogs in a teapot and he knew he was in trouble and that's when he learned how to cook. My father cooked every Sunday for as long as I remember in my life and everybody would come to our house on Sunday. He was an amazing chef, but every Sunday he said he had to learn how to cook; otherwise, he wouldn't eat. It wasn't that my mother couldn't cook. It was just that he was a jokester, you know. Speaker 1: What were his specialties? Speaker 2: Oh, god. Spaghetti, steak and potatoes, you know, my father, he was just, anything, I mean, you know, bread pudding he taught me how to make and he taught me how to make it with the layers and, you know, he thought he was a connoisseur, you know. Everything was a big deal. He spent hundreds of dollars on his knife sets and his pots and pans and he just did everything really, really classy. When we moved to New Jersey, he had built, he grew a garden and got all of our vegetables from the garden. He'd be out there all day long and we'd have lettuce and tomatoes and all of that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Would you say that your father is a role model for men (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh absolutely, absolutely. And guys, like my friends and when I got older, my friends' husbands, and my first cousin, his nephew. When he died, my nephew was about forty. He could not stop crying at the funeral. He got up and talked, him and his brother, and they both said, 'cause their father was not like my father. They said, "This was my father. This was the man who was a role model for me," and they both talked about the earliest memories of my father. It blew me away. Speaker 1: Being your father, you being a girl, he set a standard very high for you, didn't he? Speaker 2: Extremely. Very. Speaker 1: I've seen the love that he had for you. Speaker 2: And the one big thing was you couldn't be fat. You remember him. He was lean as can be. You couldn't be fat in my family, unh-uh. He just was not having it. It was just certain things you had to accomplish. You didn't even have a choice. I just never, I never thought that I could fail, because it wasn't part of the equation. It wasn't that it was pressure filled or anything. It was just what it was. He set an example by his life; and we just knew that we had to do better. Story_ID: 506253 Speaker 1: Now there came a point in time where your mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] and father left New York City [New York, New York] and went to Florida. What timeframe was that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they actually went to move to New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay, New Jersey. Speaker 2: When I was twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. So they moved to New Jersey first (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because my father wanted to do just like George Jefferson moved into the Upper West Side [New York, New York], my father moved us to an all-white town in suburbia, New Jersey. Speaker 1: What time was that? Speaker 2: Called Haworth [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Spell that. Speaker 2: H-A-W-O-R-T-H. And our claim to fame was Stanley Turrentine was our neighbor and Rudolph Isley and his family lived there, so I grew up with the Isleys there. Those are very small, like Brentwood [Los Angeles, California]. Had a country club called White Beeches [White Beeches Golf and Country Club, Haworth, New Jersey]. You had to prove your ancestral background to be a member of that. My father was the first black man to ever step foot in there as a guest. He was that kind of person. Our town was all white. He ran for city council. He was not going to let anything ever keep him down, and all the neighbors loved him, everybody gravitated to our house. The kids would come by saying, "Where's Mr. Smitty? Where's Mr. Al [Al Kersey]?" He was just that kind of a person. You know, he definitely garnered respect in every way. He had friends of all races and colors. You know, he was always kind of the helping hand neighbor that was always there to help you and do things and, you know, Mr. Fix-it with the tool belt on, and Mr. Gardener with a gardening hat on sitting outside watching the garden with a BB gun, making sure the squirrels wouldn't come, and he would shoot them (laughter). He was a nut. He was an absolute nut. Speaker 1: And you said one of your neighbors was Stanley--who was that? Speaker 2: Stanley Turrentine and Rudolph Isley. Speaker 1: Turrentine. Speaker 2: And then later, Brooke Shields moved in. Speaker 1: Brooke Shields? Speaker 2: Um-hm. That's where she grew up. A small town, 2,500 people. Speaker 1: Wow. And not a large black community there? Speaker 2: Only about five black families. Speaker 1: Five black families. Hmm. And you went to school there at that time? Speaker 2: And my father, I did not want to go because I went to school in Greenwich Village [New York, New York], you know, which is very multicultural and very diverse and I moved out to white man's land, you know, and it was difficult because they were not used to black people like me. There was one other black girl that was my age in my class, and then there was Stanley Turrentine's daughters, you know, they were kind of on the outside, well, because they travelled so much and they were also between Stanley and Shirley Scott, so they weren't in school as much, but they were used to the other little black girl because she grew up and so she was, had assimilated. I was from New York City. I was not assimilated into the suburban white world, so I kind of was a shock to them and they took, I probably never acclimated myself to it. I was always a rebel. I was just like my father, actually, but just in a different way. I ended up being a rebel there. But, I was president of the class in high school [Northern Valley Regional High School at Demarest, Demarest, New Jersey], I was a varsity cheerleader, so, even though I had all those problems, I still excelled. Speaker 1: So you stayed in Haworth, New Jersey? That's H-A-W-O-R-T-H. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: For, from the age of twelve until what time? Speaker 2: Until I went to college [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Until you went to college. Story_ID: 506254 Speaker 1: And then, what did your parents do then? Speaker 2: My father [Al Kersey] was the chief investigator for the EEOC, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. He worked for Clarence Thomas in New York City [New York, New York], 12 Church Street. My mom [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] was a teacher. Speaker 1: Now [U.S.] Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And my father actually retired when he was on trial, because he said he didn't want to be called, so he took an early retirement. Speaker 1: Please tell us that story. Speaker 2: Yeah, he worked for Clarence Thomas, and what he did was when you had a claim of discrimination, my father was the head investigator, so he trained people all over the country and he worked under Clarence and when Clarence went on trial, a lot of those people testifying were people who my father worked with, and he was just sick of it. He just said, "I gotta get out of here," and he literally came home one day and told my mother he was taking early retirement, and my parents, made my mother quit her job, all within a week's span, and sold their house a week later. Had no place to live for a year. Went down to Florida and lived between family, friends, and hotels and built a brand new house down there. But all because of Clarence Thomas (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, the trial was when he was-- Speaker 2: Long Dong Silver. Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Anita Hill. Speaker 1: Right. He was trying to get on the Supreme Court. And he said, your father said, "I don't want to be called." Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Interesting, interesting. Obviously did your father keep a relationship with the justice after-- Speaker 2: I don't know. He never told me. Didn't even ask. He just said he knew some stuff. That's all he said. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Wouldn't tell me. Speaker 1: Clarence Thomas, interesting, interesting. Story_ID: 506255 Speaker 1: Okay, so now your father [Al Kersey]--the family has now leave, left New Jersey and now moved to Florida. Speaker 2: And they lived with family for a while. Well, they sold everything. All the furniture that they had, if they didn't sell it, they shipped it out here to me and my sister [Lisa Kersey]. So they basically went to Florida with nothing. They didn't even have towels. The only thing my father kept were his pots, his pans, and his knives and his tools. Speaker 1: He's a cook. Speaker 2: And a gardener guide. And my mom [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] kept, they kept their clothes. Everything else was gone. And they went and they lived with their nephew for a while, they lived with my mother's brother [Franz C. Wallace, Jr.] for a while, they lived in hotels for a while, and they built their dream house down in Florida. Speaker 1: What part of Florida? Speaker 2: First they moved to Jacksonville [Florida] and the house was just too big for them. They lived on a lake. They named the boat after my kids [Monique Kersey-Love and Brittany Kersey-Love] and a couple years later they sold that and built the house on a golf course in Central Florida (laughter) and two days after they moved in, my father dropped dead. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Never sick a day in his life. Never remember him taking a Tylenol. He just dropped dead out of the clear blue. My mother was out, shopping for furniture, came home, my father was dead in the garage. An out-of-body experience. He was sixty-six years old. He was young. But it's funny because now that I think about it and everybody told me this at the time. They said, "Your father would have never been happy being old." And I could never picture my father being old. So, I just think that he wanted to go out where he was in life. You know what I mean? Speaker 1: Now, the city he died in what city was that? Speaker 2: Lady Lake, Florida. Speaker 1: Lady--? Speaker 2: Lady Lake. Speaker 1: One word or two words? Speaker 2: Two words. Speaker 1: Lady Lake, Florida. And he had a home down there. Speaker 2: Just built it, two days old. Story_ID: 506256 Speaker 1: How do you remember your father [Al Kersey]? Speaker 2: He was a great dad, you know. He was one of those fathers who wouldn't tell you how proud he was. You found out from everybody else. He was a big show-off. You always knew to ask him for money in front of people because he'd give you a whole bank roll. You know, he was out there to make a statement to the world. Speaker 1: I remember the support that your father always gave you because of what you were doing in Hollywood. Talk about that. Speaker 2: He would come out here when I did the Infotainment Conference and I've never seen him more proud in my life. I mean, he was tickled pink when I got my office over there on Centinela [Avenue]. He would wake up every morning and walk over to the office. I had to, of course, get him his own set of keys. He'd be in the office before anybody else and he'd call me and say, "Where are you? It's nine o'clock. You're supposed to be in the office." He would start answering the phones. He took over. I mean, literally took over. When I did that conference, he was running the show. He was just very proud that I had done something like that and he just was so supportive, it was incredible. Speaker 1: I remember doing the conferences and he was there, everywhere. He helped (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He ran the thing. And that's why I said when he died, everybody kept calling me. Because he had met all of those hundreds of people. You know, people were sending me messages saying, "Oh, my God. I love Smitty," and I was like who are you? You know, but they all knew him because he was such a big mouth, you know. I mean, that was the thing. He was loud. He made himself known. He was boisterous. He was funny. But, yeah. He was just really proud that I had gotten my own office and, you know, 'cause he knew from where he came and that he raised daughters because I never wanted to go to college. I wanted to be an actress and a model. My father told me, "You're going to get out of the house if you don't go to college," and so I literally got into Rutgers Mason Gross [Mason Gross School of the Arts, New Brunswick, New Jersey] at the very last minute. I told my father if I couldn't come out to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and be an actress, I wasn't going to go, and at the last minute he made me go, and so I did go. Speaker 1: Were you aiming to get your mother [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] and father buried together? Speaker 2: My father was. He went into the plot. He made his, he had everything written down (laughter). It was so weird. We went into his safe deposit box. He had literally a letter to me, my mother, and my sister [Lisa Kersey]. It sounded just like him. I still have it. You know, don't be fighting over nothing, do this, do that, basically telling us all what to do. He said, "I want you guys to party, don't be mourning me, don't do this, don't waste your money on a burial plot." He want to be cremated and sent somewhere down in South Florida to where the veterans are buried. Don't even know where he is. And my mother, we did the same thing. They actually Fed-Exed his remains down to the place. All I have is, someplace I have a piece of paper that says where he and her are, but I mean, that's not them. That's their ashes. So I know a lot of people like my [paternal] grandmother [Peggy Epps] were very upset. "What do you mean there's no plot," and all that--"Where is he? Where's my son." I don't know where he is. My mother was the same way. She was like, "I don't know where he is." I said, "Mom, where's Dad?" "I don't know." And that's how he lived his life. And that's how he wanted to be. He didn't want anybody sitting at a plot looking at--crying or anything, so that's where they are. Story_ID: 506257 Speaker 1: Your father [Al Kersey], talk about some of the memories you had of your father, what, what--like your summers. What did you guys do for the summers? Speaker 2: Summers we went to either Wildwood [New Jersey], where we had a house about five blocks from the beach. We went deep sea fishing, went fishing for blues. If you know anything about fishing for blues, those are fish that fight, I mean that's what you call game fishing and you go on a boat, and you can't have a lot of people on the boat because the lines get tangled and my father always said, "I'm not taking you girls fishing for no blues." And, I wanted to get into the, you know, they do the pot thing where you put your money in and everything, he's like, "I not gonna put money in." Well, didn't you know I caught the biggest fish on the boat? Had everybody's lines tangled. My father was running around the boat saying, "Lines tangled, lines tangled. That's my daughter, that's my daughter." He was untangling lines to get my fish, so proud that I went fishing with him and could fish. And then he took me going for these other kind of fish. I caught seventy-two of them. Those are the fish that are so stupid, they just see the worm and they just all go. But, yeah, we used to go fishing all the time, went to the beach, went to the boardwalk, had a house in Nantucket [Massachusetts] that we would go to, Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], we'd go to. He'd take us out picking berries to make wine and jam. You know, he just did things. We did lots of sight-seeing, you know, rode horses, in the winter went skiing. We had a time share up in the Poconos [Pocono Mountains] and then my father was a golfer. That's probably the most important thing in his life, next to his wife [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] and kids. And, that's when he needed sons, because me and my sister [Lisa Kersey], we revolted after about two years. He would take us out to the golf course and get mad at us because we weren't hitting the balls right. We were like sixteen years old. He was yelling, "You're slicing it to the left, you're slicing it to the right." And then the ball would go in the water and he'd try to make us go in and get it, and he was horrible to us with that golf thing (laughter). I consider myself a golf orphan. I don't even want to look at a golf club, because my life revolved around golf with him for many years. Yeah. He was a character. Speaker 1: He was a character. Now, you said the boardwalk are you talking about Atlantic City [New Jersey] or are you talking about Coney Island [New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Atlantic City, well no, Wildwood. Speaker 1: Oh, Wildwood. Speaker 2: Atlantic City wasn't even gambling and all that then. You know, this is in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, this is before Atlantic City was Atlantic City. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We used to go down to the shore. There were other parts, the Asbury Park [New Jersey], and stuff like that by the shore. Story_ID: 506258 Speaker 1: Now, you grew up in New York City [New York, New York]. What hi- what elementary school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to St. Benedict's [St. Benedict School, Bronx, New York]. Speaker 1: Which is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Catholic. Speaker 1: Catholic school. Speaker 2: And then I went to P.S. 41 [P.S. 41 Greenwich Village School] down in Greenwich Village [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Now you were living in Harlem [New York, New York] but you were going to school down in Greenwich Village. And-- Speaker 2: Well, 'cause in New York, you can go to any school you want to. You know, my parents [Cynthia Wallace Kersey and Al Kersey], you know, they didn't want me to go to the neighborhood schools. I mean, they were, you know, the bougie kind so, you know, like my sister [Lisa Kersey] went to Ethical Culture [Ethical Culture Fieldston School, New York, New York], which was a very sadiddy private school, and the school I went to, not too many black kids went to. It was very much an artist's school. At that time, Greenwich Village in the '60s, [1960s], the late '60s [1960s], you know, everyone thought everybody was crazy down there, you know, Bohemian types, you know, artist-type like Jerry Orbach from 'Law and Order,' I went to school with his son, Tony [Tony Orbach], down there. Lots of artists, lots of actors and things like that. But that's just where my mom wanted me to go, because I was very artistic, and I was always talking about acting and I was dancing and I was modeling and doing all those things at a young age, so that was a perfect school for me. Speaker 1: Participate in school plays? Speaker 2: Not really. I just knew I was a star. I didn't need to, I didn't need to do the play thing. I was doing my own stuff at home; and then, like I said before, I was at Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] and that took up all my time. Story_ID: 506259 Speaker 1: Talk about the Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York], what they are, who they are, and the contribution that you gave (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well now, it's one of the, probably the most renowned black classical dance company in the world. It was founded in the '60s [1960s] by [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell. I started with Arthur in the basement of a church at the Harlem School of the Arts [New York, New York] on 138th Street [sic. St. Nicholas Avenue] and was there for about two years. He had just had kids from the neighborhood. He taught us dance. He taught us African dance, ballet, Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] technique, tap, and we also had to take art, arts and crafts, voice, and acting, and then in the late '60s [1960s], Ms. Gimbel [Alva B. Gimbel], from the Gimbel's department store [Gimbel Brothers], I think it was, endowed him to build a dance theatre in Harlem [New York New York], the studio on 152nd Street, so he moved us all up there. Karl Shook was the famous artistic director at the time, and I was one of the first students there. You know, that whole first class that started, and I had to go every day. I mean, I started dancing at five with Miss Facey [Marion Facey] at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York], and I finally ended probably when I was about fifteen. Speaker 1: So you actually were about fifteen years old when you got to the Dance Theatre of Harlem? Speaker 2: No, no, no. When I quit dancing-- Speaker 1: When you quit dancing. Speaker 2: Because I went into gymnastics and cheerleading. But yeah, so I grew up with that discipline, you know, and that work ethic, and ballet is all about that. Speaker 1: How about Mr. Mitchell? What are your memories of him? Speaker 2: Ooh, he was mean, him and Karl Shook. I mean, that was old school ballet teaching. They had that stick where they would tap on the floor and they would tap you. You know, now a days, you can't do that. But it was funny because I always danced, even though I didn't dance every day anymore, you know, when I became an actress, in New York [New York], you have to be a triple threat. You have to act, dance, and sing. So, I went back to taking dance classes again, and when I moved out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], I couldn't believe the dance classes. You talk West Coast, East Coast. In New York, it was the whole 'Fame' thing. You wore torn up, ripped up clothes, no makeup, the whole thing, for the dance world. In L.A., you would be in the bathroom primping yourself with the blow dryer, the makeup, the clothes--I walked into a dance class and I was like, is this a beauty contest or what? Couldn't believe it. Very, very different out here. So, I just wasn't feeling it. I liked the old way of teaching dance, you know. Speaker 1: The Debbie Allen method-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. You get that stick. Just like her character in 'Fame,' Lydia; yeah, that's how I grew up with dance. No, they will knock you outside of your head if you start to talk in class. You just don't do that. It's all about technique. In L.A., it's a little bit different. Speaker 1: Am I, so I'm not getting confused, the Dance Theatre of Harlem--they haven't had any recent problems, have they had any recent problems? Or am I think, the Boys Choir [Boys Choir of Harlem]. Speaker 2: The Boys Choir had problems. The Dance Theatre of Harlem had some problems. I mean, you know, all of these non-profits are having problems, you know, the National Endowment of the Arts [sic. National Endowment for the Arts] is not giving out the money like they used to, so they're all having challenges, but yeah, they had a few problems. They were trying to raise some money a couple years back. That email was going around. Speaker 1: Back in those days, did you have to pay a stipend to attend school? Speaker 2: It was basically free from what I remember. You know, I guess it was a little bit to pay but, you know, when we were at Harlem School of the Arts. It wasn't, it was through a church. We were in a church basement. When we went to Dance Theatre of Harlem, there was a little bit to pay, but it wasn't like it is here in L.A., where it's gonna cost you five hundred dollars a month. It's not like that. I mean, all the kids, we all went there, no matter how much money your parents made. 'Cause it was open, you know. It's different. Speaker 1: And like you said, it was good--it was enjoyment. It was good discipline. It gave you discipline. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That later in life allowed you to do what you do now. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely. Story_ID: 506260 Speaker 1: Okay, so now we're in elementary school [St. Benedict School, Bronx, New York], we're, and we're doing this, all these little things. Now it comes time for us to go to high school. What high school did you go to? Speaker 2: There was only one high school; no other choice. Northern Valley Regional High School [Northern Valley Regional High School at Demarest, Demarest, New Jersey], which was my town of Haworth [New Jersey] and two neighboring towns. All three of them got together, because one town by itself wasn't big enough for a high school, so it was three small towns. We made up Northern Valley Regional High School. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were, you went in there about the age of about what, fourteen? Speaker 2: At fourteen. I only went three years. I graduated early, so I started college [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey] at seventeen. Speaker 1: Graduated at seventeen. And what was it like, what were your memories back there at high school? Speaker 2: Horrible. Absolutely horrible. I mean, I was vice president of the freshman class. I was a varsity cheerleader freshman year but, you know, I just never acclimated myself to that world there, because those people were living stuck in a place in time. You know, there was no diversity. There just wasn't. It didn't exist because there were no black people to push diversity. Real estate agents were telling black people or Latino people to move to that part of town. So, it was really difficult for me, you know, and I was a very strong black woman and I wasn't taking any mess. You know, I got my mom [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] to go in there and say, you know, on Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday, everybody's gotta shut up and have a moment of silence, you know, because you have to teach people that, to respect that. They weren't doing any of that, you know. They didn't understand that, you know. When the elections happened, I'll never forget, it was Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], he looked, because you can see in the Bergen County [New Jersey] record who votes for what, you know. The Democrat got like six or seven votes. I mean, it was just very, very Republican, you know, very, very conservative and, you know, it's what it is, but they knew me at that school because I made it known. I refused to bend down. And you got the--I could have ended up with the Michael Jackson complex, you know, you got the whole thing, you know, your nose is flat and all, you know, all of those, I experienced all of that. But I was tough. I would just beat somebody down. So, I just punch 'em out. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Just trying to imagine your prom night. What was that like? Speaker 2: I didn't go to prom. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Didn't want to. I had no use for those people after a while. That's why I got out in three years. I just wanted to get out and move on with my life. Speaker 1: Were you dating? Were you doing anything that-- Speaker 2: I went out with a basketball player from a neighboring town. You know, but I had my own life, my own world. You know, I was going to New York [New York] and acting and, you know, I was doing my thing. I just wasn't buying into that whole suburban thing. Everybody was doing drugs. You know, it was a 'Go Ask Alice' [Beatrice Sparks] time, you know, it was just, everybody had keg parties. I grew up in that kind of environment there. It just wasn't for me, so, I didn't do a lot of social, I mean, I had friends and stuff and we did sleepovers, but I had a whole other world. Every day after school I would still take the bus to New York and I would go to either DTH [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] or I would go someplace else, so I kept my total connection to New York. My parents worked in New York every day. You know, my [maternal] grandmother [Gwendolyn Miller Fieulleteau] still lived in New York; so I lived in New Jersey and went to school there, but as soon as I could, I got on that bus and got to New York City. Story_ID: 506261 Speaker 1: You indicated that you were doing some acting while you were in high school [Northern Valley Regional High School at Demarest, Demarest, New Jersey]. What type of acting, and where were you doing it at? Speaker 2: Where was I doing it at? I was taking acting classes somewhere in New York [New York]. I went through that whole beauty pageant stage and that whole kind of things. I was starting, I actually wanted to model, but I was only 5'3.5", so I entered Hal Jackson's Talented Teens [Hal Jackson's Talented Teens International, New York, New York]. I was second runner up in New Jersey. Then I entered the Miss World pageant and I was the only black contestant in the state in that pageant, and from there I went to Barbizon [Barbizon Modeling and Acting School, New York, New York], of all places, and did that whole thing. I just wanted to model, but I was just too short, and so finally in the '80s [1980s], petite modeling started and I finally got my chance to do it. Speaker 1: And what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it was all a buildup to actually being an actress and a model. Speaker 1: Gotcha. So Tyra Banks ain't got nothing on you. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I used to go to go-sees with Whitney Houston. She was doing Teen magazine. She was with Wilhelmina [Wilhelmina Models; Wilhelmina International Inc.], I was with Models, Models [ph.] but we would end up on some of the same go-sees because we were still genotypes, so I go back that far. Speaker 1: So you remember Whitney Houston. Speaker 2: Um-hm. I remember her from go-sees. Speaker 1: Wow. Interesting, I saw Bobby Brown last night (laughter). Speaker 2: He was there? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was at the concert last night. Speaker 2: Was he there with Superhead, Karrine [Karrine Steffans]? Speaker 1: No, he just came by himself. Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay. Story_ID: 506262 Speaker 1: Okay. So now we're in, we're doing all these good things, so now it came time for you to go to college. Here you are, at seventeen years old and you selected a college. What college did you go to? Speaker 2: Douglas College at Rutgers University [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you got a degree in what? Speaker 2: Well, I went in as an acting major and then realized I didn't need to learn how to act. I thought I was already brilliant, of course, which I wasn't but that's what I thought. And, I was really smart, you know. That's how I graduated from high school [Northern Valley Regional High School at Demarest, Demarest, New Jersey] in three years. So, I went in political science/sociology with a concentration in international economics, because, you know, there was a side of me that wanted to be an actress and a model, but I was also because of my move from New York [New York] to New Jersey, I was also very politically motivated. I wanted to make change. I wanted to change the world. You know, I had experienced being a black girl in New York and moving to this lily white environment in New Jersey, and actually in college I had to write a senior thesis in sociology and it was on being socialized, born and socialized as a black girl, being desocialized and resocialized as a white girl and then coming to college and being resocialized again as a black girl, because when I got to college, everyone told me I was an Oreo. I had to prove that I was black because I had grown up in this town where, you know, you had your mom's Bloomingdale's card and your Saks Fifth Avenue card and everything was like oh, my god, it's like so excellent and, you know, I was into Led Zeppelin and 'Stairway to Heaven' and Aerosmith. I mean, that's who I was. I, they broke me down basically. You know, I still like The Jackson 5 and all of that, but, you know, I was wearing Frye boots and flannel shirts and the whole thing. So, when I got to college I had a tough time. I moved into the black house right away. Wanted to move into the African American house, wanted to show my blackness. You know, I told my father [Al Kersey], "Don't claim me on the taxes anymore. I'm poor. I'm gonna get food stamps." He's like, "You're gonna what?" I'm like, "I'm gonna get food stamps. I'm poor. I gotta show that I'm black and I'm poor." (Laughter) And that's what I did. I literally, I got a job, I didn't have to do anything. My parents could have paid for me to go to college. I was so stupid because I, you know, I, just because of the social environment and the pressure, and so I got food stamps. Here my parents are living in one of the wealthiest cities in New Jersey and their child, my father was so through with me (laughter), he couldn't believe it, but I was independent and I wanted to prove something. I got smart after a while. He would send me a check every month and in the memo it would say welfare check. I'd have to go and cash that. Speaker 1: Food stamps, huh? What you said is not leaving this room, okay (laughter)? Speaker 2: At eighteen, nineteen. Yeah. Speaker 1: Food stamps. Speaker 2: Because I lived off campus and I was broke. Once my father didn't claim me anymore, I wanted to be independent. I mean, sure, he could have written me a check and paid for all my food, but I didn't want that. I wanted to do it this way and I think that, you know, at that point in my life because people have made fun of me so much for having, I felt the need to experience what it was to have nothing. That was my own psychological trip, because I didn't have to go through that. See, my kids [Monique Kersey-Love and Brittany Kersey-Love] will never go through that (laughter). They never want to experience that, but I needed to have gone through that. It was very short lived, obviously, but it was something that I went through. Story_ID: 506263 Speaker 1: That's frustrating when people who are the same color you are get mad at you because you had something that they haven't had. Speaker 2: Or that you don't talk black. I mean, it was just like, "Okay, you don't even sound black." Well, what does black sound like? I'm black. You know, just because I wasn't raised to talk quote/unquote ghetto does not mean I'm not black, but I caught a lot of hell from being raised where I was raised and, you know, and other people had parents that could afford things, but I guess it's the persona of who you are. You know, when the kids wanted to get something to eat, you know, I could just go and pull out some money. They were all searching for a dollar. I had money. They didn't like that. You know, that was problematic. Times have changed now, but back then, you know, black people were still becoming something. They were still, that black middle class was just evolving and I was a part of that and we, it was hard for us to be acknowledged as still being black and not being poor. Speaker 1: I was just thinking to myself, your father [Al Kersey] being the kind of person he is, he was like a visionary. He said this is my daughter. I'm gonna raise my children just to be in the world by themselves, because that's what's gonna happen one day. He's gonna leave. Speaker 2: And that's why he moved us to that town [Haworth, New Jersey]. I used to say, "Why would you move me here?" I couldn't believe it. He says, "I wanted you to have better. I wanted you to experience something else." And I thank him to this day, though, because all of those experiences when I just got out of college [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey], you know, and again, we're still talking the '80s [1980s] here; I mean, things were still changing. I was able to deal with anybody. Then, I think a lot of it was my father worked for EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]. He worked for the government. He worked, first he worked for Head Start too, and he used to always tell me that these young guys would come in with the apple pick in the back of their pocket, talking this mess with jeans and low pants and it was his big problem with them, 'cause he's like they come in here saying that they were discriminated against, but look at them. You know, and so I grew up hearing that and knowing that, and that was a part of who I was, and so I think it was also a part of him not wanting me and my sister [Lisa Kersey] to be like that, and wanting us to bigger than that and higher than that, and to get more and to be looked at in a different way. So, when I was a kid, I had to read the newspaper every single day and tell my father three top stories before I could go out and play. If I said ain't, my father would wanna slap me. You weren't allowed to say any slang in my house at all. No slang. He wanted us to talk the King's English, and we weren't slang kids, but I would say ain't, or something like that, and sometimes if I would stand a certain way my father would say, "What's this, what's this. Stand up straight." He didn't want any of that. He wanted us to be tall, to be proud, to have correct posture, to speak correctly. He didn't want, oh he would hate sing-song talking. He would call it, don't sing-song. You know, so yeah. He, that was him. Amazing when you think about it. Speaker 1: You are Al Kersey's daughter. Hmm. Interesting. Speaker 2: And my sister is too. She really is. You know, we always talk about it. Now, we're really proud that our father did raise us the way he raised us. Speaker 1: Did you ever want a brother? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: I knew my father didn't want a brother. He didn't want a son. He just wanted to dote on two daughters and a wife [Cynthia Wallace Kersey]. She just doted, doted, doted. He didn't want, there was just something about having a boy. He always said he didn't want any grandsons either. He wanted granddaughters, and he got three of 'em [Monique Kersey-Love, Brittany Kersey-Love and Cayla Jones]. Just girls, girls, girls, girls, girls. I don't know why. He just loved doting on us. You know, and then my god-sister, another girl, doted on her too, yeah. He was just like that. Speaker 1: Ouch, I feel for him. I had seven girls and one boy. I know what he's talking about (laughter). Story_ID: 506264 Speaker 1: Okay. Rutgers [Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], Ivy League school. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Douglass College [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey] is, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Douglass College. Speaker 2: One of the top ten women's colleges in the country. Run by a black dean at the time. Dean Cobb [Jewel Plummer Cobb]. That was one of the reasons I wanted to go there. Speaker 1: When folks see it on your resume, what do they say? Speaker 2: They freak out. They're like, oh, my god, you went to Douglass in '83 [1983]? That's like going to Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and stuff, I mean, you know, Rutgers is a good school, but Douglass College in and of itself, that's considered an Ivy League school within a big university. So, you know, my father [Al Kersey] said to me, his wisdom, he said, go to Douglass, it will look great in the future. And I'm still amazed. People always pick it out. They say, oh, wow. You went to Douglass. You must be smart. Yeah. Speaker 1: So, here you are, twenty-two. You got your B.A., now, in political science and sociology and you're ready to take on the world. What happened next? Speaker 2: Moved back home and started going to New York [New York] every day to act, got my AFTRA [American Federation of Television and Radio Artists; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] card, my SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] card, started doing commercials, soap operas, went to an audition that I didn't know what it was for, found out that there was a new show called 'The Cosby Show,' and I was gonna be Vanessa's [sic. Tempest Bledsoe] stand-in, and so for a year I was under contract to NBC. Samuel Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] was my father. He was Bill's [Bill Cosby] stand-in. I was Vanessa's stand-in, and I worked that show. Jay Sandrich directed us. We were called the B team, they were called the A team, and went in every day, table reads, read lines, had to know our lines, they blocked the show. The kids went to school. Bill and Phylicia [HistoryMaker Phylicia Rashad] went into their dressing rooms, and we ran the entire show for the cameras. The only day we didn't come was on the actual shoot day (laughter). Speaker 1: Samuel L. Jackson, Leroy Jackson. Speaker 2: He was my dad, yeah, and it was so weird because Samuel was great. I mean, you know, we used to sit around and just look at him in amazement because he was such a talented actor. He was older than us all, and we just could never understand why he wasn't big in television, and it was right after that, that he got the thing in Spike Lee's film and made his big move. But, it was weird because years later I saw a biography about him and he was talking about his drug addiction during that time that I worked with him every day. We took the train together every single day, 'cause he lived in Harlem [New York, New York] too. He lived in, what's the brownstone area? Speaker 1: The Lincoln projects [Abraham Lincoln Houses, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: No, no, no. The brownstone--Striver's Row [St. Nicholas Historic District, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Up on 135th [Street]. Speaker 2: He lived there with Tanya [LaTanya Richardson], and his wife Tanya was the casting director for, was it Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] at that time, yeah. And, you know, they had their daughter [Zoe Jackson] and we were great friends, and he was my dad. It was great. That's kind of where I met everybody from Robin Givens to Blair Underwood to all of those people who end, who are, were my contemporaries in acting in New York. It's because we're all the same age, pretty much. Story_ID: 506265 Speaker 1: And then there was William Cosby, what about him? Speaker 2: He's a mess, he was a mess. He was something else. Very talented, very brilliant, really nice guy. Yeah, my father [Al Kersey] was so proud, oh my god, because to him, you know, it was Bill Cosby, and he got to bring people from his job down to the studio, you know. That was huge. So, you know, they would let us bring family and friends and my father would sit up there watching the show so proud. He got to meet Bill. My mom [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] came and one of the gifts for the smartest kid in the class would be to come on the set, so she got to bring her kids, some of her kids on the set. It was great experience to be part of the team. Bill was, you know, he was brilliant, just brilliant guy. Speaker 1: You met the real Mrs. Cosby [Camille Cosby]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. She was there all the time. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. We were all like family. I mean, you know, we were cast and crew. I still have my crew jacket. Speaker 1: So, the guy who played Theo [Theodore Huxtable], you knew him very well. Speaker 2: Let me tell you, he had a crush on me. He called me his home girl. He was thirteen years old, and his mom, actually, you know he's got a play going here and she's one of my, you know it's weird, because then she was like a mother image and now I realize she's only about ten years older than me. Last time I saw her, she invited me to her fiftieth birthday on a yacht, and then I saw her recently again and Pamela Warner is amazing. She's a single mom, you know, raised Malcolm [Malcolm-Jamal Warner], but Malcolm is google-eyes at me. He said, "You're my home girl, you're my home girl." You know, I've been friends with his mom for, you know, years and years and years. Speaker 1: Have you seen Malcolm lately? Speaker 2: I saw him at the show, yeah. Speaker 1: Does he still feel the same way? Speaker 2: Oh, we've never even talked about it. She knows about it, but I never even brought it up. I would never embarrass him, but everybody on the set remembers that because he was, I was older than him, you know, and everything. He was this, you know, kind of awkward thirteen year old guy that had all this success, but he was always a sweetheart, just like he is now, very grounded, and his mom did that to him. Speaker 1: Any other memories of the Cosby show? Speaker 2: Oh, when Stevie Wonder was on the show. That was amazing. He would crack so many jokes about him being blind, we were all just astonished, because he would say things and he, he was humorous about who he was as a blind man, so that was really interesting. I met so many people, Danny Kaye, I mean all kinds of people on that show--Earle Hyman; yeah it was an amazing experience. Story_ID: 506266 Speaker 1: So you really started to build up a resume now. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was really lucky. I was young, I was very all-American, that--being able to speak the King's English really worked in my favor, because when you're going up for Burger King and all of that, they want all-Americans that speak very well, so I was lucky. I got my SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] card really quickly. I did voiceovers with G. Keith Alexander, like Red Lobster and stuff, I did print work, I finally did my modeling, did a national cosmetic ad for Lickety Lips Lip Gloss [sic. Lickety Split Lip Gloss], you know, I still have my old portfolio. So, I was lucky. I just was the right fit, the right type at the right time, and I worked all the time, did six months on 'As The World Turns,' you know, regularly worked on, like 'All My Children' with Debbi Morgan and, you know, Darnell Williams and actually Morgan Freeman, I ran into him talking and I said, "Morgan, don't you remember me?" He was cracking up, because I worked with him all the time, him, [HistoryMaker] Jackee Harry, Petronia Paley, on 'Another World.' He had just come off 'Sesame Street' [sic. 'The Electric Company'] and he was a cop on 'Another World,' and I must have worked for him for a year and we were just recently talking about it. He was cracking up. He couldn't believe I remembered some of the stuff that I remembered. So, yeah, I would, you know, I look back and I said, wow. I was blessed to have worked with some people that are really big right now. Speaker 1: Yes, we're talking about Academy Award winners. Speaker 2: Yeah. Morgan was amazing. He was absolutely, he was great. He played a cop, he was a plain old beat cop on that show, but he was, even back then he was gracious, and just fabulous. So, yeah. Speaker 1: What would your friends say when they'd see you on 'The Guiding Light' [sic. 'Guiding Light'] and other shows like 'All My Children?' Speaker 2: Well, my friends were all actors at that time, so it was, you know, it was a big deal to my family but not to my friends because we were all struggling actors and actresses, you know, that were just pounding the pavement just trying to make it; so, no big deal. Speaker 1: No big deal. Story_ID: 506267 Speaker 1: So, why'd you get out of acting? Speaker 2: I didn't, actually. My, my manager sent me out here and my first audition was for '227,' and I went in and they sent me to producers and they said, Tanya [HistoryMaker Tanya-Monique Kersey]--," they said, "how old are you?" I said, "Seventeen." They said, "Tanya, you've been seventeen for about four or five years, haven't you?" And it was different in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. That was my first big audition and I realized that things were really different here in terms of acting business. You know, I never was a great actress. I just had the right look and I had started writing my book ['Black State of the Arts: A Guide to Developing a Successful Career as a Black Performing Artist,' Tanya-Monique Kersey and Bruce Hawkins], and so I got really involved in that and just, by the grace of God, just said okay, I'm gonna finish this book. I'm gonna be an author. I'm gonna go on speaking tours, and I had all these big ideas. And it kind of just segued. I just put my energies into the book, so it was not that I every quit acting. It's just that I turned my attention to something else. Speaker 1: You think you'll go back to acting? Speaker 2: You know what? It's weird. People now have asked me more to do things, like Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett] asked me to play an Oprah Winfrey-like character in a play that she was doing, which I did. You know, I've done a few things people have called me for, but no as a regular thing. I would love to go do voiceovers or commercials again so I get my pension from SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)]. That I would love to do. I needed like a couple more years, and then I'll have my full pension under SAG. So, that I would, but no. Story_ID: 506268 Speaker 1: Just go back for just a second and talk about--you used the expression BAP. Let's talk about BAPs, the black princesses. Speaker 2: Black American Princess. Speaker 1: What's that about? Speaker 2: I think that comes from my generation, you know, I think, you know the '60s [1960s] was a very volatile time in black history; Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the March on Washington, and there was a group of black people who were breaking through the glass ceiling, for lack of a better word. My parents [Cynthia Wallace Kersey and Al Kersey] were part of that group where we were living in white communities, we were highly educated, we were shopping in the stores. They were making money. It was the black, middle upper class. That's where bougie all basically came out of. That's where Jack and Jill club [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], you know, we were part of all of that, and that's where the Black American Princess, I think I was probably in that first generation of kids that were called that, because of the way that we were raised. We were not poor. We didn't need for anything. You know, our parents gave us the credit cards to go shopping, we went to good schools, we went on vacations, all the things that we've talked about already, when you put them all together, that spells BAP. Speaker 1: But isn't it a perception as well, in that we as black people, how we perceive each other versus how other non-blacks perceive us. Speaker 2: What do you mean? Speaker 1: Well some people, okay, some non-blacks, when they see black people they just see they're all black, they all got rhythm, they all got (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Monolithic. Speaker 1: They can all bounce basketballs, but they don't understand we are not that way. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Can you explain your thoughts? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I've never really gotten that because I think that depending on who you are, people get me really quickly. They figure out who I am and where I come from and people judge you on that, you know. So, I think it's really that people see us, but once we open our mouth they see that we're all different, and that's all that it takes, is to open your mouth, start talking, and they totally get from where you came; and that you're not a cookie-cutter representative of what they think a black person is. Story_ID: 506269 Speaker 1: Now, you wrote a book in 1990 called 'Black State of the Arts: A Guide to Developing a Successful Career as a Black Performing Artist' [Tanya-Monique Kersey and Bruce Hawkins]. That's a mouthful. Speaker 2: (Laughter) It is, that was back when people did long titles. Speaker 1: Yeah. What was that about? What made you do that? Speaker 2: You know, I think having early success as an actress in terms of just getting my SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] card, which was a huge accomplishment for any actress. People would ask me, well, how'd you do it? And, so I started to just write it down. And then I had experience as a black actress that I realized I read everything. I'm one of those people as I could read myself into being a doctor, because I believe that education is in the books. And so, I had read every how-to book on becoming an actor, but there was nothing that addressed the specific needs that me, as an African American actress would need or things that I would need to know. Like I went on that commercial voiceover audition with Petronia Paley, well-known New York [New York] actress, for cherry (unclear) wine. The guy turned around to me and said, "Talk more black." I was like, what? Now luckily I was smart enough not to catch an attitude in there when he said that, but when I got it but I said, wow. There's another situation where a black actress may have to encounter and you need to know about the situation and how to handle it, and that's kind of how the book came out because there are lots of how-to books. I just had to put a black slant on it. So, there's like an area where we talked about getting your head shots taken, but if you're black the lights on the camera bounce off your skin a different way, so the advice in that section of the book is, you know, to look at the photographer's book and make sure that they've shot people of color so that you know that they know how to light us. So, it's basically taking your average how-to book and adding the things that an African American actress needs to know. Speaker 1: Now, I'm sure you got some good response to that book, didn't you? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I actually had my mom [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] invest $10,000 in it and I went and published it myself, because after I, nobody wanted to publish it, first of all, because, you know, they never want to publish anything that empowers us, and that's what this book does. It empowers black people to do better in Hollywood by teaching them what they need to know. So I self-published the book, ended up selling it to the big, major bookstore chains. It was everywhere, and then finally a couple of years later I sold the rights to a publishing company who put out a second edition. Those rights have recently reverted back to me. So now what I'm doing is I'm taking the book and breaking up the twenty-four chapters into twenty-four e-books and selling them online. So basically, instead of getting $29.95 for one book, I could sell twenty-four chapters for, say, $5 and make $100, because people come back. They want the chapter on this, they want the chapter on photos and pictures and resumes, you know, so we're working on that now, and then updating it too, because e-books is huge business, and they assume everybody wants to be an actor. Everybody wants to be a director and a writer. So, basically what we're doing is taking the book on the acting, they included acting, singing, dancing, and modeling and we're adding writer, director, producer to it and creating an entire series of career handbooks that will sell as e-books. They may only be twenty-five pages a chapter, but you know, a book, but for $5.95, once you read the one on getting your pictures and resumes and you've seen pictures of actors, you know, representative pictures of resumes, you want the next chapter on how to market yourself, or how to find an agent. So basically we just have them keep coming back. Speaker 1: Good move, good move, wow. Story_ID: 506270 Speaker 1: That, I understand, led to you to establish Black Talent News, 1994. Speaker 2: Wow, has it been that long? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, it has been. Yeah, I was on the launch team of Vibe magazine and [HistoryMaker] Keith Clinkscales had something to me and I found about the Stanford University [Stanford, California] professional publishing course and I got a fellowship to it, so I went up to Palo Alto [California], lived on campus and did their publishing course, and I came out of there and said I'm going to do a magazine. I went up there as a book publisher because I was a book publisher at the time, and something just hit me, so I started Black Talent News as a four-page-newsletter, and my parents [Cynthia Wallace Kersey and Al Kersey] were, I called them and I said you guys need to go to the Harlem Book Fair [New York, New York] and take this there and set up a table, and I sent everything. My father and mother went, did my table up in Harlem [New York, New York]. People actually subscribed to this little four-page-newsletter, and that was the beginning of it, and it stayed in newsletter form for a couple of months, and then became a trade publication that kind of just morphed over time. Found a distributor out here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] who said nobody's gonna buy this for $2.95. It was like twelve, sixteen pages, sold out at the newsstand because it wasn't how it looked, it was the fact that nobody had put this information on the newsstands before. This was a cross between Backstage, basically a black Backstage, because it was for actors when it first started, and it since had morphed into a full-fledged industry trade publication like Variety and Hollywood Reporter, but the idea was to include production charts of projects, they weren't including our projects in those. They weren't telling us about auditions. They weren't giving a release schedule of films that were not just mainstream films but black films and independent films, so basically I just found a niche within a larger, and it just, kind of just built. Nothing that was ever planned. You know, they just always said that God takes you from one step to another and you have to just follow where he leads. And that's basically what I did, and it was kind of like everything kind of morphed from there. You know, I did that book, I did a couple small books, a book for--what's it called--original scenes and monologues for black actors, you know, 'cause they don't always wanna do Tennessee Williams or William [ph.] (unclear), they want to do something contemporary. I did the 'Urban Hollywood Resource Directory' [Tanya-Monique Kersey], which is basically taking the 'Hollywood Creative Directory,' and putting an urban twist on it, because if you go to the Hollywood Creative Directory, you can't find Don Cheadle's production company [Crescendo Productions]. They have Steven Spielberg's [Storyteller Holding Co., LLC] and George Lucas' [Lucasfilm Ltd. LLC], but not Don Cheadle's, so you go to mine and you can find Sam Jackson's [Samuel L. Jackson], Don Cheadle's, Ice Cube, you can find the agent, look at a list of black executives, that kind of grew out of there, and then the black film report grew out of that, so everything that I've done has basically just gone from one to another. Speaker 1: Where do you get these ideas from? Speaker 2: God. That's all I think about. I mean, I had never planned to do any of this. I think that once you kind of get into something and you, someone said to me, a minister said to me one day, I was in a bible class, she says some people have God ideas, and you have to know when you have a God idea so that you can follow and let the spirit lead you. She looked at me. That's what I think. She looked at me. Maybe she didn't, but I got it at that particular point, and that was like in 1992, '93 [1993], and since that point, I just let the spirit lead me. The ideas pop into my mind, you know, and then some of it is just looking at the marketplace and seeing what's needed. I mean, everything that they do for mainstream Hollywood, we need for us, because we have no power in this town. You know, in order to build a power base we have to be educated and we need the tools, and so that's been my thing is to build the tools to educating and empowering us. Speaker 1: Now, BTN right now, it's now in a different form right now, is it not? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in print for seven years and when the Internet came up, we were a monthly publication, so everyone's publishing daily on the Internet, so having a monthly publication didn't make sense. The model wasn't there anymore. You could do a monthly fashion magazine, but you don't even see any other kinds of monthly mag--they've gone out of business, basically, so we switched to the web so we went from like ten thousand copies to ninety-seven thousand unique visitors, so no more publishing costs in terms of hard costs for printing distribution. It's online and it's supported by advertising still, though. Speaker 1: Unique visitors, you call them. Speaker 2: Yes, right. It's not about how many hits you get, it's about the unique visitors. It's about the unique visitors (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: Which is basically your circulation. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 506271 Speaker 1: Early in the interview you talked about the Infotainment Conference. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: In 1997, after you had gotten be- let me stop for a second and go, because I can remember what it was like being in the office when you were putting together Black Talent News. Can you talk about what a normal day was for you, please? Speaker 2: It was, I tell you, my friend, Shirley [Shirley Jordan] was working with me at the time and we, you know, we had no idea what we were doing. I mean, I really didn't. I was just really blessed. I had this old Macintosh computer that I got back in, I would say 1986 to start writing the book. It was an original PC [personal computer]. It was two 386K floppy drives. No hard drive. My father [Al Kersey] got it for me at ComputerLand, or something like that. Three thousand dollars for two 386 floppy drives. No hard drive, for three thousand dollars. That and a dot matrix printer--I still have the receipt for that and I remember my father, who obviously was not in the generation of computers. He was like, "I could buy a car for this." Because back in 1986, you could buy a Pinto [Ford Pinto] or a Honda or a Toyota for $3,600 dollars, but my father bought me this computer. That's how much he supported me, that he spent $3,600 dollars on this computer, which was unheard of at that time, and I basically wrote my book on that, and that's how I was able to do everything, because I had the tool to do it. You know, I was able to do Black Talent News. We would sit up and use Microsoft Word and we would lay it out and, you know, we didn't even have scanners back then. You had to take the pictures to the photo place and they would do it, it was totally different, and I think now is how do we ever put this publication together? But we did it and we printed it out and we took it to the printer and they printed it out. It was crazy and hectic and, you know, but it was so much fun. There was so much love around. We loved what we were doing. We were making a difference. People knew we were making a difference. You know, people would call even to this day. I run into people and they just hug me. They're like, "You don't know. That changed my life. That gave me hope, you know, hearing what you guys had to say every month," you know, and it did what it did, but yet it was just constantly, trying to get people to buy ads. Nobody wanted to buy any ads from us. You know, just it was tough, it was tough, but it was great fun; and I would do it again if I had to. Story_ID: 506272 Speaker 1: You know who inspired me to use computers on a daily basis (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who? Speaker 1: You did (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, that's right. Oh, my gosh. I forgot about that. Yeah, I was early on those computers. I was before, because I got it my last year in college [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey], so all my friends, they wouldn't even touch a computer and to this day they all talk about it. I have many friends like you who say you were the one who taught me about computers 'cause, you know, that was after your generation. You were grown and stuff, so you had to be introduced to it on the back end. It wasn't like growing up with it. Yeah. And now we can't live without 'em. Speaker 1: Two or three hours a day. Can't live without 'em. Speaker 2: Well, see I was, like I was saying, I had everything, I had a new Blackberry. So, this is basically a computer. I get my emails, everything on here. I'm never away from my office. Speaker 1: High technology. Speaker 2: Yeah, fabulous. Speaker 1: Yes, I can remember you taught me how to use it and inspired me to use that computer. We'd be in the office cutting up things and doing different things and you'd make a copy and you'd say, "Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington], get this program and use that and do this and do that--," taught me a lot of things. Speaker 2: Technology is, you know, the wave of the future. You have to use the tools to, just to be, like you said, a visionary and to be a head of the learning, you have to be able to embrace those things. There are too many people. I have friends who I've just talked to until I'm blue in the face and it takes them a year or two to get it, you know, but then you've missed out on the opportunities. You have to, we have to start to change the way that we think and we really, you know, even as black people in a hole in America, we're gonna miss the boat unless we just start actually reacting to the things that are happening in the marketplace. Speaker 1: Thank you. In the class that I teach, one of first things that I ask is how many people are computer literate, and you'd be surprised how many hands don't go up. Speaker 2: Really? See, my kids [Monique Kersey-Love and Brittany Kersey-Love] were seventeen and eighteen, everybody is--I mean, my kids have been on a computer since they were two years old. So, they could take apart a computer, they don't even read the directions. They just grew up. And that's because, you know, it's really what they learned from their parents. If the parents aren't doing it, they're not going to do it. So, I think generations are changing now because kids have to use 'em in school now, even if they have to learn them, well at least at schools my kids have gone to, I don't know about all of them, but they have to be able to use the computer so their kids will know it. That's why Steve Harvey was so on getting the computers and the books and stuff into the schools that were in South Central [Los Angeles, California] and everything, because those kids were not on that learning curve; and by them not having those tools, it's another generation that's not--right, lost. Story_ID: 506273 Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997], Infotainment Conference. Now, Black Talent News is moving, it's gathering steam, it's known in the industry now, but you decided to do something unique and different. You wanted to have a conference where you could bring all these people together and do something. Talk about that please. Speaker 2: Well, you know it was really people. I think everything is demand and, supply and demand, and it was really the readers of Black Talent News saying, calling, and emailing constantly and writing letters and faxing and wanting more information because we were a trade publication, we weren't a how-to book. But, because of the way that we wrote it we dispersed information so, when you do that people come to you for more information. And, you know, I just said one day, I said we gotta do something. You know, there's so many people all around L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and the country that want more information and it just popped in my head, you know, again, let's do a conference, and it started out as a one day conference and ended up being a three day conference, the first one. You know, it had Disney [The Walt Disney Company] and all these people came on board, sponsors and stuff. I thought we maybe had fifty people. We ended up having two or three hundred people from all over the country come in. Panels were amazing, you know, panelists, called in all my friends and people that I knew. You know, I had a little market place. We did it up at Loyola Marymount [Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles, California]. You know, we had a party. Everyone got together. We basically started forming our BTN family during that event, and it was so successful we took it to Toronto [Ontario, Canada], we took it to Chicago [Illinois]. We do it a second year. We also did some small conferences in between. We did a music one and we did an acting one at Loyola Marymount, and then we did a finance conference at, what was the bank they call it in Jenkins [Carlton J. Jenkins]--Founders [Founders National Bank of Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California; OneUnited Bank], at Founders. So, you know, basically it was looking at the marketplace and seeing what areas we weren't filling, that weren't being filled and that weren't being addressed, and finance was one of them. Standing room only, Carlton, who owned the bank at the time, said nobody's gonna come to this thing. Everybody came. You know, the acting one, casting directors came, talked about careers and acting. The music one, music people came. So, it was basically my idea at the time was every niche and area in entertainment, I was going to do a conference for it outside of Infotainment, because otherwise you would need a week-long conference. You know, and then the filmmakers that were at Infotainment came to me and wanted to exhibit their films; and, hence, the film festival [Hollywood Black Film Festival] was born. Speaker 1: The film festival. Okay. Story_ID: 506274 Speaker 1: While all this is going on, while you're doing all these wonderful things, you also have a personal life as well. You keep mentioning your daughters. Can you talk about those two ladies please? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were born in '88 [1988] and '89 [1989], so they were born pre 'Black State of the Arts' ['Black State of the Arts: A Guide to Developing a Successful Career as a Black Performing Artist,' Tanya-Monique Kersey and Bruce Hawkins]. I was actually pregnant with them when I was readying the book for publication. Two daughters, Monique [Monique Kersey-Love] and Brittany [Brittany Kersey-Love]. Speaker 1: Monique-- Speaker 2: Who just graduated from Beverly Hills High School [Beverly Hills, California]. Speaker 1: Okay, her middle name-- Speaker 2: Monique Danielle. Speaker 1: D-A... Speaker 2: N-I-E-L-L-E, Kersey-Love. Speaker 1: Kersey-Love, okay. Speaker 2: And Brittany Alexandria. Speaker 1: Brittany, B-R-I-T-T-- Speaker 2: A-N-Y. Speaker 1: Alexandria, A-L-E-X-A-N- Speaker 2: D-R-I-A, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And last name, Kersey? Speaker 2: Kersey-Love. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. Now Monique is-- Speaker 2: She's eighteen. Speaker 1: She's eighteen? And Brittany is-- Speaker 2: Seventeen. Speaker 1: Seventeen. And Monique just came out of Beverly Hills High School, BH High School grad, 2007, with the plans to do what? Speaker 2: She wants to be a journalist, like her mom. She's gonna move down to San Diego [California] this summer. She's gonna go to community college for two years, and then transfer to a four year college after. Speaker 1: Which community college do you have in mind for her? Speaker 2: She decided herself. She's going to something in San Diego. It's all on her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wanted her to go to Santa Monica [California]. She wants to get out of the house, and I'm not mad at her. That's great, you know, raising two daughters, teenage daughters, I need a break. Speaker 1: It's been rough for you, hasn't it? Raising those kids? Speaker 2: It's challenging, I mean when you're an entrepreneur, you're working all the time, you know, and so, you know, it's a lot of sitting at the computer and not now, not now, not now, you know, you kind of look back and say wow. I didn't give them the attention and time that they needed. But you do in other respects. But yeah, it was hard, you know, but it just all worked out. I have two girls and they're so close together, but they kept each other company, which is a good thing. If had it been one child, then it would have been more difficult. Story_ID: 506275 Speaker 1: Now, you raise them [Kersey's daughters, Monique Kersey-Love and Brittany Kersey-Love] all alone, you have help from other sources? Speaker 2: Well, their father was my first husband. Speaker 1: His name? Speaker 2: Oh lord, Walter Clifton Love. Speaker 1: Walter Clifton Love, L-O-V-E (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just Clif for short. Speaker 1: Okay. AKA Clif. Speaker 2: With one f. Speaker 1: C-L-I-F, okay. And he was your first husband? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you were married from when to when, ma'am? Speaker 2: Hmm, '87 [1987] to '92 [1992]. Speaker 1: Okay. And he lives here in Los Angeles [California], so-- Speaker 2: Have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: No, no. And then I got married again in '83 [1983], to Ron Henley, who they consider their father. Speaker 1: Did you say '83 [1983] or '93? [1993] Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993], I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I was gonna say (laughter). I was gonna say was--okay, and his name is-- Speaker 2: Ronald Earvin Henley [Ronald Henley]. Speaker 1: Ronald-- Speaker 2: Earvin, E-A-R-V-I-N. Speaker 1: Oh, like Magic Johnson. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Henley. Speaker 1: Henley, okay. And what kind of job, work did Mr. Love do? Speaker 2: He was an entrepreneur. He owned a messenger company. Speaker 1: Okay. And Mr. Henley? What does he do? Speaker 2: Well, right now, he's a flight attendant with Continental [Continental Airlines, Houston, Texas], but he's a singer as well. Speaker 1: Singer. Any relation to any of the famous Henley singers? Speaker 2: Well, his brother Patti [Patti Henley] and Bobby Henley [Robert Henley III]. They have their own group, but not any other famous Henleys (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. All right. Anything else you want to say along those lines? Speaker 2: Nope. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: That's it. Acknowledge their existence (laughter). Speaker 1: You're good (laughter). Okay. Moving right along-- Story_ID: 506276 Speaker 1: So, again, you--it, it, like you said, the difficulty in raising two girls, traveling, 'cause you have a life that you have to lead too. You mentioned your friends. You've got a lot of friends (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have, yeah. You know what? My friends--I was just looking when I was looking at the pictures. I said I was just so blessed, because when Monique [Monique Kersey-Love] and Brittany [Brittany Kersey-Love] were like four and five, I'm basically a single mom and I need to go out and do all these Hollywood kind of things. I had friends that would take my kids and, you know, take them for the weekend, so I didn't really miss out on a bunch of opportunities because I had friends that were always willing to be there for them. Yeah, it definitely depended on them. Speaker 1: You know everybody in this town. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And if you don't know them, you know somebody who knows them. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's kind of scary (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why do you say that? Why do you say it's scary? Speaker 2: It just, you know, it blows my mind sometimes. 'Cause none of that is planned. You know what I mean? So, just sometimes I think about it and it's like wow. Speaker 1: I mean, you drop names and it's like these, but you know you work with them, the biggest names in Hollywood, you know them. Speaker 2: I've been around (laughter). Yeah, it's kind of amazing when you think about it. But you know, I think, 'cause when you're in it it's just what you do. You know what I mean? It's like no big deal. You know, I know why people go up to my website and it's like, "Oh, my god you got a picture with 50 Cent." I'm just like yeah, but you know, it's what we do it's like not thinking anything of it. So, but you know, to the outside world I guess it's a big deal. Part of being an entertainment journalist. Story_ID: 506277 Speaker 1: Would I be fair in calling you the black Jackie Collins? Speaker 2: I always thought of myself more as a black Mary Hart. And that was always my role model because she's the diva of Hollywood, 'Entertainment Tonight.' Speaker 1: I was going to ask you who are some of your mentors? Speaker 2: Well, she was just the person that I wanted to be. I mean, when I decided I was going to do this, I wanted to be the black Mary Hart. I wanted to be on 'Entertainment Tonight' or 'Access Hollywood.' But I didn't want to dish the dirt in the way they do it. I've always been on the more business side of it, you know. So, that's been the difference, but you know, I've been trying to do my own shoe for a while and, you know, 'cause I think it's important for people to know. People are always saying, well why didn't this movie do good, and why aren't they doing more black movies? Well, if people were educated and we had a way to get the messages out there, maybe we would. Speaker 1: But you do get your points of view out in different ways, at your conferences and at the black film festival [Hollywood Black Film Festival]. In other ways, you get it out there. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I do TV stuff, like lately I've been doing a lot of stuff for Reelz channel; you know, I've done stuff for CNN and MSNBC, and I've done interviews and things so, yeah, it gets out there but I just always, you know, want to either have a radio show or talk show or something on a regular basis, where all of this could be discussed and we could have very intelligent discourse on the entertainment industry and pop culture. Speaker 1: How about being a consultant? Speaker 2: I do that too; whatever can make me money, I do (laughter). But, you know what? I just, consulting is just, it's hard work doing consulting work, because you have to almost get into somebody else's body to be able to, and learn somebody else's business in order to consult with them, because everybody doesn't know everything so, you know, sometimes you get a new consulting client and they're doing something new in the industry that now you have to go research so that you can consult with them on. So, it's a lot of work. Story_ID: 506278 Speaker 1: You started something a few years ago that, in a town like this [Los Angeles, California] it was needed, it was most welcome and it has become an annual pilgrimage, is what I call it. We're talking about the Hollywood Black Film Festival. Can you speak about that please? Speaker 2: You know, that started out of Infotainment, with filmmakers saying they wanted a place to exhibit their films and, you know, I sat down and I looked at it and I said okay. Well, because of Black Talent News, I have an in to the power brokers in Hollywood; you know, people that I know are studio executives or agents, or the people that people are trying to reach. So I have a way to get them, to bring them to the festival. And then, in terms of starting the festival, I needed to figure out how could I do it so that the industry would pay attention, and USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], being the number one film school in the country, offered me the opportunity to launch the film festival on their campus. So, there was no better way to start a black film festival in Hollywood that wanted to be considered reputable and important and relevant, than to do it on USC's campus, and that's what we did and, you know, got Forest Whitaker as our honorary chairperson, Oscar [Academy Award] winner now, you know, so to have him there and we opened with a film by [HistoryMaker] Tim Reid, with Blair Underwood and some other people. Just really got the right people there, the right mix of people. And, I think that just having Hollywood as a part of my everyday life is what legitimized it, because people were starting film festivals every day all over the world, and it's not about just starting a film festival, it's about, for the panels that you do, who are you gonna get there that will give them access, the people who can get access to movers and shakers. Lots of people have film festivals and you look at the panels and you're just like, well, what are they gonna teach me. You know, so that was my thing, was to bring Infotainment Conference, which was already established and already had a long list of power brokers and important people, bring that in, so basically the film festival absorbed Infotainment. And then, in terms of the films, you know, coming up with an identity, 'cause we didn't want to be the booty shaking hip-hop film festival. We wanted this to be a festival of films that Hollywood ignores, meaning this is the black love story, this is the black drama, this is the black action film that could be on the big screen, but isn't. We didn't want to do low brow comedies. You know, we really wanted to have a programming philosophy that would appeal to the filmmakers who were out there trying to break through, and that would appeal to the industry, and we just came up with the right combination and, you know, over the years we've just grown from three days and twenty films to six days and 125 films, and now we have over one hundred panelists every year, as we have had heads of studios, and now--I mean the list of people who have spoken is just amazing and, you know, that's because I have a great team of people; and everybody's volunteer. Story_ID: 506279 Speaker 1: Back to the film festival [Hollywood Black Film Festival], having a film festival here, living in Los Angeles [California], as you know there are other film festivals, like we have another film festival here in town called the Pan African Film Festival [Los Angeles, California]. What's the difference between your film festival and that film festival? Speaker 2: I think the biggest difference our film festival and any other black film festival is access. You know, at our festival distribution, acquisitions, development executives are there in full force from most of the networks, most of the big production companies. They are representative. This year, you know, Lions Gate [Lions Gate Entertainment, Inc.], Focus Features [Focus Features LLC], Universal [Universal Pictures], Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation], you know, they're all there. That's what a film festival is supposed to be about. Deals are supposed to be made. The wide majority of our features get picked up somehow. You know, they may not get theatrical releases, but in fact, not too many black films get theatrical releases period. But they all have an afterlife, and that's really important in saying how many films got acquired at your festival. This year, out of our thirty features, probably so far over ten of them have acquisitions deals. So, that's really the hallmark of our festival, is what we say is our byline, access, opportunities, deals. That's what it's all about. You know, coming to a panel where you can meet Charles King [Charles D. King] from William Morris Agency [William Morris Endeavor Entertainment, LLC], or meet, you know, a well-known entertainment attorney and talk to them. Like, this year we had a free legal clinic where we had seven high-brow entertainment attorneys there to talk to you for free. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: You indicated earlier that your film festival has a lot of volunteers. One of those ladies comes to my mind every year. Speaker 1: Jackie. Speaker 2: Please talk about Jackie Blaylock [Jacqueline Blaylock]. Speaker 1: That's my partner in crime. She's the director of programming and, you know, that's the hallmark of the great film festival, too, is its programming, you know, because you want the industry to come and to acquire films and to see good films. If you put together a bad slate of films, you've just lost the credibility of your film festival. And she screens hundreds and hundreds of films and makes the decision on what's gonna screen at our festival. So, she is the, in terms of the look of the festival and programming, she's the one who makes the decision. And that's her aesthetic that you see up on the screen. Story_ID: 506280 Speaker 1: A lot of work goes into that film festival. Speaker 2: Yeah, and we're just this year was a year where we really, I think, made a difference, where we got over the hump. We're starting to make money. Sponsors are calling us. I think this year was the year we really broke through that part that we hadn't done before, so I think it's going to be all smooth sailing from now on. You know, plus we moved to Beverly Hills [California] a couple years ago which, for me, I wanted to do. I wanted to, on Wilshire Boulevard, to have two marquees or two art house theatres on Wilshire Boulevard say Hollywood Black Film Festival. I thought that was an important statement to make. You know, because I live in the city and knowing that it is a culturally diverse world that we live in, I wanted the filmmakers from outside of L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to come to Beverly Hills. I mean, you know, because if you're gonna go somewhere and travel for a film festival, is that not enticing to be able to go and stay in a hotel in Beverly Hills. You know, we worked out a deal where the hotel was $180 a night. It was one hotel that was less than $100, a motel. People couldn't believe it. You mean, I could stay in Beverly Hills for under $100 dollars? And then, where we were in Beverly Hills, like the venue where we did the panels, was two blocks from Beverly Drive. You know, so if you walk down Crescent Boulevard [sic. Crescent Drive], all you saw was black people for six days and I've talked to some of the vendors and they said this was amazing. They even loved it, because they don't get as much traffic there; you know, the Whole Foods [Whole Foods Market, Inc.] did bang business. Everything around there really enjoyed us being there, and I liked the idea that we could bring black people to a city and you didn't have to hear on the news about problems and things like that. Everyone was impressed with the crowd and how classy it was, and that's important that wherever we go, we make a statement. And that was very important for me, is to make that statement. I don't want it to be the hoochie mama kind of festival, you know what I mean? I wanted people to just be very respectful, classy, you know, people coming to watch movies and to learn and to educate, and that's the way it panned out. So, it's just a blessing. Speaker 1: And a record number of films this year? Speaker 2: One hundred twenty-five films, yeah. It was amazing. And we had a shuttle this year, Urban Work Shuttle [ph.], going around the city. I really modeled it after Sundance [Sundance Film Festival], and if you've been to Sundance, you know that they basically take over Park City [Utah] and neighboring cities, and the city basically become Sundance. So, every restaurant you go into, everything you see is about Sundance, and that's what I'm trying to do for Hollywood Black Film Festival. So next year we'll get more of the stores involved so that you'll be able to pick up film guides there. They'll have things on their windows. Hopefully we'll get the city so that you'll see the light pole banners up and down Wilshire Boulevard. You know, and that's a process. It took Robert Redford and those guys, you know, ten years to make that happen at Sundance. So, you know, we're doing okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how many years is this? Seven? Speaker 2: This is eight years. Speaker 1: Eight years. Speaker 2: Next year will be our ninth year. No next year will be our--yeah, it will be our ninth year. Speaker 1: When you've got something as good as this, what keeps it going? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. Just pure passion for what you're doing, you know, for changing peoples' lives or giving people access and opportunities for making a difference, and that's really what it comes down to. We're all gonna volunteer and do something for something. So, this is just what I choose to do. You know, someone once said something, "You just like being the Harriet Tubman for blacks in Hollywood." I said, okay. I like that analogy because that's what I wanna do is to move people along the road toward success in Hollywood, so I love that analogy. Speaker 1: When people run into you in Hollywood what do they say to you? Speaker 2: It depends on who they are. If there's somebody who doesn't know me, but has read about me, then they're usually like, "Oh, my god. I've read your stuff. And you're so nice." Because everybody in Hollywood is larger than life. We're all just regular people, you know, but they see you and hear about you and it's like, you know, everybody's a celebrity in Hollywood and then, you know, basically that's just the response. It's like, oh my gosh, you're so nice. You talked to me, you took a picture with me; you know, that kind of thing, which, you know, why not? Story_ID: 506281 Speaker 1: With all the connections you have, one very strong connection you have that was engrained in you a long time ago is going to church. Please talk about the church that you go to and the pastor who influences on you. Speaker 2: You know what, I actually, church just came a part of my life like thirteen years ago. I never, we weren't raised in the church. My father [Al Kersey] was not having it. You know, being the character that he was, he said that when he was younger, they made him go to church, so when he got to make a choice he didn't want to go to nobody's church. He would say, "Good god, good lord, good bread, let's eat." You know, I mean he was one of those types. He was most (unclear) and my mom [Cynthia Wallace Kersey] always wanted to go to church, but he was just like we're not going to church. I didn't grow up in a traditional family and, in about 1992, I ran into a publicist who said, "You've gotta go to this church, Della Reese's [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett] church," and that's how I started. I went to Della Reese's church and got saved there. And, moved from there to Faithful Central [Faithful Central Bible Church, Inglewood, California] and you know, it's just a great church. I don't particularly like going to church in the Great Western Forum [The Forum, Inglewood, California]. It's a little bit too big for me, but I became a part of the church, I produced the Gospel Showcase there, and it's good energy there. I really like it. Speaker 1: And the pastor of the church is-- Speaker 2: Bishop Kenneth C. Ulmer. Speaker 1: Okay. And are you going to do some work for him as far as gospel events planned? Speaker 2: I don't know. I want to do a film festival there, and I've talked to--Pastor Beverly Allen is a good friend of mine, and so I've talked to her over the past couple of years. But, you know, you've gotta have the money. I'm not doing any more freebies. So, you know, if you wanna do it, and I think Faithful Central has got the clout in the industry to be able to, in the business world and in Los Angeles [California], to bring in the sponsors to do it, then yeah, I think it would be great, because you could do it in the tabernacle. It seats 2,500 people. You know, they've got all the screens there. I mean, it would be great to do that. They've got the space. They own the building. You can do panels and workshops on, you know producing faith-filled projects. You've got Tyler Perry and David Talbert [David E. Talbert], and you know, all these well-known African Americans, who are getting into that space. Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation] just started Fox Faith, you know, Weinsteins [Harvey Weinstein and Bob Weinstein] are reportedly starting a faith line. I just think it's a great business, so yeah. Story_ID: 506282 Speaker 1: What do you see for the future of black Hollywood? Speaker 2: Wow. I don't think it's gonna really change. I think that the change that people are looking for, they're looking for this big, monumental earth-shattering change. I don't think that's ever gonna happen because we're not part of the power structure of the business. It may, opportunities may become more plentiful, but you saw they became plentiful with UPN [United Paramount Network], and then they just took it away from us and black writers are out of work again. So, as long as we don't control the industry, we don't, we're not a part of the power structure, I don't think it's ever going to be that pie in the sky dream that people have been hoping for. I mean, otherwise it would have been already. Hollywood's been around for fifty years. We haven't really advanced that far. I mean, we've advanced as the times have changed, but where really are we? We have women running studios of networks, we have Asians, we've got Latinos. Latinos have got, what, fifteen doggone stations, cable stations. We've got barely two. I just think that we've missed the boat and the change is gonna be when three people like Katzenberg [Jeffrey Katzenberg], Geffen [David Geffen], and Spielberg [Steven Spielberg] get together and form DreamWorks [DreamWorks Studios; DreamWorks Pictures]. Why are we not getting together and forming our own? I think that's what it's gotta be. Why the Weinsteins [Harvey Weinstein and Bob Weinstein] did it too and, if you notice, the Weinstein brothers formed Miramax [Miramax, LLC], sold it to Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California]. Those guys, Spielberg, Kazenberg, and Geffen did DreamWorks, sold it to Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation]. We can do it. I mean, I'm not saying that we'll always be outside of the system, but I think that the model is already there. You look at the guy who started Fox [Fox Broadcasting Company] and then went over to WB [The WB Television Network], what's his name--Keller, Jamie Keller [sic. Jamie Kellner]. Here's a guy who started two networks. It's possible. Look at Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson]. He started BET [Black Entertainment Television]. So, I think it's there. I think somebody's just gotta have the vision and a lot of it is about egos and I think a lot of it also is that people have come into town and I've sat down with a lot of venture capitalists and people that are trying to do things in the Hollywood space, one problem is a lack of information, lack of knowledge and going to the wrong people. You know, I remember years ago I was doing an interview. I won't say with who, with a well-known singer from a top female singing group on the business of being a singer. A mistake. She didn't know anything. She went to an open call and became a member of this Grammy [Grammy Award] winning group but she couldn't sit there and tell me anything that I could pass on to an aspiring singer, because she just got lucky. So, you know, I would ask her, "Well how do you do this, how do you--," "I don't know that. My agent should show me. I don't know--." It was the worst interview I ever, ever had and I learned from the experience that it's necessarily what your appearance is in the industry, it's what you really know and what you can give to another person. Speaker 1: If given the opportunity, say for example, if you run a studio or some major (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'd love to run a studio. I would absolutely love that. I'm working on our own imprint right now. I've got three deals, three offers on the table to have a Hollywood Black Film Festival DVD line with the option to release theatrically. So that's my next move. I'll probably sign the deal within the next month. Story_ID: 506283 Speaker 1: I just saw an article. Spike Lee is going to--he announced this week. He's going to do a film ['Miracle at St. Anna'] about blacks in the [U.S.] military during World War II [WWII]. Speaker 2: World War II, Nazis, yeah, announced that in Italy. That's-- Speaker 1: Your thoughts about subjects like that. Speaker 2: I think it's great. I mean, Spike Lee is a visionary, you know. I think that Spike has got to realize that okay, if his films don't do $100 million at the box office, it's okay. There's something called the independent art cinema circuit, and it's okay. It's about getting the message out there. Not everything is going to do bomb box office. Nowadays, actually not many do. It's only the big, big pictures that are gonna do it. So, it's okay. I think he's such a visionary, you know, with his Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] project ['When the Levees Broke: A Requiem in Four Acts'] and this and others, you know, his place in history is already there and I just, you know, more power to him for picking up these very relative--even Ice Cube is doing that, you know, when he did Black and White ['Black. White.']. You know, there are so many black people out there now that are doing great, great, great work. A lot of it's on cable. You know, we gotta look past just the broadcasting networks and the major movie studios and look to other outlets on the internet. You know, people are doing great work and that's part of a film festival too. If you got 125 films that you will see nowhere else, you will see black love stories, just like mainstream ones, but with our faces on them. You will see dramas. You will see faith-driven stories; I mean, horror films, action, it's amazing what we're doing in the film world that's never getting out there on mainstream, but we just have to realize it and educate the audience that it's not just what you see in a movie theater, it's going online to black film bookstore--whatever it's called--dot com, and looking and buying black films from there or downloading them from the internet. There's other ways to get them, and so for people who are looking for product, it's out there. Speaker 1: But the images of Hollywood have always been, say from the days back of Stepin Fetchit to now. I mean, that's the--they have carved the image of a black person in the minds of people around the world. Speaker 2: Yeah, they have, but I mean I think now with the Internet and us being able to go directly to the public, I think that will change. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because they're going to see different images of us. They're going to see our own images as people. Not just as Hollywood anymore. But people are getting out there. You've got YouTube. You've got Myspace. You've got people like my kids, your kids, putting out their own images. You see images of my kids [Monique Kersey-Love and Brittany Kersey-Love]? They're two black girls who go to Beverly Hills High [Beverly Hills High School, Beverly Hills, California]. That image is gonna be way different from Stepin Fetchit. You know what I'm saying? And that's the beauty of it. Story_ID: 506284 Speaker 1: What are some of the things about Hollywood that you like, and what are some of the things about Hollywood that you don't like? Speaker 2: There's nothing that I really don't like. I mean, it's just all about illusion. That's, if anything that bothers me. I mean, there's no reality based to it, you know, and the fact that so many celebrities buy into their own PR [public relations]. You know, they are just people. They are flesh that you can touch. Most of the time they've got more problems and issues than we do, I mean, it's amazing. You live that kind of a life, yeah. It's no different than anybody else, so I think, you know, this illusion that celebrities live this fabulous life, they're just as tired as me and you. They gotta get up at five o'clock to be on a movie set. You talk about no sleep? You know, I mean it's, you know, you see them on the red carpet. That's one time here and there. They are working their butts off. If you're working a TV show, you are working five, six days a week. You're working twelve-hour days. That's no joke. A lot of people don't get to see their houses. That's why they've got houses all over the place. They don't get to sleep in them. They don't get to see them. If you're a movie actor, you're going from movie to movie. When are you ever in your house? You know, so I think that the illusion is a fantasy. The reality is it's a hard job. Speaker 1: Along that line with the advice that you're giving, a lot of people come here with illusions of grandeur, thinking look, I've got the look. I'm beautiful. Where's my job? What do you tell someone like that? Speaker 2: It's show business, show business; it should be business show, because it's really about a business and it's not about the glamour, it's not about how talented you are, it's about how smart you are. It's about how well-read you are, how educated you are, how knowledgeable you are; you know, it's not about being the cute girl, it's about being the cute girl that knows how to network with other people. It's about the cute girl that realizes it's not a casting director you wanna meet, it's a director, because a casting director is just the liaison between the actor and the director. You don't want to go to the second string. You want the first string. The director is going to make the decision, so why network with casting directors? The director can get you in to read for the part, you know. So I think it's all about strategy and it's all about what you know, how you know it, knowing how to power network, you know. One of my biggest pet peeves is people come up to me and I've had this so many times, "Oh, girl. I just wanna network with you." Well, who are you? It takes time. It's about power networking. You don't just meet people and ask them for a favor. You have to build up trust. You have to build up a relationship, and I think that the people who are greedy and who don't know, it is blatantly honest and right there and in your face. You know right away. I can talk to a person and in two seconds know that they don't know anything. They need an education. And, it's sad that, you know, and that's the allure of Hollywood, but you know, people just have to be smart, especially if you're grown. Then you have no excuse. If you're young, then your parents should be telling you, but somebody's gotta educate you. Otherwise, you come out here with pipe dreams that never materialize, and there are a lot of people on Skid Row [Los Angeles, California]. Story_ID: 506285 Speaker 1: Couple more questions. There seems to be a lack of roles for black women in Hollywood. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that; and what do you see as a solution for that? Speaker 2: Well, more black women writing projects is a solution to it. It's a male-driven industry. Women, white or black are not getting the roles. Men run Hollywood, so it's really about those women like the Sherry Lansings of the world to really championed women's projects and tell more women's stories. You know, that whole second class citizen is very alive and well in Hollywood. And if you look at the audience, the audience is not all male, so it's really good story, everything is about good story. I think good stories rise to the top. It's about getting those projects out there. More women, just like African Americans in the studio system, running the studio system, making decisions to green light films. That's really what it's about. It's all about power. Whoever is in the position of power can decide what they wanna see, on screen big or small. Story_ID: 506286 Speaker 1: How do you wanna be remembered in this town? Speaker 2: Just about a person who dedicated her life to, you know, empowering African Americans to do better and to succeed in Hollywood. I'd be happy with that (laughter). Speaker 1: We'd be very happy and fortunate. Ma'am is there anything else you want to talk about? Speaker 2: You've just about covered it all. I've gone the trip down memory lane (laughter). Speaker 1: It's a pleasure, of course, bringing you on as one of us. Ooh, those girls [Monique Kersey-Love and Brittany Kersey-Love], ah, the future. Story_ID: 506287 Speaker 1: Okay, this was in September, August or September of 1987, at my parents' house in Haworth, New Jersey, my father pre-Emeril [Emeril Lagasse] days as the chef, was reigning over a buffet that he had created in our garage, and it was my first marriage reception at home. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER): Right, okay. Speaker 1: This is my grandmother [Peggy Epps], my father's mother, at my parents' house in Haworth, New Jersey, and this was taken in the last 1990s. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That is me and my college graduation from Douglass College Rutgers University [Douglass Residential College, New Brunswick, New Jersey], with my mom and dad. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Year? Speaker 1: Oh, 1983. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Okay. Next. Speaker 1: That is my sister, Lisa [Lisa Kersey], and that is circa 2004. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That is at the funeral of my father, from, let's see, from your left to right it's my godmother, my mom's best friend, my mom, her brother Bobby [Franz C. Wallace, Jr.], my uncle Eddie [Edward Varner] and his wife, Aunt Lucille [Lucille Epps Varner], who is my father's sister on the far right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Did you say that was, what year? Speaker 1: That was 1998. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ninety-eight [1998], okay. Thanks. Speaker 1: That is 1997, at my parents' house in Jacksonville, Florida. That's my mom and her mother, Gwendolyn Fieulleteau [Gwendolyn Miller Fieulleteau]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. Good shot. Okay, next. Speaker 1: That is also 1997 in Florida at my parents' house in Jacksonville. That is my mother's father, Franz Wallace [Franz C. Wallace, Sr.], and his wife, Evelyn [Evelyn Wallace], his second wife, not my grandmother. My step-grandmother. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 1: That is in 1991. They are my daughters, Ms. Monique [Monique Kersey-Love] is the one with the doll, and Ms. Brittany [Brittany Kersey-Love] is the one in the chair. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Good shot. Next. Speaker 1: Another one bites the dust. Speaker 2: First marriage [sic.], wedding. They are my parents on the left side, me, and my husband, Ron [Ronald Henley], and on the far right is his mother, and then my daughters, Monique and Brittany, and that was in 1993. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: That is Monique and Brittany with their dad. That is in 1998, and that's with who they call their dad, but it's actually their stepfather, Ron. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good. Speaker 2: That's my parents' favorite picture of all. That's my parents, Al [Al Kersey] and Cynthia Kersey [Cynthia Wallace Kersey], and all three of their granddaughters. The littlest one is Cayla [Cayla Jones], my sister's daughter, and my daughters, Monique and Brittany, and that is in 1995. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Which one are we doing? Speaker 1: This one. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is 1961, this is me at three months old. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And there's one of me and my sister. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Love the red velvet cover. That's like a 1960 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know, isn't it something? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's great. Speaker 2: Birth to, I can't even read it now, yes, oh. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's great, though. Speaker 2: There's a picture down here with me in the pink dress. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: See, and the other little smaller picture on that page, Ron [HistoryMaker Ronald H. Brewington], that looks just like Monique with the pout and everything. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And, that is me and my little sister. I am three years old and she is about six months old; so that would be in 1964. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, perfect...