 Story_ID: 9569 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Iris Dawn Parker. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Okay. My name is Sokoni Karanja and the first name is spelled S-O-K-O-N-I, the last name is K-A-R-A-N-J-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us the meaning of your name? Speaker 2: It's not complete without the middle name Tacuma, it's T-A-C-U-M-A, Sokoni Tacuma Karanja, a person from the sea with knowledge willing to share. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's what the meaning is. Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind how you received this name? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I--my, my birth name is Lathan Johnson and, but I went to Tanzania back in 1966, '67 [1967], '68 [1968] and I lived there for a while, lived there in a village in Upper Ketete (ph.) and they gave me the name while I was there, be--I guess because I shared a lot of information about this experience and, in the United States and, and they, they liked me. And I visited about fifty or sixty villages over the time that I was there, lived in many of them and so that's what they called me, you know, Sokoni. Speaker 1: Okay. So Sokoni means--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean what was the whole name again? Speaker 2: Well Sokoni actually you know in Swahili means duke--I mean or, or a store you know so a storehouse of knowledge you know I--you know so--and then seeing is something, Tacuma has something to do with seeing and then the Karanja is I guess the--. Speaker 1: From across the sea? Speaker 2: Yeah across the sea, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah that's where it all comes together. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, I know it's always a story behind names because they--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: People look for meaning when they change their names and so--. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --you know I thought I'd ask. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah it was a, it was a very powerful experience for me to, to have, to have them give me that name and I adopted it. Story_ID: 9570 Speaker 1: What is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is 02/11/1940. I was born in Topeka, Kansas to Hubert and Laura Johnson and that's all I can remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Occupation, I guess organizer, administrator, Urbanologist, you name it you know. Those are things that I do you know. Speaker 1: And I think you're most noted in Chicago as the founder and director of the Center for New Horizons? Speaker 2: That's correct, yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is January 7th, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the central office of Centers for New Horizons in the conference room. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At 4150 South King Drive in Chicago, Illinois at 60653. Story_ID: 9571 Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: There are actually two. One I can't eat, the other I eat all the time, turkey is my favorite food and pecan pie is my other favorite and I don't eat it. But I have, I have about four of them frozen in, in my refrigerator just in case I decide to go off my agreement with myself you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Not really but I like bright colors. I like the reds, the yellows, the oranges and, and then I also like the earth tones so--but the reds and oranges and you know I like those. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I prefer warm weather so I guess summer and spring would be, you know, my favorite times. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I, I can enjoy winter too so it's not you know it's not absolutely locked in, you know. Other than that I wouldn't be in Chicago, you know I'd be gone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of these days I do plan to go some place like Cuba and stay for the remainder of my life and do some work there hopefully. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I'd say that it's probably Mombasa in East Africa, Kenya, East Africa. It's one of the most beautiful places in the world, Mombasa. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right on the ocean. Speaker 2: Right. As a matter of fact the, that [Indian Ocean] tsunami [2004] hit, hit there you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Didn't kill many people there but it, it hit there, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well I like what is credited to the former president of, of South Africa, [Nelson] Mandela, you know. He said our greatest fear is that we are great and that we are special. And I, I'm paraphrasing, I don't know the exact quote but I, I like that. That's probably my favorite you know 'cause I think it applies so much to African people. I think we're scared to be what we can be you know in, in this world and, and other people are scared that we will be, you know. So one--somebody's got to get over the fear and get on with our lives. Story_ID: 9572 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: What little I know about each of them I'll tell you. Speaker 1: Okay. Well can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother had, they decided that they were going to give her as many names as they possibly could. So they started naming and you know so it's Florence Laura, Laura Bell Henry and there was one other name that I can't ever remember. That's--Henry was her maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 1913 in Oneida, Kansas. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side first of all? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well I knew my great grandmother, Grandma Parks and I knew my grandmother, Gammy. I mean those were the names we called, we, we--I, I called them. Beyond that I don't know much about them. I know that Gammy, I mean Grandma Parks appeared to be white although I couldn't really say that. You know nobody ever talked about it but you know she, she appeared to be Caucasian you know. But she was very much the dominant person in the house, in, in the, in the house that I, I remember you know visiting you know. And she was the dominant person in the family. I don't remember when she died but I know that it was a great deal of sadness in the family when it, when it happened. I don't remember the year, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was your great grandmother? Speaker 2: Great grandmother, yes. Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Are there any stories from that side of the family about slavery or reconstruction or how they got to Kansas or any of that? Speaker 2: No. No, there's very--that side of the family is pretty silent. I, I knew my, my uncle, great uncle who was blind and he and his wife used to talk about you know different things but not really a great, you know there wasn't a great deal of information shared about--that I recall, that I remember. I don't really remember you know. My, I have a brother that is like the third brother in my family, Warren who remembers everything you know. And he, he can tell me a whole lot more and you know I guess I didn't pay attention when I was coming along as to you know the important historical kinds of things you know and family kinds of things. But he seems to have gathered all that information so I go to him to ask the questions you know, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. What did your family do for a living? Now they were in Oneida, Kansas right? Speaker 2: Yes, that's where my mother was born. I, I suspect that they were laborers and that's, that's all I really know. Speaker 1: Now did she grow up like on a farm or in a town or--? Speaker 2: She grew up on a farm but she moved to Topeka [Kansas] at a very early age you know so my mother is probably--she's very dark complexion with long black hair you know. So I, I gather from that look that she may have some [American] Indian background but I'm not sure. We never, we never really talked about that but that's what comes, comes through to me you know, in, in our, in what I've seen and, and through--and that's through, it runs through her entire family. But her family is an interesting mix of people. My Uncle Chuck and Uncle Bob which were her brothers were gangsters of the first order. I mean they ran the policy and the Fourth Street Club--not the Fourth Street, Seventeenth Street Club in, in Topeka and were considered the baddest men in the town, literally or figuratively. I mean they were--my Uncle Chuck was about six [feet] four [inches] and my Uncle Bob was a you know, you know much more muscular and shorter fellow. But--and my Uncle Bob--Uncle Chuck had a bald head and he would come around, he be the--he was the nicest fellow. He just treated us you know with--I never knew until they died--'cause they died spectacularly in a shootout there in--at the Seventeenth Street Club. And I just didn't, I didn't know that they were involved in that kind of activity but they obviously were. And, but they were very nice to us as kids. I mean they, they would come over, bring us presents and talk to us and my Uncle Bob had a whole bunch of kids himself. My Uncle Chuck had, had a couple but he was, he was very elute, very cool you know kind of guy and you never would have guessed that he was, ran this club and you know controlled the policy in the city you know in the little town of Topeka, Kansas. Speaker 1: Now is there a story about what the shootout was about or was there a struggle over the, who was going to control? Speaker 2: Power, power, yeah, who was going to control. And--. Speaker 1: Was it within the black community or it was--? Speaker 2: It was--I don't know. I don't know whether there were other attempts--. Speaker 1: So you know the famous story, that they made the movie of about Bumpy Johnson in Harlem [New York] who--I think Dutch Schultz encroached upon him and the stories here of Frank Nitty trying to encroach upon the Jones Brothers. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: You know, so I don't know--. Speaker 2: I'm sure it may have been a similar kind of thing but I don't know. I don't know that. All we know and our family is very quiet about this except some of the information seeped through you know with us listening to what happened to Uncle Chuck and Uncle Bob 'cause all of a sudden they were dead and they had been you know like the previous week visiting the house and you know having conversations. So--. Speaker 1: How old were you when they were killed? Speaker 2: I guess we were, I was about seven or eight you know seven or eight years old. Yeah, yeah so, and I was not really allowed to go to that part of town you know so I didn't, I didn't really know much about it until I was much older when, when I you know could freely go there and look and see what was going on you know. But they owned this tavern and it was notorious and they, they I guess ran the policy business, you know. But this sort of ran through my family. You know my daddy [Hubert Johnson] you know was--did on the side in addition to working at Morrell Packing House, also had, you know, made bootleg liquor and I mean they had a big vat in the kitchen you know and he would bring all the folks in and you know all the men you know in the neighborhood would come to buy liquor in the neighborhood. And it was, it was fascinating to me because I always thought we were very poor and, but--and, and, and--no I didn't think we were very poor, I thought we were well to do. But I, I, I--my folks always told me we were very poor but I, I never believed that because you know we had, we had plenty of food and you know we lived in a house. You know it wasn't much of a house but you know it was a shotgun house. But it was, you know and we rented. You know I know we took twenty dollars next door to a guy by the name of Mr. Webb every, every month. I think it was twenty dollars a month, that's what it was. And--but my daddy worked at Morrell Packing House and so I thought we were, you know, wealthy. He worked you know so that was, that was, that was very positive. But he also had made this stuff in, in this, in this vat and they had, you know they made it every--periodically and he would, I guess they got money for it. And the reason I say I guess he got money for it because in about 1951 or '2 [1952], Mr. Moore down the street from us was getting ready to sell his house and so my daddy said he was going to buy the house. And, and I--then he lifted up the floorboard and got money out of a coffee can, took a piece out of the mattress, got money out of the mattress, he got, he got money from a lot of different places. And I, you know, I always would go back and search for them afterwards you know search those places to see you know if they put any money, money back. But he got a total of five thousand dollars. He paid cash for the house and so we bought Mr. Moore's house. He bought Mr. Moore's house. My mother, up until about three years ago still lived in the house that my brother now is managing the house and is renting it out periodically to different people. So, so that's, so, but so it--you know the, the activity, the sort of side activity was always a part of other aspects I mean of, of our family activity. You know there were some people always doing those kind of things. But they really protected us kids from that. My cousins, me, others you know we really didn't know a whole lot about that. We were expected to go to school, get educated and, and be you know and be somebody. So, but they did whatever they could to, to make sure they could take care, take care of the families. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us--now oh, back to your mother for a second, did she talk about growing up a lot or did she--? Speaker 2: No. No, she--. Speaker 1: What do you know about her growing up and going to school and what she was like when she was growing up? Speaker 2: Not a whole lot. She, she went to high school and she graduated from high school, graduated quite well from high school you know and was you know--they, they said she was one of the smartest kids that ever graduated from Topeka High [School]. And the--and then she did domestic work you know. She didn't consider going to college I guess. She eventually became a licensed practical nurse and I remember that occurred in, in the '50s [1950s] some time and then she worked at the VA Hospital [Veterans Administration Hospital] you know from that point on. But she apparently married my father at a very young age. You know she was like right out of high school. She was about sixteen you know when she graduated from high school. Speaker 1: Do they pass down a story about how they met? Did they tell you about how they met? Speaker 2: No. You know they talked about their courtship and how my daddy was a, a, a dancer or at least he fashioned himself a dancer and my mamma couldn't dance at all. And I inherited that from her because I have no rhythm and she, she has no rhythm. But he had all the rhythm and he didn't share it with me. My other--a couple of my other brothers actually you know gained some rhythm but I didn't, I didn't get any you know. So--. Speaker 1: Well you know this is an African American History project now we may have to stop the camera. Speaker 2: I can't dance. I, I, I, I destroyed the myth. I have no rhythm (laughs). Story_ID: 9573 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, Hubert Joseph Johnson. Speaker 1: All right, and what's his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born in Topeka, Kansas, 1905. I just called my mom and asked her so that's, that's the reason I know, I'm so clear. It was June 7, 1905. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well tell us about his side of the family and do you know anymore about the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: I know some of them you know cause I met some of them, my Uncle Buddy who was a jackleg preacher, my grandma, my dad's mother Grandma Nanna, Nanny. That's what we called her, Grandma Nanny, that's what we called her. I don't know what her real name was but Nanny is what we called her. I remember her, she was a tall lady you know large boned, dark complexion, very, very much in control of the situation. And I don't remember my grandfather on, on my, on my father's side. I remember my uncles, Uncle Paul, Uncle Ralph and they were--my Uncle Ralph did not live in Topeka, he lived in Wichita and my Aunt Ruth. My Aunt Ruth was a, very much a part of my life up until about seven or eight years ago when she passed away. She had four children who we were very close to growing up. So I, you know I, I don't know a lot about my family in, in that sense. I mean we, we have family reunions and we talk about things but mostly we talk about things that are contemporary, we don't talk about things that are historical. Warren is the only one that seems to really have the history you know. Story_ID: 9574 Speaker 1: Coming from Kansas, is there any--do you know if, this might trigger something I don't know. Is there any history in your family of your ancestors being in Kansas during the time when Kansas was vying for statehood you know when John Brown was in Kansas? Or when it was bloody Kansas and all that, is there any history of that? Speaker 2: Not really. I, I, I have had a, a lot of exposure to the 1954, preparation for the 1954 'Brown v. [Board of Education' of] Topeka, Kansas decision. I was--I grew up in a church, Church of God where a gentleman by the name of McArthur Burnett [sic, McKinley Burnett] was--who is the, sort of the father of that particular piece of legislation. McArthur Burnett went to my church and he worked with Thurgood Marshall and Sam Jackson and put the, put that piece of, of I guess it's legislation. It's not legislation but that court order to help to put that--. Speaker 1: Court case together? Speaker 2: --court case together. And so I, I saw those folks coming in and out of the church, didn't know who they were but--and the other thing about McArthur Burnett is that he introduced me to J. A. Rogers and to my Africaness. And so up until I was completing my Ph.D. program and which was when he passed away, he would you know give me books that helped me to understand in a deeper way who I was and, and what my responsibilities were you know to my community. So, so I, I grew up you know with that kind of tutelage--. Speaker 1: So when did you meet--? Speaker 2: McArthur? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well I, I think I knew him most of my life. He, he was in my church and I grew up in that church. Speaker 1: What was the name of that church? Speaker 2: Church of God. It's not the church--it's a Church of God out of Anderson, Indiana. The headquarters is out of Anderson, Indiana and it's a very fundamentalist church. It's, it's typical Kansas kind of you know church you know where you know, you don't smoke, you don't drink you don't dance, you don't fornicate you don't do anything you know that's fun. You just you know you just, you just, you know you can participate in sports you know and that kind of thing but beyond that you do, you do absolutely nothing, you know. And on Sundays you do even less, you know. But, so that, that was, that was the kind of church I grew up in. And so it was--. Speaker 1: What was the name of your particular church? Speaker 2: The Church of God at 12th [Street] and Lane [Avenue], 12th and Lane. Speaker 1: And Lane? Speaker 2: 12th and Lane, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's still there. In fact my brother owned, owned the building. My brother is quite an entrepreneur. He's also the local black undertaker so he has--he, in addition to, he owns almost every building in the black community and, and, and he owned that church for a long time, and so--. Speaker 1: Right he owned--was, is it an actually a church building? Speaker 2: Actually a church building. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a church building that they built while I was, while I was growing up there you know. And he, because nobody bought it when they moved that church he just bought the building and so he owned it for about ten years. Then he finally convinced another church to buy it and so he got out--he said he got tired of you know owning a church you know. So he gave, gave it up and they--there's another church occupying that church at this point, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And McArthur Burnett, was he from Kansas originally? Speaker 2: That I don't know. Now McArthur was you know--if--and he could have passed for a white man but he you know claimed his African heritage and his wife was even more white but she was also African. And so you know there were a lot of things you couldn't do in Topeka. And so McArthur and his wife did them. They would cross over you know get stuff, bring it back and so it was you know and it was sort of a game with them you know. She would go--you know they would say you know well you know black folk couldn't get it so she would go and she could get it you know. And she was most, she was the most effective at it you know cause she, she I guess growing up she had learned you know articulation that was you know more European and so she, she was, she was very good. She could go in and talk just like them and they would you know give her whatever she wanted you know. So--and you know there were numerous stories about how she had gotten materials that black folk weren't, weren't supposed to have. But the black teachers in, in, in Topeka hated McArthur cause he always was pushing or higher standards of education and that kind of thing. And they--and he was the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] yeah, he was the head of the NAACP there and so that's how he got hooked up with Thurgood Marshall and Sam, you don't remember Sam. Well you're maybe too young for that. Samuel Jackson was you know appointed by one of these presidents you know as attorney general, assistant attorney general or something like that. Story_ID: 9575 Speaker 1: Well tell us more about McArthur Burnett [sic, McKinley Burnett]. He sounds like an interesting figure. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't think we've had too many people discuss him. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the 'Brown [v. Board of Education' of Topeka, Kansas]--did you know the--? Speaker 2: Implications of the 'Brown versus'? Speaker 1: Did you know the Browns of the 'Brown versus'--? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I know them grown up at this point. I know, I know the daughter who is, yeah she's actually a granddaughter who is sort of a spokesperson for the Brown family. Speaker 1: What was the name of the name of the lady, she was a--what Brown, what was her first name? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: I don't, I mean that's the thing--seems like we should all remember it but I don't. I know I don't. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well she, she grew up and had a daughter. Her daughter is, now has earned a Ph.D. and is you know the one that's actually promoting, sort of marketing the whole 'Brown v. Topeka, Kansas' piece. So she--Mac had to, had to really you know chase them down and, and sort of corrall them to do it 'cause they were afraid you know that they were going to be hurt by the white community cause the white community was very--growing up in Topeka is just like growing up in Mississippi almost. You know it's, it's, it's pretty rough. It's pretty rough. Speaker 1: I think when I was a teenager you'd have to convince me of that. But now, nowadays I mean when you hear the stories of the West and Oklahoma--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --Kansas, Missouri, some of those places are a lot--. Speaker 2: Yeah, well I mean Oklahoma, you know in Tulsa they--my sister in law on--Larry's my second brother next to me, his wife, her family came out of Tulsa and they were the ones that got burned out in that whole Greenville, Greenwood [Oklahoma] thing there in--. Speaker 1: 1921. Speaker 2: Yeah, they got--they, one of her uncles had his business burned to the ground you know and, and he, they almost ran, they ran him out of Oklahoma. You know they were the most wealthy families in Tulsa. Speaker 1: Now was that the family that owned the movie theater? Speaker 2: I'm not sure what all they owned but they were the most wealthy family and they got run, run out of there you know. And they almost run out of Oklahoma but they was able through the lawsuit to stop that, you know. But it, I mean they bombed them whether you know the, the, the airplane. Speaker 1: It was gasoline bombs or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, it was something. Yeah it was something. So yeah. Speaker 1: So they can tell stories about that? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Oh yeah it's--they have a--her mom just died, she was ninety-nine when she died, Harriet's mom, that's Larry's wife's mother and there's about ten or twelve brothers and sisters there, you know. And they, they started out in Oklahoma so that was--so they have a real history of that experience you know. Directly it impacted their family you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Back to Attorney Burnett, do you know where he went to law school or--? Speaker 2: Oh no he wasn't an attorney. Speaker 1: He wasn't? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Oh he was just the head of the local--. Speaker 2: He was the head of the NAACP. He wasn't an attorney he was just a very smart man that knew how to you know piece things--he worked at the Santa Fe Railroad you know that's what, that's what he did. He, he was just--. Speaker 1: Atchison, Topeka and the Santa Fe [Railroad]. Speaker 2: And Santa Fe, that's right. So he worked for the Santa Fe Railroad and, and he did this as an application you know of other--you know as a, as a, as a side thing, a community building community work kind of thing. Yeah and, and then he attended the Church of God there at 12th [Street] and Lane [Avenue] so that's how I encountered him. And he and--his son and I were very close friends you know Marcus Burnett. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's how I knew him. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was sort of a mentor for you growing up I guess in terms of--. Speaker 2: Yes, between him and, him and my daddy [Hubert Johnson] you know. They were you know--but he was a very tough man. He, he--I remember the insurance man came to our house. He was a white insurance man and made some remark to my mother. And I remember him knocking him off the porch you know and you know everybody in the neighborhood was scared. We were right at 1186 Buchanan [Street] because they were afraid somebody's was going to come and get my dad. But he knocked him off the porch and, and you know got after him pretty good. The neighbors pulled him off of him. The insurance man never came back. But--. Speaker 1: That's when they would come around and get a nickel every week? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Come, come around and get a dime or a nickel or whatever it was you know. But you know made some crack to my mom. My mom was a very pretty lady and so you know it, it was easy to understand that they'd be attracted but you know it was wrong, wrong lady you know to make those kind of passes at. So, you know so, so it was--that, that was--I mean we always knew sort of subtly that Topeka was a very dangerous place you know for, for black people. Story_ID: 9576 Speaker 1: You mentioned J. A. Rogers and he's a figure that is legendary--. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --in terms of culling black history you know out of nowhere--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for people and publishing it himself. Speaker 2: Right, right. He's totally self-published, yeah. Speaker 1: So tell us about your meeting J. A. Rogers. Speaker 2: I never met J. A. Rogers. Speaker 1: Oh okay. You were introduced to his books? Speaker 2: I, I was introduced to his books by McArthur Burnett [sic, McKinley Burnett] who had all of them, 'Sex and Race [Negro-Caucasian Mixing in All Ages and Lands'], all those books you know he--Volume I, Volume II, Volume III, I still have them you know and I read them in their entirety and they gave me an excellent understanding of, of what had transpired you know. He and Chancellor Williams sort of wrote from the same genre you know with the you know gaining a lot of information than just kind of putting it down without you know--he had a time line order that kind of thing but excellent information. You just have to be able to call through it and, and put it into you know proper order. And that was that was the beauty of it you know. One of the books I remember was about this fellow that worked on the train and this white guy got on and started telling him all of the things that you know he should do. And he sort of taught a lesson as they went through the story about the history of African people as opposed to European people. And so that was very impressive. Speaker 1: Yeah, the black Pullman Porters. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Who people now look at it and say that was a surrogate of Rogers. You know Rogers--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --was a Pullman Porter at one time. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay that's, that's a real possibility. Speaker 1: So that was--that character kind of stood in for him you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well that's--. Speaker 1: And the name of the book was 'From Superman to Man'. Speaker 2: 'From Superman to Man', that's right. That's right yeah, excellent book. Story_ID: 9577 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah. My brother and I were--you know you, they had outdoor toilets back in that day and this was in the '40s [1940s] I would imagine. Yeah it was in the '40s and we were playing and he decided to climb down into the, into the toilet you know. We thought we would try, we were trying to get a ball down, down there out of there and so I said I would hold onto his leg and so he got stuck down there. So I--that was, that was probably the--and we were about--we couldn't have been more than three or four, you know. I was maybe four, he was maybe three you know. I mean we were, we were very young. I, and I, I remember my mother coming, rushing--no it wasn't my mother it was a neighbor Ms. Thompson next door who got, who got him out you know. But he was stuck there. You know it was a pretty smelly situation (laughs). That, that's the earliest memory I have you know. Speaker 1: Sir, you know I cannot laugh out loud. It's unprofessional so I have to try to-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You can see the way you told that you knew what was going to happen next to him. Speaker 2: Right. So--. Speaker 1: Well okay, that's quite a memory. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughs). Speaker 1: So how many siblings do you have? Speaker 2: I have three brothers and a sister. Larry [Johnson] is the brother next to me, Warren [Johnson] who is just under Larry and Ivan, James Ivan [Johnson] and then Wilhelmeta [Johnson] is the sister. Speaker 1: Okay, are you--where do you fall in the order? Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. I'm the oldest. There was a sister older than me but I never knew her name or anything. She passed away at--during the birthing process and so we never really knew who she was. But she, she was born a few years before I was. Story_ID: 9578 Speaker 1: Describe your neighborhood? What kind of dwelling did you live in? Speaker 2: You know shotgun houses you know. The first house I recall, the house where the outdoor toilet was, was a two story house right at the corner of Lincoln [Street] and 12th Street [Topeka, Kansas] and right across from Jackson's store. There was a Jackson's store that was owned by a black woman. Her name was Ms. Jackson. She had a brother who you know also helped her with the store but she was, she was the empress I mean she ran it you know. And Ms.--so the neighborhood was very peaceful as I recall. Men stood on the corner and told tales, they called it the stem. I'm gonna go--my daddy [Hubert Johnson] used to say, I'm gonna go hang out on the stem you know and so that's where they would go to tell big lies and drink there, drink that stuff that he made in the kitchen and all that kind of stuff. So the Buchanan School which is where I went to elementary school was right across the way from my--that first house we lived in. We moved from that house to 1186 Buchanan [Street] which was right next to Gaines & Son Funeral Home and that's where we grew up 'til about twelve years old when my daddy bought Moore, Mr. Moore's house. So that's--so it was a very, it was a neighborhood that I knew. It always seemed you know to the south and to the north everything seemed mysterious cause we didn't have a car when I was growing up so I didn't know much. I knew about downtown because I would go downtown with my mother [Florence Henry Johnson] on the bus occasionally and, or to, with my father to get some shoes, Health Spot shoes. You know cause I had flat feet, they, they always wanted me to have Health Spot Shoes. So I had to go and you know you could look in this little thing you know you could look down in this little thing you could see your feet. Speaker 1: Yeah what they call a fluoroscope. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Fluoroscope. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's exactly what it was and you could see your feet. And so I always thought it was fascinating to go buy shoes at the Health Spot. Speaker 1: This doesn't exist anymore. This is--you could look--for those who are watching this now who are young they probably wouldn't understand this. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But you could look down, you could see the bones in your--. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --feet. I mean it was like an x-ray of your feet you could see it with a fluoroscope. So I suppose they don't have them now either cause they're too expensive or because they emitdangerous radiation or--. Speaker 2: Right, probably. Speaker 1: You just don't see them anymore. Speaker 2: Probably the, the second one the emitting dangerous radiation and we didn't know it you know. But they, they certainly had to have them in all the--well in the Health Spot Shoe Stores anyway. Speaker 1: Well when I was coming along they had them in most of the shoe stores. Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: You could, yeah stick your foot in there and see your feet. Speaker 2: Well that was, I mean that was what twenty years later you know so that's, that's, that's good. You know I didn't know that they still existed you know. I didn't see them after I, I left Topeka, Kansas. Speaker 1: I grew up in Dayton [Ohio] and we had them, it was during I guess until about 1961 or '2 [1962] they were still around. Speaker 2: Okay, right. I stopped wearing Health Spot shoes probably when I was--after the sixth grade. My daddy said you know you can go buy your own shoes you know cause I had, you know cause we all had to work. So you know everybody had jobs. So you know you bought your own shoes. So you know Health Spot was too expensive so you know I went to wherever I could go and afford them and look, you know, so--. Speaker 1: Did your feet bother you when you were growing up? Speaker 2: No. I was, I was, I was an athlete. I grew up, I played all the sports and I was very--well I was good you know I was good. And I, I was good enough to go through college on an athletic scholarship. So, so I you know--and, and I, I thought I was going to play pro ball but I injured my knee in my senior year and nothing much came of it after that. Speaker 1: What was it your best sport? Speaker 2: Football. I was a, played halfback and middle linebacker. I, I was a better defensive player than I was offensive player although I, I, I gained notoriety for my offensive play you know when I was a much better defensive player. I loved to tackle. I loved 'cause I could really teach folk, especially those big bruisers coming to the line you know cause you know it was all integrated you know by that time so it was you know you couldn't pay them back you know in ordinary ways but you could pay them when they came through that line. So I loved, I loved football, yeah. Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, sights and sounds. I guess the Kansas Free Fair was, was the, sort of the highlight of September going to back to school, August, late August, September. You go to the Kansas Free Fair. They had rides and they had all of these cows and, and hogs and everything. So see you know Kansas is very much a farm area and all around it is farming so, so they had cattle and pigs and horses and all that and you know and they, they judged them and so you got to see all that. They had auto racing right there in the Kansas Free Fair so we worked at the auto racing you know while they was--'cause you made, you know sold drinks you know around there. And then they had the rides you know you had to pay for the rides and so it was always a delight at that time of the year for a whole week to go to the Kansas Free Fair and look at the hogs and the cattle and all and the, and the horses. And you know and always wanted to and in fact did own, didn't own a horse but had a horse that was owned by my play uncle who had a farm just outside Topeka. And so I you know, I, I was able to ride that horse when I, when I visited him you know so, so that, that was a very positive experience. I enjoyed the farm. I enjoyed my play uncle's farm and I enjoyed going there. Worked on the farm in the summer time, picked potatoes and, and other crops and enjoyed that very much. I think as far, athletically the, the track meets were always wonderful because we got to travel. You know we got to go to different parts of the country and run and, and, and compete against folks. And we, we always had a very good track team and you know Charlie Tidwell was my competition you know in the quarter and the hundred yard dash and he'd always beat me. But I beat him once and, but I, you know I was, I, I enjoyed that. That was a very positive thing. The track meets were always very--the girls came you know and watched you know and you know always you know--they liked the guys that win--won and so I you know I enjoyed you know showing off you know and that kind of stuff. So it was a very positive you know kind of experience. Story_ID: 9579 Speaker 1: I enjoyed school all the way. You know elementary school it was always, I just loved school. I, I--from, from the kindergarten all the way through, you know, Ph.D. program I, I loved the experience of going to school. Speaker 2: Now did you go to Buchanan [School, Topeka, Kansas] all the way through elementary school? Speaker 1: I went through the sixth grade. See, they had a middle school in Topeka, seventh, eighth and ninth grade which was Boswell Junior High [School]. That's where schools were integrated. They were not integrated at the elementary school until after 1954. It was--so I just missed the elementary school integration. I went to Buchanan School which was an all black school and I think I received some of the best education that I, that I had during my growing up years at Buchanan because the best teachers, the black teachers had to be very best because in order for them to stay there they had to be really very good. So I had excellent teachers all the way through the sixth grade. Then I don't really remember many of the teachers in junior high cause that was my first integrated experience. Speaker 2: Now you were actually there in 1954 in junior high school--. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --when the 'Brown v. The Board' [of Education of Topeka, Kansas] decision was passed down. Speaker 1: Right. Yeah, and I, I, like I said I observed them you know in the preparation for it you know people coming and going, meeting with McArthur Burnett [sic, McKinley Burnett] and Reverend (Knowles?) who was the pastor of the church you know. So I observed them. I didn't know who they were. I knew that they had on suits and they seemed important you know. But you know as a--I was very young so it didn't matter much you know that they were important. Speaker 2: Now did your parents talk about it or did you hear adults talking, about it after the decision was rendered? Speaker 1: After the decision was rendered, yeah. Speaker 2: And it was on the news and that sort of thing? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah 'cause some of my family was affected by it 'cause they had to go to different schools. They, they couldn't go to Buchanan. Buchanan was actually closed. It was--and most of the black schools, the black, the schools that were predominantly black were closed so we ended up going to the other schools. You know there were Buchanan, Monroe, Washington, all of those schools they were on--Topeka, in Topeka we lived in what was called Tennessee Town cause most of the people coming from Tennessee settled there. So we lived in Tennessee Town. And black folk could live in Tennessee Town or Lowman Hill. Lowman Hill was nicer than Tennessee Town but we grew up in Tennessee Town. And then there was Mud Town which was on the east side of town and they didn't have sewers over there so you know it was serious mud when, when, when the, when the rain came. And then in North Topeka black folk sort of lived scattered but they had a little concentration there in, in North Topeka. And North Topeka always got flooded up until 1951 when they had the major flood and then they fixed it, you know they, they created dams and all that kind of stuff so, so it wouldn't flood again. So, so, so I guess I answered your question. I hope I did. Speaker 2: Yeah. Does--now are there any teachers in school that you, in grade school first of all that you remember that--? Speaker 1: I remember all of that. Speaker 2: That were--? Speaker 1: I remember every teacher in grade school. Speaker 2: Well who were the ones I guess that were most important to your development and growth? Speaker 1: Well Mrs. North was my first grade teacher but Ms. Monroe was just so pretty and she was my kindergarten teacher and I really enjoyed Ms. Monroe. I--'cause she would, and take us you know to her house and that kind of thing and we met her, her fianceé and all that you know. We, we really had a nice--I think I was in love with Ms., Ms. Monroe. Ms. North was much strict and she taught me how to read you know. I learned to read--well actually my mother [Florence Henry Johnson] taught me how to read but I, I learned to read in the first grade. And then--so Mrs. North--and I also liked Mrs. North's daughter because she taught piano lessons so I took piano lessons from her daughter. So I knew Mrs. North both from the classroom and from working with her daughter as a, you know learning piano. Still didn't get any rhythm you know but I, I learned how to play the piano. I had a recital every year and you know I could, I could play the piano but no rhythm. Then in the second grade was Ms. McBriar and she forced me to learn how to concentrate because I should have been in the first reading group and I was always in the second reading group cause I was always talking to somebody when, when my turn, turn came to read you know so I would miss my opportunity to move up to the first grade. I, eventually I moved up just by virtue of the fact that I could read better than most of the folks in the class. So, so eventually I, you know she--but she got, she forced me to concentrate while, and stop talking and so I remember that. Mrs. Starnes was our, was the next teacher and Mrs. Starnes, Mrs. North, then Ms. Montgomery and Mr. Ross, those--Mr. Ross is still alive today and as a matter of fact he was my--I just lost a nephew and I went home to, for the home going ceremony and he was there. He attended the, Larry, Jr.'s funeral you know, so yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. So now who else, what other teachers, any others? Speaker 1: In elementary school? Speaker 2: Elementary school, yeah. Speaker 1: In element--no that was all of the, that was all of them. Speaker 2: Okay. You went through all of them? Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that went through all of them. I even remember the janitor's name as Mr. Savington (ph.). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so we knew--I knew Mr. Savington. He lives right, all of them lived right in the neighborhood. You know Ms. North lived right across the street from me and Mrs.--well Mrs. Montgomery lived in Lowman Hill you know so you know and Mr. Ross lived in Lowman Hill, Ms. McBriar lived in Lowman Hill. They all drove these little Fords you know, little black Fords you know funny looking Fords you know. Speaker 2: The one with the kind of, the circle on the front like a--? Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right, yeah. Speaker 2: '49 [1949] Ford? Speaker 1: Yeah something like that. Speaker 2: Or a '50 [1950] Ford? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah something like that you know. And then--so that was all of the people and I knew there was sort of a, a superintendent over, over, over the, the quote Negro schools. I'm trying to think of his name. I can't think of his name. I, I used to go with his daughter but I can't, I can't remember his name. Speaker 2: What was her name? Speaker 1: I can't remember her name either. I would you know if I had some time I probably would remember her name but I can't remember it you know. But she was a very, very nice young lady, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Now did, well when you went to middle school, you go to Boswell and it's an integrated school--. Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: --you know were there any black teachers in Boswell? Speaker 1: None. None. All white teachers. All white teachers. Speaker 2: Well that seems to beat--did that kind of define what integration meant then when you go to--? Speaker 1: Yeah, that sort of defined integration. Integration was you went to a school where you would get better education you know and white people could give you better education. But the fascinating thing about education in Topeka is that you, you went to all, you took all kinds of classes. You know I learned how to do home ec, I took Latin, you know I took Spanish, I took French, I took all that stuff you know and you know, but--and then I also took woodwork you know so all of those things were a part of the curriculum. You know, you, you learned how to build stuff. You learned how to fix stuff. You learned how to--you had--they had an electrical class you know that you could take. I, I think I took that. Printing, I took printing in high school and then I also took all these other courses you know so, so it was, it was a very broad curriculum you know. Speaker 2: Okay, now this--so did you ever have a black teacher again in school, in public school? Speaker 1: No, not, not--there was one black teacher that came to the high school when I was in Topeka High [School], but we'd just go around and look at him you know. I think he taught English but I never had the good fortune of having him as a teacher. Speaker 2: So as they closed black schools in favor of integration and shipped the students to the white schools in the name of integration, what happened to the black teachers? Speaker 1: They, they, some of them were pulled in 'cause they were very good. Many of them were very good, Ms. Starnes, you know some of the really, better teachers they all, they all went to, into the elementary schools but--and they kept the very best ones and they, but they went to, they mostly taught in all white schools. They didn't teach black kids. Story_ID: 9580 Speaker 1: I was asking you off camera about the Browns, if they had to suffer any consequences for having been named in that suit ['Brown v. Board of Education'] with all, or any backlash in Topeka [Kansas]? Speaker 2: Yeah. They, they had, they had a great deal of fear that they might be singled out and, and, and hurt by it. But he continued as I recall it, to have his job and he had, he had--he was always in and out of employment as I recall it. And, and so--but he, he was not obviously you know singled out as a, as a person that they were after you know. So you know and it, it had such a profound national impact it, it really kind of raised his stature in the community you know, Mr. Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Now he wasn't known as a leader in town or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Mr. McArthur Burnett [sic, McKinley Burnett] had to pursue him. As a matter of fact he tried to get out of it two or three times but McArthur kept him in, in the suit. Story_ID: 9581 Speaker 1: You say you loved school but was it sort of a culture shock to leave like a, the friendly confines of Buchanan [School, Topeka, Kansas] to go to a--? Speaker 2: Well you know in Topeka you know you have the advantage and disadvantage of always interacting with, with white kids. I remember when I was growing up there at 1186 [Buchanan Street] there was a little red head girl that used to come over and play with us. And you know we, we thought that was the natural way. This is before we went to kindergarten or as we were going to kindergarten or something. And she would come and we'd play and you know and then we noticed that one day she couldn't come back anymore. I guess she went home and said something to mama about, you know, coming over to play with us and you know we--I mean she was all over on the playground you know had--you know we couldn't go across the street to the playground so she was, she, she went across the street to the playground and the next thing we know this little red headed white girl never came back. The only--the next time I saw that little girl was when I went to Topeka High [School] and by that time she was you know sort of a grown little girl. But, but I first met her when she was about four and she came and played in our yard you know and she did that for about a week until she decided to go across the street and meet some more of us and they decided it was time that she stayed out of the neighborhood so we didn't see her anymore. So--but we interacted with white people on the periphery. My, my mother [Florence Henry Johnson] was a domestic so she, she worked for a lady by the name of Ms. Eaton and she worked for some very rich white people. So I was always in and out of white people's homes you know doing some kind of work or helping my mom or that kind of thing. So, so I always had you know while it was a cultural shock in the school I was, I, I was not entirely uncomfortable. What I didn't do in, in junior high and high school and even into college was say much. You know I, most of my academic work was writing you know. I didn't, I would respond to questions but I, I was not raising my hand to make a contribution. I basically did my work and whereas when I was in elementary school I mean I was, you know I was always into you know, you know being sort of a, a, a leader, sort of a, a person that had the answers, that kind of thing. But I stopped giving answers when I--cause you know I was, I was, I was very frightened. You know I was very frightened in those situations that I was going to give the wrong answer and folks would laugh at me. But more often than not I had the right answer, I just didn't have the confidence to, to, to give, give the, give, give it in, you know publicly. So, so--. Speaker 1: There's another kind of--tell me if this is--were your parents active in your, in, at Boswell [Junior High School, Topeka, Kansas]? Speaker 2: Buchanan? They were active at Buchanan. Speaker 1: But were they active at Boswell? Speaker 2: Neither Boswell nor Topeka High. Speaker 1: So there seems to be a pattern of how that happens because people--. Speaker 2: My, my mother would always put me in things but she was not there. You know she--I, I was involved in art stuff and I would--you know she always made sure--and I'd be, often be the only, myself and a guy named Ronnie Walker cause his mother did the same thing, we'd be the only ones there and you know black, blacks that were there. And it was, you know it was, it was all right. I mean they, they allowed us to be there and some folks even encouraged us you know so it wasn't, you know I mean they didn't, we didn't get name calling or anything like that but we were often isolated you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was, was Topeka the kind of city that had like signs white and black and that sort of, colored--? Speaker 2: No, no. No, no we didn't, we saw--we, we, we heard all that on T.V. you know once the '60s [1960s] movement began and then I saw it directly cause I went to Atlanta and Mississippi you know to get involved in that but no, we didn't. Speaker 1: Did you ever go to another place in Kansas where that, those signs were up? Speaker 2: No, I never saw a sign--oh the only signs I saw were in Georgia and Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Story_ID: 9582 Speaker 1: What about high school? Now you went to--? Speaker 2: Topeka High [School, Topeka, Kansas]. Speaker 1: Topeka High, okay. And well how was that experience? Did you, were you able to you know do most of the things you, you know--? Speaker 2: Pretty much. Pretty much. I, I had a very interesting job experience there. I was, when I was let's see, I guess I was a sophomore. And there was a, there were two twins and--white twins who were in my biology class and I never will forget the place. They both were working at this place called Quavera (ph.) Specialty Company. It was a biological supply house so they supplied small animals and some large animals to these experimental places. And so they were working there and one of them decided they, well actually both of them had gotten other jobs so, so they asked me if I'd like to have the job and I said yes, you know, 'cause they, they had taken a liking to me you know and we worked on some projects together and so they gave me the job. But whereas they were handling all of the animals and, and involved with animals, the woman decided that all I could do was cut grass and, and sweep the place, you know, whereas you know they were, you know, they had been--when they trained me they were showing me how to move the snakes from place to place. So, so I, that's what I was looking forward to, being, you know having this opportunity to do this but she, she didn't allow me to touch any of the snakes or you know do any of that stuff. I--she told me, I want you to sweep this you know space you know and take out this and cut the grass. Well when I saw what she was doing I one day I went to work you know, it was about a week or so into it and I raised the question of why I wasn't doing the same thing as the twins were doing and she said you know you, you have to learn how to do that. I said well I know how to do it you know and I, you know I said let me show you. And she said oh no, no, no you can't do that. I said you know I know how to get the snakes out. I know how to, you know I know how to use this thing you know I know how to do all that stuff and she, she said no you can't do it. You need to go cut the grass. So I, I took the lawn mower out into the yard, drove it about half way through the yard down the middle of it, left it, they never saw me again. That was the end of my job at Quavera Specialty Company. So I mean that's, that was the kind of, sometimes kind of experience that I would have is that they would you know not allow me the same opportunities that my white counterparts would have you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you, were you on the honor roll in high school and that sort of thing or did you--? Speaker 2: Not really, you know. I was, I was, I was a good student but I wasn't--I guess I was. I, it would be the B honor roll if I, you know 'cause I didn't, I you know I didn't really become academically sharp until I went to college and then I, then I really, I was on the honor roll in college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and into graduate school and I, I wasn't on the honor roll in high school. Speaker 1: But you, you ran track in high school? Speaker 2: I ran track--. Speaker 1: Played sports, football? Speaker 2: Played football, played basketball, did all that kind of stuff and you know I, I got good enough grades to get into you know just about any school I wanted to go to and I ended up going to Washburn University [Topeka, Kansas]. Story_ID: 9583 Speaker 1: Now how did you choose Washburn [University, Topeka, Kansas]? Speaker 2: Well actually I, I first went to a junior college because I wanted to go to San Jose State [University]. That was, I mean my goal was to go to California and go to school. I went to a place called Fort Scott Junior College in Fort Scott, Kansas. I went there and we, we had--a guy named Willie Richardson, I don't know whether you ever heard of him. He played pro ball. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, played for the [Baltimore] Colts didn't he? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Willie, Mose, Richardson and a white guy who was, it was four of us and we took the national junior college championship in track as a team. The white guy ran all the distances, I ran some of the distances like the half mile and the quarter and we won everything. And Willie and Mose ran all the dashes and Willie won the broad jump. I took second in the broad jump and that's, that's--Mose did the pole vaulting and Willie did some of the high jumping. We didn't win the high jump but we, we won most of the stuff. And then, so I mean it was, it was--I didn't really become interested in academics until, until I got to junior college then cause I knew I had to get, in order to get into San Jose State I had to have a certain grade point average and so I needed to get my grades. And you know at that time ACTs [American College Test] and SATs [Scholastic Aptitude Test] and all that stuff you know they were sort of you know around but they were not you know really you know that important. Your grades were the most important thing. And then so I really buckled down and started getting you know pretty much As and Bs, pretty, almost straight As but once in a while I'd get a B and that continued through college on through--I went through three master's programs and then I went to a Ph.D. at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] Speaker 1: Okay, now you went to Fort Scott first? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then where did you go? Speaker 2: Back, well back to Washburn. My father [Hubert Johnson] passed in November of 1958, November 19th to be exact and then I came back home to help with the family and went to Washburn. I got a scholarship. Speaker 1: Now Washburn is here in Chicago? Speaker 2: No, Washburn is in Topeka, Kansas. Speaker 1: In Topeka, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Washburn's in Topeka, Kansas. Went to Washburn and graduated from there in '61 [1961] Story_ID: 9584 Speaker 1: Then went to University of Denver [Colorado], graduated from there in '62 [1962], went to Atlanta University [now Clark-Atlanta University, Georgia], that's where I went to the Civil Rights Movement and stayed there for I think three years and graduated from there in about '64 [1964] or '65 [1965], I'm not sure, and then Atlanta University School of Social Work that's where I went. And then I got a masters degree at the University of Cincinnati [Ohio] and graduated from there in about, must have been '66 [1966] and then went on to Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] I think '66 [1966], fall of '66 after I got out of jail. This was the year of the you know rebellions in the city so I had gotten caught with some weapons and so--. Speaker 2: In Cincinnati? Speaker 1: In Cincinnati, right. So--. Speaker 2: Now we got to back up some. We're moving too fast. We got to get you--but you, okay when you went to--okay, so you got a--when did you get, where did you get your bachelor's degree from? You--? Speaker 1: Washburn--Washburn University. Speaker 2: Washburn, okay. You went to University of Denver to work on a master's? Speaker 1: I worked on a master's yeah. Speaker 2: And--. Speaker 1: That's where I met Asa. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Asa Hilliard. Speaker 2: Asa Hilliard III? Speaker 1: Yeah. Asa was there at, at the University of Denver. He was working on his Ph.D. at the time. Speaker 2: Now was Dr. Carruthers there too at the time? Jacob Carruthers? Speaker 1: No, he was at, he, he may have been. He was at the University of Colorado [Boulder, Colorado] though cause he went--. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Remember he always used to say I went to U of C, you know? Well you know that, that's where--. Speaker 2: That's right, the University of Colorado. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was at the University of Colorado. Speaker 2: So Asa that's his first cousin you know. Speaker 1: Right. That's where I met Asa. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So Asa Hilliard was there okay, University of Denver. Okay, yeah in '62 [1962]. Now what kind of master's were you working on? Speaker 1: Experimental psychology. Story_ID: 9585 Speaker 1: You went on to Atlanta U [now Clark-Atlanta University, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: So were you teaching and going to school at Atlanta U or you just--? Speaker 2: Not really. I was just mostly sitting in on lunch counters and marching on folk and, and sort of getting an education. But I, I did do well academically yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Now Atlanta U in those days was, Atlanta was--. Speaker 2: Hotbed. Speaker 1: Yeah, but it was kind of behind the rest of the South in terms of some of that activity because--. Speaker 2: Right, they were just catching up. Speaker 1: --the leadership there knew Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] when he was growing up and they took a paternal attitude to what he was doing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's, well that's the scuttlebutt I get about that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well I you know I didn't, I didn't gather that, you know. I, I mean he, he seemed, he was very honored you know in, in student circles you know, Dr. King was you know. But I, you know I could see where you know some of the--Atlanta is a very, very color conscious town you know. If you are dark complexion you know, you know unless you are extremely good looking and--. Speaker 1: Get back. Speaker 2: --well educated. Speaker 1: If you're brown you can stick around. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah right, yeah but it's a very, very color conscious--. Speaker 1: So you think that he was kind of really not seen as a leader because he was too dark? Speaker 2: Yeah, well that's one part of it you know. I mean you look at Julian Bond who was you know, I, I, I was taught by Julian Bond's father you know there at Atlanta University? Speaker 1: Horace Mann Bond? Speaker 2: Yeah, Horace Mann Bond, yeah. So, yeah and--but Julian Bond was brilliant you know. I mean he was a brilliant guy you know. He should, he should, he should have been the one that you know went to, went on to Congress but when he got exposed in his cocaine habit or whatever it was got exposed that's what stopped him from being you know from achieving. I remember you know talking to him and you know he was just brilliant. You know he had so much going, so much vision. I could see how, why he might get into drugs 'cause he just, he was just so underutilized you know as, as a, as a human being and the human mind you know. So, so that was--. Speaker 1: Why do you suppose that was true now? You know he was involved in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] early on and--. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --he was, he ran for Georgia State legislature, the youngest--. Speaker 2: Yeah and they, they wouldn't let him in remember? Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And you know it wasn't until they had to add some special laws to, to get him into the legislature you know or, you know get the higher Supreme Court decision I think it was to force him into the, into the legislature you know. And then they isolated him and so you know it was a constant kind of fight. I mean it's sort of like Harold Washington here [Chicago, Illinois]. You know when you look at his experience I really think the, the stress of this whole thing you know took him out of here, you know this whole business although there are some other rumors that you know--something else happened. Speaker 1: Right. I remember those, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I think the stress of the situation you know with all of these different folks coming at him all the time and I think that's what happened to Julian Bond you know is, is that you know they just beat him down you know in that, in that legislative process. Speaker 1: Yeah, one would think it's hard enough to assume a position like that and--. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --but to be--. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean but--. Speaker 1: --to have your colleagues fight against you. Speaker 2: Yeah when you look at [Barack] Obama here you know going into the you know senate now and you know he's, he's, he's embraced you know. But when you look at Julian you know he was, you know he was totally--he couldn't even have a seat. You know he couldn't even come to the legislature. I mean they voted him out of the legislation after he was democratically elected you know. So, so I mean that you know that's kind of you know very demeaning you know. You would think that just because you understand it's racism but it's still very demeaning. It's a very destructive you know kind of process, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now in Atlanta you in those days, now was a--I know they, I don't know if they were, this happened, my chronology might be off when you were there but they formed eventually a center for the black world in Atlanta with a lot of the activists. Speaker 2: Yeah that was, that was after--. Speaker 1: That was afterwards? Speaker 2: That was after I was there, yeah. Speaker 1: Vincent Harding. Speaker 2: Yeah, Vincent Harding they, that was in the '70s [1970s], the late '60s [1960s], early 70s. Speaker 1: Yeah, late '60s, early '70s. Speaker 2: Yeah right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, so yeah. Speaker 2: And that's when they did that and then they brought in Cheikh Anta Diop and what's his name that came before Columbus guy? Speaker 1: Ivan Van Sertima. Speaker 2: Ivan Van Sertima and all of those folks and they put together a magnificent conference. Asa Hilliard and Jake [Jacob Carruthers] were involved as well, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So in '64 [1964] you were doing a lot of sit-ins and--? Speaker 2: Right, sit-ins, marches, that kind of stuff yeah. Speaker 1: And got arrested in--? Speaker 2: In Cincinnati [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay that, Cincinnati is later. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's two years later. Speaker 2: Yeah two years later. That was as a result of being involved with the, the--we got arrested a couple of times in Atlanta but we, we always knew we were going to get out 'cause they had the bail money and all that kind of stuff you know. But you know a lot of times we got arrested so it wasn't you know, it wasn't anything to get arrested. The important thing was to get out, you know. Speaker 1: So in Atlanta were you a member of SNCC? Speaker 2: No. No, I was just a student you know and I would join you know whoever was you know doing the, the, taking the action. You know I'd go to their meetings but I wasn't a member, no. Speaker 1: Do you remember some of those figures who were doing stuff? Speaker 2: Stokley [Carmichael] not really. I don't, they were not there in, in Atlanta. Story_ID: 9586 Speaker 1: Mississippi was going that summer of '64 [1964] with Bob [Robert] Moses and all of that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah I, I did not know Bob Moses till much later you know but the people in, in Atlanta [Georgia] were you know not the well known people. They were, they were less well known. Malcolm [ X] came through there quite often and spoke cause we'd go to the mosque and, and, and see, and hear him speak but he, he would come through. Speaker 1: Now what was your impression of Malcolm X in those days? Speaker 2: I, I--he was my hero. He was the, he was the consummate African man as far as I was concerned. You know he, he represented the kinds of things that I wanted to be you know that was, that was--you know I had a lot of growing to do in those days. I was still thinking that I was well accepted in America in spite of all of my experiences you know. So, so I was really confused. But I, I--Malcolm was, was my hero and is till this day one of my heroes. Speaker 1: Okay. What did you think about the--I know--did, did you, were you familiar with the Black Muslim movement before--? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. The Muslim movement was very much there in Atlanta so we you know we got a lot, got to see a lot. And we would go--as we were in graduate school we would go sit. We'd debate, you know, whether or not we would join and you know at one point we almost joined until they--and I was seriously considering becoming a Muslim until they killed Malcolm. You know when they killed Malcolm I just lost all interest. I thought, I thought they were you know a, a bunch of charlatans you know after that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So Malcolm died in '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, and so I, at that time I think I was--by that time I had gone on to Cincinnati [Ohio]. I was in Cincinnati at the time and so, and it was there I had considered really joining the Nation of Islam and was, was really you know attending some of their meetings on a regular basis but when, once they, once they got to Malcolm I, I gave it up. Speaker 1: Was there much activity going on in Cincinnati when you were there in '66 [1966]? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a lot of recruitment, lot of involvement. Malcolm would come through there once in a while and you know we'd all go hear him and we always were disappointed in the Honorable Elijah Muhammad's speech and, and his--you know we couldn't, I mean we understood that he was the organizer but he, he certainly didn't come across as someone that really was the leader of the group. Malcolm was much more in our mind the leader you know. So--. Speaker 1: Yeah it seems there were a lot of, you know there were books written about the relative powers of Malcolm and Elijah Muhammad and the--over the course of the years especially. Speaker 2: Well he was obviously an organizer. I mean he--I'm talking about Eli, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad but he was not an articulate spokesperson, you know. Malcolm was clearly that. Story_ID: 9587 Speaker 1: Tell us about the incident in which you were jailed. What happened? Speaker 2: Well, well the, the burning of the city had been going on for a couple of days. Speaker 1: Now this is after the, this is a riot in Cincinnati [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Well we called them rebellions. We didn't call them riots but yeah this was when it was burning. It was burning and I was on the, I was in Avondale, Avondale community and I had just taken some guns from some young kids and I put them in the trunk of the car and as I was turning to leave they didn't, they didn't ever really see the guns. As I was turning to leave the situation the police arrested me for you know just hanging out you know. And the, and--loitering is what they called it and so they had me in jail for like two or three days and this is, this was in, this was in '66 [1966] yeah, when that happened, yeah. And they got me out of jail eventually. They eventually found me and, and I was on my way to Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] so I was leaving the city anyway so I--but I thought I was going to miss school because you know I was, I was in jail but they got me out. And the, and the guy, the lawyer eventually wrote a book about the, the incident you know, the incident of my arrest, you know. And they--this was the, the--they tried to make loitering, the loitering law unconstitutional as a result of that, that particular case, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there, what do they call the case, I mean is there--? Speaker 2: I don't even remember. Speaker 1: 'Johnson v. Cincinnati'? Speaker 2: Yeah, Cincinnati, something like that yeah (laughs). Story_ID: 9588 Speaker 1: So, we went on to Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts]. Now what degree did you get at the University of Cincinnati [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Planning, community planning. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was in your mind as a plan for what you wanted to do as a career 'cause you, now you got two master's degrees by this time right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you're going to--. Speaker 2: Three--two, two. Speaker 1: And you're going on to Brandeis to get a third one. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I was going, I was going--let's see. I got three master's so it was the third one, yes. Well I, I wasn't sure whether I wanted to be a psychologist or--but I found a lot of excitement I mean and inspiration from working in communities and so, so that was also in my mind. And I didn't really know where it was all going to take me but it was you know it was starting to come together. You know I, I knew that our communities needed--there was also the, the thinking beginning to evolve in the movement area around institution building and the need for that in the African American community. And so you know that was sort of what was motivating me as I was moving through these processes, the educational process. Story_ID: 9589 Speaker 1: Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts] I want to try to--well you found there weren't that many black students at Brandeis. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You decided to help. You were dean of students--. Speaker 2: Assistant dean of students. Speaker 1: Assistant dean of students. Speaker 2: Assistant dean of students. I was hired at assistant dean of students. Speaker 1: And you decided to try to help recruit some black students. Speaker 2: Yeah. They said, they said they couldn't get them to come. I said you know I can get them to come you know. I, I, I you know I just believed that I could. I don't know why I thought I could. But I went to, first went to Boston, Roxbury [Massachusetts] and went around in Roxbury and I was able to get about fifteen or twenty students to apply and eventually get in. And then they sent me to the South. I went to visit all along the East Coast. I went to Virginia and Florida, all down you know in Mississippi and different places. Along the way you know I almost got my head knocked off but I, I, I--we were able to recruit about a hundred and fifty students, hundred and twenty five students that first year and then a lot more coming in from Boston Proper. At the end of--when I left Brandeis in about '67 [1967] there were about two hundred students there at Brandeis. Speaker 1: Yeah, a substantial increase. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah it was--you know if--we had ten and I'm exaggerating I think when I say we had ten. We then had--. Speaker 1: At least twenty times more students. Speaker 2: Yeah, twenty times more students. Twenty times more black students. Had a lot of scholarship money though cause Brandeis had so--we had a lot of scholarships and we created what was called the TYP Program, Transition of the Year Program and this allowed students to finish the school in five years. Had very bright students but they--you know I had a student for example that took the SAT, 'cause SAT was the popular test and scored, almost had a perfect score on the SAT and said he couldn't do math, was a black student. I said that's not possible, you know, so, so I mean we had, we had those kinds of experiences and we recruited some very excellent students. Almost everyone of them that we recruited graduated from Brandeis University. So, so that's, you know that was, that was very positive. But in order to get there you know and really push the envelope on it we--following the examples of San Francisco State [University] and other universities we took over a building and, and held that building which had all their computer systems, all their communications systems, switchboard, everything in it and held that building for--called Ford Hall--held that building for about three weeks. And I thought we all were going to die in there 'cause I mean it was--I mean imagine you know all of these kids with their hormones running everywhere and I, I was the oldest one of the group. I think I was in my twenties and you know and then you know, and, and for a long time I just didn't want to take any leadership. But I, you know I, I saw them starting to destroy the computers. I said, "You all, we are all going to go to jail. They, they don't care anything about us." And so we, we organized and stopped folks from tearing up stuff and, and decided to--we got this kid who spoke fluent Yiddish and was black and we got him, his name was Randy. And I got Randy to become the spokesperson and we decided to lay out our demands. And you know we, we had him go forward as, as, as the, as, as our spokesperson. But Randy was, you know, very nervous and so he would forget, get what our, what his arguments were and you know where supposed to be so we had to constantly prop him up, you know that kind of thing. But he, he, he's now a, a seminarian, Randall Bailey, that's his name and, and he's a Ph.D. type down there in Atlanta some place. So, but he was, he was, he was an excellent spokesperson thought and we, we managed to get through the, through that negotiation and, and, and get, and get out of Ford Hall. We just, one day we just left Ford Hall. We, we-- Speaker 1: One sec--(interruption in tape). Speaker 2: And so--we're back? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay--so we were in there for fourteen days, fifteen--no, it was almost a month. We were all, we were in there for almost a month. I mean it, I mean it was, it was, it was, it was an experience that I wouldn't want to go through again trying to get folk to understand how the system worked. That's when I first met Randall because you know all the schools in the area that had black students came in to do support, to be supportive. The, the folks from Harvard [University], the folks from Smith [College], the folks from all the different schools came and they sat with us and you know they brought food in and all that kind of stuff. So it was, they were very--and Randall Robinson was one of those that came, came to visit, you know. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that, that to me was, coming out of the building without all of our demands being met was, sort of put me in a bad place 'cause they, they thought I had sold out to the administration. But I, my concern was that those folks had been in that building so many days without any--and I mean I already knew that some of these kids were going to come out pregnant you know 'cause there was a lot of hormonal activity going on that you know probably could not have happened you know had, had we you know been you know in our you know separate dorms and all that kind of thing. So I was, I was very scared for the students and for the other students and so tried to get them out of there. And I was also assistant dean of students so you know I did have some responsibility as a, as a university representative so I convinced them that we should leave and have them walk out in the middle of the night. Speaker 1: How did you feel about being in the spot like that? Now I've seen this on campuses and heard stories. And I was in a student in the '70s [1970s] and--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and '60s [1960s] and '70s. And to be a, a young black administrator--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in a black, in a school and black students that wanted demands puts you right in the middle of things. I know I mean in a lot of ways it puts the squeeze on you. Speaker 2: Well I really, I really did not want leadership. You know I tried to avoid being involved in the leadership but eventually had to take leadership cause they wouldn't listen to anybody else. So I, I started talking to them and I talked to them individually. I started you know essentially organizing them to protect us you know cause they were you know starting to tear up the computers. They were inviting folk in so I had--first of all I asked them to kick every, not kick but get everybody out of there that did not go to Brandeis cause their self interests were not the same as ours. So we got all the folks that had come in from Roxbury and all that. So we had about two hundred people in the building, some of which we did not know, you know. So all those folks we didn't know we got them out of the building and then we got control. We got people to guard those material things that I knew the university would put us in jail for. And you know and so my feeling about it was I didn't have a choice. You know if I didn't do it they, they were going to move it all, you know get you know, be put into--oh I'm sorry--we would all be put into a, a, a situation where, where we wouldn't you know have a future. And, and so they thought I was selling out you know that kind of thing. And so--but I knew it--what I know from that experience and many since then is you have to keep going. You know the logic in spite of your blackness, in spite of your culture sometimes defines situations and you have to, you have to follow that logic you know. You, you have to, you know, choose between you know what is the reality you know and, and the, and your, your image, you know, 'cause your image you know is going to take a fall among the group. But ultimately they may have an appreciation for it. Many of them do. Many of them still tag me as a 'Tom' because I forced them out of the building you know or asked them to go. And so you know that's, that's, that's the, that's the choice that you have and you know it's just, it's a very frustrating and disheartening kind of experience but you got, you got to go through it and you got to stand with it. Speaker 1: It's a tough position to be in. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. Speaker 1: Very tough position to be in. Speaker 2: Very tough. Speaker 1: For somebody that's going through--. Speaker 2: But it happens all the time. It happens all the time. When, when we began Centers [for New Horizons] back in the '70s [1970s] you know I would--you know the folks--Haki [Madhubuti] and all of you all were talking about you know independent that, independent this and I wanted to do that but you know I also felt like this government money belonged to black folk as well so I, I took the government money and you know I got a lot of criticism for it, but I, I kept moving and I kept trying to do the same things that you all did you know, trained our staff, you know get them to view themselves as African people and you know I continued to, to do that and, you know, go along to Frogmore [South Carolina] and all those places, you know, and you know, meet with Haki and all the others and learn about ourselves as African people. But they always sort of branded me as the one who took the government money. You know it's, it's, it's a struggle that you face all during--at least I faced all during my career in speaking out. What is the best thing to impact the most people in the African community and--. Speaker 1: Yeah it's at--that, I remember those discussions well and--. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: --those were going on before I came to Chicago. They talked about--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: There was some discussion, I think there was a--CB had a big teachers training. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And that's gonna be a topic of discussion. Some--. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. We had, we had several teachers that went to, that went to CB, went to the council on independent black schools, you know, meetings. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Institutions. Speaker 1: But once again it's too--I guess some people have not but to the position that you took then most of them have come to it, have come in that position now. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so. I think that's true. I think that's true. Story_ID: 9590 Speaker 1: You were describing, you're talking organizer talk. You're talking about one on ones with people and--. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: And so did you have an organizer's training somewhere along the way? Speaker 2: Yes. I, I--when I did my stint at AU [Atlanta University, now Clark-Atlanta University], I was, I read a lot of the [Saul] Alinsky stuff and I also got my master's degree and specialized in community organization so I knew how to organize and had done a lot of organizing there in Atlanta with young people and getting them involved in rite of passage programs and that kind of thing. And I knew, and, and so I knew what to do but I didn't want to do it because I didn't think it was my role there in that building [Ford Hall at Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts]. But because they had taken over the building and you know I, I'd watched them do it. I was, you know I had an office there in the building. I saw them when they took over the switchboard and all that you know and I didn't try to stop them. But I didn't want to lead it, I--you know but I realized that if I didn't they would hurt themselves in ways you know cause there were some--a lot of those guys are big time lawyers in, in Boston you know and have you know very prominent positions and lawyers, doctors, what have you, you know, they, they've done very well for themselves yeah. Speaker 1: It was like a moment when you had to kind of make a decision based on conscience--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in terms of what you ought to do. Speaker 2: Yeah, and logic, you know. Story_ID: 9591 Speaker 1: How long did you stay at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Stayed in Brandeis probably a couple of years and then I finished all my coursework and began to write my dissertation. And I wanted to do it on Julius Nyerere in Tanzania, so I traveled to Tanzania in '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '67, and I stayed in Tanzania until about '71 [1971]. So I was in Tanzania from '67 to '71. I lived in villages. I first lived in Dar [es Salaam, Tanzania] and I met [H.] Rap Brown and several other--. Speaker 1: Now this is something--it's funny how this works. But all week I've interviewed people that have some kind of relation with Tanzania. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's unbelievable, I mean--. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah. Speaker 1: It just, I, it's just, it's really unbelievable. Robert Bennett we talked to. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Prexy Nesbit. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Everybody. But that was a time when a lot of people I know were going to Tanzania. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I think the Center for Black Education sent a whole group up over there. Speaker 2: Over there. Speaker 1: SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] went over there at one point in time. Bob [Robert] Moses ended up over there. Speaker 2: Right, Joyce, Joyce Ladner was there. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Joyce had worked with Bob Moses down--she and her sister. Speaker 1: That's right, she's from Mississippi. Speaker 2: Yeah, from Mississippi so--. Speaker 1: Her sister Dori and--. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all there. And, so and, and Rap Brown was there. He got arrested several times there and--. Speaker 1: In Tanzania? Speaker 2: In Tanzania yeah, you know because he, he would, he jumped on the Arabs a lot you know 'cause they would you know try to rip, rip us off there in Dar and so he was, he was the spokesperson you know the high priest of, of civil rights in, in the U.S. Speaker 1: Well the Arabs had just experienced almost a--. Speaker 2: It was Indians and the Arabs. Speaker 1: Yeah, they were pretty much mowed down in '64 [1964] before you all arrived--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --with the famous--they made international news. Speaker 2: Right. Right, but they, they still owned a lot of the stores and that, they hacked it in ways that were opprobrious you know they were very un--disrespectful and very, and attempted to manipulate situations and so Rap would call to question--all of us would you know but Rap was the most outspoken you know and, and most of us just tried to settle it you know right there you know in the, in the situation. Speaker 1: Now what was he like? Now I think he's, I don't know if he's still under arrest in Atlanta for supposedly a shooting. He became a Muslim at one time himself. This is odd. Now he was a major critic of Islamic--it wasn't because they were Muslim it was because they were cheating you right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, but he became a Muslim later on himself. In the '60s [1960s] he was, in '68 [1968], '69 [1969] he would appear in a city and it would be burning. I know my hometown in Dayton [Ohio] he spoke at the Wesley Methodist Christian Center and it burned up the day he left. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The day, the night he left. Speaker 2: Yeah that's, that's--Stokely [Carmichael, later Kwame Ture] was similar. I found him to be much more less intellectual than Stokely. He was much more streetwise I thought than Stokely. And very straightforward in his conversation, very hardnosed about blackness and very, you know no reflection just you know if you're not there you, you're not one of us you know. You're, if you're not a revolutionary you're a, you're a 'Tom' you know. I mean there was no, no in between you know. So, so that was, that was my experience with him. I, I didn't know him well but that's what I observed from, from a very close distance, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you like him? Speaker 2: Not particularly, no. Not particularly. I didn't really get a chance to know him either so I, you know I don't know whether I liked him or not, you know. I know what I saw I didn't particularly like but I, I didn't really know him. I mean I would sit around the table and we'd have conversations but I was, you know I just saw him and there were a lot of other people there. Bob Moses was there at the time. He owned a chicken farm you know there just outside of Dar. So you know I, I did not encounter him there. I, you know I knew he was there but I didn't ever encounter him, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now several other figures were, I mean there was a, I know there was a big group from the University of Kansas that started chicken farms too. Speaker 2: Oh okay. Speaker 1: In 1970, '71 [1971] there was--. Speaker 2: Well that was, that was after--. Speaker 1: After you left. Speaker 2: --after I left you know 'cause I didn't, I didn't meet those folks. I left in early '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Now did you get a chance to meet Dr. Nyerere? Speaker 2: No. I, I, I went to a lot of his speeches. I considered him one of my mentors but I, I never met him. I never met him. I would, I, I went to his office and did some of my research there in his office but I never met him. I met his assistant. It was a white lady that worked very closely with him. I met her but I never met him. Speaker 1: I think if I'm not mistaken she just died recently I believe. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah she was in the news this woman who had been Nyerere's assistant for many, many years. Speaker 2: Yeah, and Nyerere died about three, four years ago yeah, in I guess in London [England] from cancer. Speaker 1: Right, right. At that time he was trying his major, his ideology was Ujamaa. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: His economic philosophy. Speaker 2: Yeah, education for self reliance, alemu yakugi tekemaya (ph.), yeah. He was, he was very much into education of self reliance. Ujamaa was a whole part of that whole, that cooperative economics. He was trying to move folks from the city back into what we call, what they call Ujamaa villages. Those were the villages I was visiting. I visited a whole bunch of those villages, hundreds of them actually you know during my stay there in Tanzania looking at them and seeing how they were working and whether they were effective and how people felt about them, that kind of thing you know. Speaker 1: How did you, what was your impression of Ujamaa experiment? Did they--I know I've read articles where people reflect on them now they say well they didn't work or something. But how did, at the time I know the whole concept seemed to really fire the imagination of the African Americans especially who went there. Speaker 2: It mostly fired the imagination of African Americans. You know the city was where people wanted to be so it seemed to go against the will of the people. The will of the people pretty much was that they wanted to go to the urban areas and, and thrive in the urban areas. Unfortunately there were not--Tanzania was a, was an agricultural economy and a very poor country on top of it. So there were not places for them to be employed. And so they were sleeping on the street and they were not a part of the economy of, of the, of the country you know. So, so that, that was, that was the real challenge there. Speaker 1: So they were sort of running counter to the, the natural flow of the economy in their own country? Speaker 2: Right, and the natural flow of, and the natural desire of the people. So I mean he was able to move them there but he wasn't able to keep them there. That was, that was a real challenge. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He wasn't able to keep them there. Some of the Ujamaa villages however, were very, were flourishing. I mean they, they had excellent crops. They had schools. I helped to build several schools while I was there. You know they put up schools, they put up churches, they did, they had small industry you know they figured out how to irrigate their crops, all that kind of stuff. So it was very, I mean they were very impressive. Some of them were very impressed but they couldn't hold the young people 'cause the young people had the desire I mean they, they, they saw the urban area as the place of attraction. And that's, if you can't hold your young you know you can't build on their future and that was, that was a real problem. Real challenge I saw with the--and so I always felt like they were fighting more of the natural urges of people you know. And the same thing is true here in this country. You know if you just think about it all the people that came to Chicago, they were coming here to work in the steel mills and all those places you know because Chicago was the place that if you couldn't find work in Chicago you couldn't find work you know. Speaker 1: So the challenge would be like trying to take people from Robert Taylor [Homes] out to the country someplace and put them on a farm, organize them as farmers? Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: Because they didn't really want to be there. Speaker 2: They didn't want to be farmers. Speaker 1: Even though they were not doing well. Speaker 2: They, they wanted to be, they wanted to be working at a steel mill, working some place in the city so they could go to the, you know the various places here in the city, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: Most places that the church that you grew up in didn't want you to go to. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's right, exactly right. Speaker 1: Okay, so anything else about that experience in Tanzania you want to share? Now you lived in Dar es Salaam and you lived in--? Speaker 2: In a place called Upper Kitete which is up near--. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: U-P-P-E-R K-I-T-E-T-E. Speaker 1: Okay. It's up near where? Speaker 2: Mount Kilimanjaro. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Near the border of Tanzania on the, I guess north, north end you know. Speaker 1: That's like northern--it's north of Arusha [Tanzania] even. Speaker 2: Right, right. Well it's close to Arusha. Close to Arusha. I had friends in Arusha so I visited Arusha quite often but I lived in Upper Kitete and then I traveled around with some of the government officials visiting the villages. It was very difficult initially getting in the door but, because folks you know you needed all of these visas and all of this stuff to do. And the white researchers could get that stuff but the black researchers were always viewed with suspicion as spies from the U.S. and that kind of thing you know. So you know so I had eventually just went to some of the officials and talked to them and I said, "look, I'm not a spy, I"--you know I just was flat with them you know. I, I knew a little bit of Kiswahili and matter of fact by the end of it I knew a lot of Kiswahili. So I was able to communicate and they said fine, come with us. So that's how I, I really was able to do my research. I couldn't do my research the usual way. I had to go around the system and, and do my research around the system and that you know really worked. I, I eventually met the president of the bank you know the Bank of Tanzania and he you know, he would, he helped me. You know he hooked me up with the folks from, from the Ujamaa villages and all that kind of stuff. And I, I never had any of those visas or any of that stuff that, that the white researchers had. I always had to do mine sort of you know surreptitiously you know rather than directly in, in the way that they were supported. And so I, I was also a fellow here at the Adlai Stevenson Institute at the University of Chicago and so I had to you know, as I was sending my reports back and explaining to the folks, you know, what I had to do, they were you know they were, you know, they were, you know, less than supportive 'cause they thought you know I couldn't do, you know, gather, gather anything without the real, without real documentation I mean real legal documents. That didn't turn out to be the case at all, didn't turn out to be the case at all. Speaker 1: Okay. So when did you come back to the U.S.? Speaker 2: '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: 1971. Story_ID: 9592 Speaker 1: January or February of 1971, I remember getting off the plane in New York City without a coat and, you know, I'd come from this very warm environment into the area I was coming back to, New York and it was February you know so it was cold, you know. So, and the first thing I did, I had to go buy a coat you know so, and I bought a, a coat there at, in, in New York there. So went Micheaux's bookstore [National Memorial African Bookstore, New York, New York] , yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah Micheaux's bookstore now that's a landmark stop. Speaker 1: Yeah. It's not there anymore but it's totally--I loved, I loved that bookstore. It was, it was more than just a bookstore it was a whole story about our culture and this, this guy who ran it was--first of all he, he, he's one--I think either he or his father actually had been the one that developed a lot of the early black movements you know. So, so he had a lot of those there in the store and he would share those. Speaker 2: Now Oscar Micheaux was a movie so they were related--Oscar was? Speaker 1: I, I, I assume so. Speaker 2: Lewis ran the book, Lewis Micheaux ran the bookstore and I also heard that there's a Bishop Lightfoot Micheaux in New York that was related too that John Jackson used to talk about. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not sure what all the relationships are. Speaker 1: I don't know what the relationships were but they had everything in that bookstore, everything you can imagine about the culture, all the J. A. Rogers books, every black book that ever been published was there. I, I tried to buy them, everything I could you know while I was there and I went back to New York many, many times. That was, in those days we were having the black power conferences and all that kind of stuff so you know every time I got a chance I would go to those places and gather them. And Maulana Karenga was holding forth you know--. Speaker 2: Did you attend the Black Power Conference I mean any? Speaker 1: All of them. I attended all of them that I knew about yeah, yeah visited all of them. There were like two or three that I recall happening yeah. Speaker 2: That must have been some experience because, especially because Maulana Karenga taking the leadership of some of those or co-convening them with others. Speaker 1: Right. Right and then there was--. Speaker 2: And all the Kiswahili involved in those too with you just coming back from Tanzania. Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah. But Maulana and Jake [Jacob] Carruthers and what's his name, LeRoi Jones--. Speaker 2: [Amiri] Baraka. Speaker 1: Baraka, all-there seemed to be conflict, constant conflict between all of those, Jake, Baraka and, and Maulana. They--Maulana did some things that they really questioned and they felt like he was being paid by the U.S. government. Maulana, I first met Maulana at Brandeis University [Waltham, Massachusetts] because he used to come there cause they were doing some kind of--Segal or Spiegel or somebody was doing some kind of violent student there at Brandeis and so Maulana used to come there. Story_ID: 9593 Speaker 1: You were talking about the Black Power conferences and some of the figures. Speaker 2: Actually the Black Power conferences occurred both before and after I came back from, from Tanzania. Speaker 1: You were discussing before we cut off your impression of Dr. Maulana Karenga. Speaker 2: Well I thought, I thought he had probably one of the best minds in the--he and, he and Asa [Hilliard] were you know among the most interesting presenters at those conferences. I think I met Asa again a little later you know but Maulana's workshops were always packed you know with, you know--he, he talked about organizing, he talked about the, the seven black values and he talked about puling people together and the responsibilities that we had. He talked about leadership, talked about institution building, all of that and so I was very impressed with Maulana and his contribution. At that time he, he just had that one little book on the Nguzo Saba but eventually--. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'The Quotable Karenga'. Speaker 2: Yeah, "The Quotable Karenga", that kind of thing. It wasn't, there wasn't all of the documents that he eventually developed you know after going to jail and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Tell me now, this is during a period of time, now this is, we know in retrospect that the FBI's COINTEL program infiltrated--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Maulana's organization, the [Black] Panthers--. Speaker 2: Right, and you know--. Speaker 1: --every, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], every--. Speaker 2: What was the guy's name, the 'Soul On Ice' guy? Eldridge Cleaver. Speaker 1: Eldridge Cleaver, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, Cleaver was there around at that time and that was like my first year at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] I, I read 'Soul On Ice' and I thought it was just a fascinating book about--. Speaker 1: In '67 [1967], '66 [1966], '67. Speaker 2: Yeah, '67 yeah. Speaker 1: And he went on to--he had to leave the country and he fled to Tanzania of all places. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you encounter him, never met him? Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't encounter, I didn't encounter him. I guess everybody and his mother went to Tanzania but I didn't see all those folks. I saw, I, the few that I named those are the ones that I saw, [H.] Rap Brown, Joyce Ladner and maybe there were one or two. I may have met, I may have met one or two others but pretty much those were the people that I met you know. Speaker 1: Okay. But some of the information we know now, there are people that still infer that Maulana Karenga is some kind of an agent or was an agent or something like that. Did you have any thoughts about that? Speaker 2: Well--. Speaker 1: As to why they would even say that now, especially in light of the--. Speaker 2: Well you know the interesting thing is he may or may not have been. But let me just say this, what I do know is that he was well-connected in the white community you know. And they--you know he was brilliant you know first of all. You know he, he, knew a lot of stuff. He spoke you know, he spoke fluent French, Spanish, Kiswahili, English, all that stuff. So he was, you know he was--and he also spoke some of the other African languages. So, so he was, you know he was just a very talented person. You know if he put his mind--most anything he put his mind to he could do so he was well known in the, in the white community. He was at Brandeis when I was at Brandeis in '66 [1966], sixty--and visited there quite often at the Spiegel Violence Center you know where they were studying violence in the African American people. They were trying to study these urban riots as they called them, you know that kind of thing and Karenga was there you know involved with that. So one of the things I know just on, based on my experience is that you know if you have interactions with the white folks are going to view you with suspicion because they don't have them. And so they figure you must be getting paid to spy on the community. He may not have been getting paid at all to spy on the community 'cause when he came he always came with an entourage. There was a whole bunch of people with him so you know he brought other African people with him you know. But, so he may--because of that and I know that that was always a suspicion and I saw, I saw Professor Clark go off on him once in, when we were in West Africa. Speaker 1: That's much later though, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, much later. This was--. Speaker 1: Senegal--Senegal. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Senegal, right and you know because they thought he was a spy. But I, you know I, I don't know what proof they had you know other than the fact that he was in those white institutions doing a lot of things that most black folk didn't have the opportunity to do. But he also had some skills that most black folks, many of the black folk did not have you know. So, so that's, that's a, that may be an explanation, I don't know. Story_ID: 9594 Speaker 1: What did you in New York? How long were you in New York City? Speaker 2: Not very long. I, I was, I was, I had to get back to the Adlai Stevenson Institute. One of the reasons I was coming home at that time is that they said that I needed to come back and begin to participate in the seminars here at the University of Chicago and so I, I headed back to, I headed back here to begin to be at the Adlai Stevenson Institute. It's, it's located there at, on--it was located there on University of Chicago's campus. So, yeah. Speaker 1: So you're living here in Chicago at this point? Speaker 2: Yeah, I began to live in Chicago. I, I visited, I came, well I came to the Adlai Stevenson Institute and then I met a guy that I'd known for some time 'cause he came to Cincinnati [Ohio] when I was working in Cincinnati 'cause I organized people in Cincinnati. We organized the Welfare Rights Group in Cincinnati and, and were, we were very much involved with a lot of the people that were doing the Welfare Rights Movement across the country. And we had a huge group of Welfare Rights activists about, actually several thousand marched across the state of Ohio. And a guy by the name of [George] Wiley was the national director and he was killed during the process of--not killed but drowned during the process of this whole movement as it was escalating. And just as I moved to Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] you know, I was asked to come direct the Welfare Rights Movement. I made a decision not, not to go do that at the time you know for a number of reasons but I, I chose not to go at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. But it's, you said at the University of Chicago you saw someone that you worked with during that period? Speaker 2: Yeah, Frank Seaver and Frank Seaver said I want you to come and set up an organization and do some early childhood education. They called it daycare in that time. So I said fine you know. So I came to talk to him. He asked me, told me I needed to write a proposal so I wrote the proposal and that became the Centers for New Horizons. A lady in public housing living over in Robert Taylor [Homes] by the name of Ms. Mary Calhurt (ph.) named the organization Centers for New Horizons, suggested the name and that's how we got the name and that was in '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was in '71. October of '71 is when we first launched Centers for New Horizons. Speaker 1: Who initially funded the Centers? Speaker 2: An organization called New World Foundation and the Chicago Commons Association which is where Frank Seaver worked. And for the first three or four years of our existence I thought that, you know, all you had to do is write a proposal and you got money and so I you know I, I was writing proposals and getting money you know. And then they told me you can only get this money for three years and then you got to figure out somebody else to get, get money from. So that's when I began to learn the foundation game you know. So that's--but that's how Centers got, that's how we started and I tried to incorporate Mary's thinking, the thinking of many of, The Institute of Positive Education [Chicago, Illinois] and black institutions across the country. So I visited and talked to a lot of people, had some of my own ideas and stole a lot of ideas and created Centers for New Horizons. Speaker 1: Okay, now what's the basic operating philosophy behind Centers for New Horizons? Speaker 2: Well the basic operating philosophy is that we as African people must build our community and, and educate our children and stabilize our families. And we must have values and principles that we operate by that ensure that that family is stable and vital and takes responsibility for its children. So our first task is to educate the nearly thousand children that we serve every day and, and to involve their families in the education and development of their children. Speaker 1: So it's similar in a sense to Head Start in a sense, I mean the concept of early--? Speaker 2: Well we actually receive Head Start funds. For a long time we didn't but we've always admired the Head Start approach because it, it is one of the best early care and education programs there is, you know. It's modeled very closely after the best early childhood education in the country you know, Head Start is. Speaker 1: So the children that you serve or you get, you actually serve, your program is like servicing children in terms of early childhood education? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's, it's changing now. I mean we, we used to have just open the doors and we'd fill up in about a minute you know because we had a captive audience you know in Robert Taylor [Homes], Stateway Gardens, Ida B. Wells [Homes], Altgeld Gardens, all of those places where there were thousands of people concentrated together and so we had you know huge numbers of--we always had a waiting list of fifty and sixty families you know on each of our, in each of our centers. Since they have, since they plan for, so-called planned for transformation in 1996 when it began, they've torn down most of the public housing. So now we get the, our families come from all across the city and we are actually doing mixed income kind of--we serve middle income, mixed, poor, poor folk and, and you know sometimes very rich folks you know in our Centers so we have a mixture of people in our centers at this point. Speaker 1: Okay. What qualifies--? Speaker 2: Income. Income. We turn nobody away. We have what we call four pillars now, health and wellness, teaching and learning. We feel that every family has a responsibility both to teach and to learn and then we have culture. Culture is a major focus of everything we do. We try to integrate culture into everything you know, and then parental partnerships. We, we feel that the parents must be very much a part of the education of, of, of their children and, and involved in the community, in the community building activities that are essential to gaining solid family protection. You can't have a community in a--you can't have a family in a community where chaos is going on. You could certainly--families have to come out of their, their self directedness and, and embrace the efforts of the entire community. Speaker 1: Okay. So do you use traditional organizing techniques to get families to come out? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Go out and knock on doors? Speaker 2: Knock on doors, one to one relationships, self interests. All of that you know are, are essential ingredients of our work with families, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now you started with one operation I suppose right and then--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you start with one, okay. Speaker 2: We started with one and then it grew to now we have twenty different locations across, across the South Side of Chicago. We never moved off the South Side. We, we have some citywide kinds of activities like we've created--we've spawned several different organizations over the years, developed a corporation. At one point we were developing about three hundred units of housing. We built a lot of the new housing in this community. We built back in the '90s [1990s] where we, we no longer do housing development, you know. We got out of that business because now everybody's doing housing development. Speaker 1: Was that in the early '90s? Speaker 2: Early '90s on up until about '96 [1996] and then we started getting out. Speaker 1: Was Ahmen-Ra [construction company] the--? Speaker 2: Akhenaten [construction company]. Speaker 1: Akhenaten. Speaker 2: Akhenaten, yeah Akhenaten was our development corporation. Yeah we, you know Akhenaten was a builder, an architect, so we selected that name as a result of that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So a lot of the, yeah a lot of greystones up and down this area especially here that, I can see that sign out in front. Speaker 2: Right. We've, we've renovated over, over four hundred units of housing you know in that, in the year, years between '90 and '96, you know. Some of, some of the work was good. Some of it was not so good you know so we, we were lucky to get out of it without losing our shirts. We lost a lot of money yeah, but we were successful as well but we lost a lot of money, yeah. We eventually walked out of all that debt you know, several million dollars. We paid off every one of our benefactors and got out of the business and survived, and survived, yes. Speaker 1: So it's kind of remarkable you've been doing the same thing I mean with the same organization since 1971. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So when you started--start your professional career you start kind of--it seems sort of serendipitous in a way because I don't know if you saw yourself doing this when you--? Speaker 2: No I, you know what I tell folks is we'll be here about three years and then I'm gone. And you know three years led to six years to twelve years to now it's, now I don't tell folks you know I'll be out in three years. I say I'll eventually be out but I'm not, I don't know what it's going to be. Speaker 1: As far as I can tell you didn't start off to be involved in early childhood education or--? Speaker 2: No. No, but what I was interested in was education and, and you know at one point we had an elementary school, First Cataract Elementary School. We, we opened that in the early--late '60s [1960s], closed it in the early, late '80s [1980s], early '80s you know. So, so we, we've had various institutions, the Akhenaten Development Corporation. We created, recently we created a community, helped to create a community credit union. We have the Lugenia Burns Hope Center for the study and development of the new world community, the leadership and organizing institute you know. So, so we've created a group called Great--the Great Coalition and all of that. So, so we've all, you know we've been evolving various kinds of organizations all along trying to figure out a way to help people of African descent gain power in a, in a base, basically very oppressive political system you know. So, so that's been our struggle you know to try, is trying to figure out how to--you know one of the things we understood from the very beginning is that if you get people early involved with the education of their kids they're likely to also be involved with the building of community and so early childhood education was fortuitous you know it's actually serendipitous as you say, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah I just, I'm impressed with the scope of what you, I mean the number of Centers. And yet the community really seems like it still, I mean we've got so many issues. Speaker 2: Yeah, so powerless. So powerless, controlled by small fiefdoms, politicians who control a little bit. You know they can, they can tell who will take the land and who controls the land. But essentially the power of the people where it should reside is viewed as non-existent. You know the politicians, all of the power resides in the politicians and in Mayor [Richard M.] Daley. You know it's a very, it's, it's the only experience that I've ever had across the country where it's organized this way but it's very much a lock out of people in general. It was only during the Harold Washington administration did we really begin to see some kind of breakthrough. And as I, and as I indicated in our sort of interim conversation I, I think that that stresses what him trying to open, open the whole government up really was not what the larger society wanted and, and they had to get him out of there and they couldn't get him out of there in a legitimate way so they got him out the best way they could. Speaker 1: Well some organizations have really complained about the city in recent years about the administration really just come in and taking control of so many functions of community organizations and all of the city. Speaker 2: That's exactly right. Speaker 1: Reaching into the foundation community to choke off some of them as well which is a--. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Yeah, when, when they created the plan for transformation I, you know I'm a MacArthur Fellow. So when they created the plan for transformation we brought about 2500 people downtown and marched on City Hall. We got a call from a certain foundation and we said--they said that our Lugenia Burns Hope Center would no longer receive funding and that we had one grant and that would be the last grant and that was in '96 [1996]. We haven't had a grant since, you know. So, so I mean that's the kind of you know--I mean that's what. Speaker 1: Now did you, I think you alluded to the fact that the Lugenia Burns Center has something to do as an organizer. Speaker 2: Organize, yeah it's an organizer, leadership and organizing institute. Speaker 1: So the--. Speaker 2: Guess who one of the founders was? Speaker 1: Who was--who? Speaker 2: Barack Obama. You haven't heard him talk about it in his campaign speeches I bet you. Speaker 1: No, I know he had an organizing background. Speaker 2: Yeah, he did. You know he, he worked mostly in Altgeld [Gardens] and for the South but he also was very much involved with us in creating the Lugenia Burns Hope Center. Story_ID: 9595 Speaker 1: Tell us about this MacArthur Fellowship. That brought you--you general operate sort of a quiet, under the radar kind of person, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You're not always on television, you know. Speaker 2: No. No, I--. Speaker 1: But you're well known in certain circles. People know who you are but you kind of operate under the radar. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But this MacArthur Fellow piece got your name really out there amongst people that hadn't known you before. Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, I, I was a little bit surprised by it cause I, you know I had thought I had done enough to you know get you know, to receive a MacArthur so-called genius award but apparently some other folks--and it was mostly my involvement with the education you know trying to transform various schools. And, and I guess my organizing work here in this community and the longevity of it you know in spite of you know working with very, very poor people and being able to pull together. We, you know we've had some real successes in pushing CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] to renovate some buildings and, and working with people, teaching them how to speak for themselves in, in a lot of different places. And so a lot of people knew about those kinds of things and that's, that's really where I think the award was generated around those kind of activities with large numbers of poor people. Story_ID: 9596 Speaker 1: You attained a high level of notoriety recently for being arrested you know. Can you tell us what happened there? This is really--. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's--June 26th was when it occurred, June 26, 2004. I was walking my dog Phoebe, it's a female Doberman Pinscher who is a very gentle dog. And we were walking along State Street on the IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology] campus. And a policeman yelled at me and asked me if I had a license for the dog. I walked towards the car and I said, "Yeah I have a license for the dog. The, the license is not on the dog but I have a license for the dog." And so he said, "What's your name," and I told him my name and then he started asking me my birth date and all that. I said no. I said, "I'll go get the license," and so I walked away from him and walked back across the lawn, got on the sidewalk. I heard the, the, the car wheels of the police car squealing you know and he came roll--roaring back down, backing up down the State Street towards 33rd Street. And as I was turning the corner on 33rd and State he came across the lawn of IIT, you know, in his car saying stop, you know. I said--no he didn't say stop. He said, "You're making this more difficult." And I said no, I said, "I haven't done anything. I'm just going to get my--the license so you don't have a reason to have this discussion with me." And then he continued to harangue and harass and then two, two other cars were coming down the street and they joined the parade across. They didn't come across the lawn they turned around and came back down 33rd. And so I proceeded on down the block and I told them in the process that you know the president is giving you this kind of license to do this kind of ridiculous stuff you know. So they--and I was talking very loudly because I wanted to draw a crowd really. So I proceeded along and the, the policeman kept, you know insisting that I stop. They turned in a couple of times and tried to stop me. I walked around the cars and kept walking and with my dog who didn't bark or growl or anything. You saw all the headlines about where I directed, I pointed my dog towards them and you know and threatened them and all that kind of stuff. I didn't do any of that. And--but I did keep talking loud. I saw the pastor of this church at 35th and Indiana. He's prominent in [Operation] PUSH and he--I asked him to witness the fact that you know I was being harassed by these police. And then I crossed that street and kept walking and they turned in again, I walked around and through them. And then I got up to the block where [Stephen A.] Douglas School is and I was walk, walking along and then another car came out of the alley, another squad came out of the alley. By that time there were four squad cars you know and then there, and when the car came out of the alley there were five. So there--it ended up there were eleven policemen that jumped me in the block at Douglas and threw me to the ground, took my vicious dog, put it in the car and took it home to my wife, told them that I had, they had to take me down, you know 'cause I was speaking irrationally walking along the street you know. So it, they took, they broke my glasses and knocked my, split my head open, that kind of thing as they threw me to the ground and then took me to the hospital over here at Michael Reese [Hospital] in handcuffs and it was a black man walking his dog, you know, yeah. So, yeah. Speaker 1: This is, you know this reminds me of the old story of Dr. Odom. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: That they pulled out of the--back in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Same, yeah same kind of experience. Speaker 1: They arrested him for some traffic--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They stopped him. I don't think he even had a traffic violation. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He was driving a Cadillac and they didn't like him and they pulled--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And he's, they didn't know he was a dentist or a well known doctor. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: What was the reaction when they found out who you were or did they care? Speaker 2: They didn't really care but they started lying faster than a dog could trot. They said I pointed the dog at them. That I, that I had been to see 911 and that it obviously you know had thrown me off, you know I was psychologically distraught you know and all that you know. It was, I said I don't know where they got these stories. But anyway they, they told story after story, none of which I you know was true, you know. So that's--then I got [Johnnie] Cochran and [James] Montgomery, they, they kicked their butts in court, you know, and that was it. Speaker 1: Now did you win a lawsuit? Speaker 2: I didn't sue. Speaker 1: You just--. Speaker 2: I didn't sue. And we get, we have a budget of about fifteen million dollars. A lot of it was government money. I didn't think it was wise to risk that you know to gain--they said I could probably only gain--Montgomery said you know you, if you really wanted to get a lot of money you need to get beaten up a little badly (laughs). Said you needed to hit him or something. I said--. Speaker 1: Just broken glasses and a busted head was not enough. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Yeah that wasn't enough so I'd only--he said you'd only get about a million said if you win. So--and they're going to play hardball so you know I'm, I'm still trying to organize with some folks a class action suit you know around this whole business of police harassment 'cause it happens everywhere you know, all across the African American community and in some non-African you know Hispanic community you know. But it's ironically it was a Hispanic guy when they got me down on the ground he stood over me and said, 'cause all of them were white except this Hispanic guy and this Chinese guy. And the Hispanic guy said, "This is what we mean when we say stop." And I said "Oh," as he was pulling me up off the ground (laughs). Speaker 1: That's amazing. Story_ID: 9597 Speaker 1: What are your future plans for the center and for your career at this point? Speaker 2: Well, I'm--we're now building a--we're changing everything as, as we go right now. We're now building a new Center [for New Horizons] at 43rd [Street] and Cottage [Grove Avenue]. We have, many of our Centers in public housing are being torn down so we are relocating. We are relocating into the Dawson Skill Center [Dawson Technical Institute]. We'll open that early childhood education center there. We're working with a church here on King Drive and we'll be opening a vision house for children that have been impacted by the AIDS virus, their family is being impacted by the AIDS virus so we'll be working there. We're doing a lot of work with former CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] residents, getting them what they call lease compliant and so that they can move into some of the new housing, getting them ready to purchase and/or rent in the public housing. So the future is really about trying to adjust to what the community is going to look like going forward and also helping those people that have been sort of forced out of this community to be a part of the wealth production that will occur as they move into these houses. So, so we are, are--our strongest program is the early childhood education program and we find that as an effective way to organize parents and to keep them involved in the community. We're deeply involved in Wendell Phillips [High School]. We want to help make that a neighborhood school, a strong neighborhood school that educates those thousand or so kids to go to college or to get into a vocational educational program or whatever they want to do, but to give them first of all solid education. We're working in four of the feeder schools and hope to partner with several of the providers that will open some of these 2010 schools through our early childhood education program. So, so we're moving in that vein. Ultimately where I hope to be in say the next five to ten years is that we will have an endowment that will allow me to step out of here and, and turn it over to somebody else that can run it and take it into the 21st century and beyond. So my goal right now is to, is to try to leave some kind of legacy and, and then, and to ensure that the institution can last at least a day or two beyond my, my moving out of it. That's, that's what I'm trying to do. Story_ID: 9598 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well one of my I guess the, the two things that I would like to do and see before I go out of here is to see a community like the Tulsa [Oklahoma] community rebuilt in an urban area where African Americans control what's going on and can make decisions and can control the politicians and not have them controlled from city hall. And can take on any challenge, education, housing, industry, whatever and be successful doing that. That's, that's what I want to see happen in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] and this, this community. That's my dream and I keep working on it. I'd like to see Wendell Phillips [High School] as a strong neighborhood school where everybody lines up to get their kids in the school. But the kids that have, are given priority are those kids that live in the neighborhood and, and all, bringing all of their challenges. You know their designation is not quite intellectually bright enough, all of that stuff and they're being educated and that's, that's--I think the public schools are the saving grace, are going to be a saving grace of the African American community. They have been in the past and they will continue to be and so we need to really help to make sure that they can work and in order to do that we need to focus on the public schools and try to create models of how they can work. And so between Phillips and building the organizing in Bronzeville those are my two goals as I try to walk out of here you know five or ten years out. Story_ID: 9599 Speaker 1: When you look at everything you've done so far is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: I would have done a lot more intense organizing from the very beginning. You know if I had it to do over again you know now I'm organizing on every opportunity I get but I, I should have been doing it from the very beginning while nobody was noticing me. Now every time something happens in the community they turn, turn and say that Karanja's doing it you know and it may or may not be true. You know recently there was a housing referendum that was on the ballot and the politicians didn't even know it was on the ballot you know, low income housing and it passed hugely in this community. And so the first person they turned to say you know you did it, you know was you know--they called my board chair you know to say you know well you know how was, how was, how was Centers [for New Horizons] involved in that you know? So I mean that's, that's the kind of thing that is happening now. You know you get a certain amount of notice and then folks you know pinpoint you and stuff that you may or may not have been a participant in. Story_ID: 9600 Speaker 1: Well tell us about your family now. Speaker 2: Well I'm married to a very beautiful woman, Ayana Karanja who is really the one that designs all of this stuff, you know. She--I'm the one that comes out in public and talks about it but she's the one that really helps me think about it, put it into place and, and for a number of years she, she did most of the proposal writing and then you know she teaches at Loyola University [Chicago, Illinois]. We have five, five children, five daughters and we have four grandchildren and one great-grandchild. My--Ayana is--has a Ph.D. in anthropology. She's written several books and, but the one she's probably most proud of is the one on the life of Zora Neale, Zora Neale Hurston. She wrote her dissertation on Zora Neale Hurston. And she is my source of strength and continued hope and, and energy you know. So she's very special and, and my children are very special and successful in their own ways. They're all working. None of them are on drugs. They all, they all were very smart in school, did very well. I have one daughter that's an assistant superintendent, another daughter that is a singer and entertainer and lives in London, another daughter that is a manager of several stores for large women and a daughter that works in a senior citizens facility and is a manager of their activities and another daughter that is a collector for a bill payment company. So, so you know they're all doing something that I think is worthwhile and at least they're making a living, you know. They only come to me and Ayana every once in a while to supplement their, their, their livelihood. Story_ID: 9601 Speaker 1: When you look back at your life up to this point, what would you consider to be your legacy at this point? Speaker 2: Well I think the fact that we have educated over twenty thousand children through early childhood education and many of them have gone on to be quite successful in, in, in life you know, that's probably my legacy along with a family that doesn't do drugs. Nobody as far as I know in the family does drugs and they, and they all work and have jobs and support one another in very positive ways you know. So those two things are my legacy I think you know. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything we haven't asked you about that you think that, that before we close out that you think needs to be addressed? Speaker 2: No, I mean not that I can think of. There probably are some things that I should have mentioned but I, I don't know what they are and so you probably asked me everything that, that you should have asked, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, well the last question is then similar to legacy but a little bit different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a person that took care of his family and loved his community and would not tolerate anybody attempting to oppress him and/or his family...