 Story_ID: 130767 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I am interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you place--please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Luther L-U-T-H-E-R, Alton A-L-T-O-N, Keith K-E-I-T-H. Speaker 1: And, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is October 9, 1950, in Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: All right, and sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am executive director of Arise Detroit, a volunteer and call to action incentive. I'm working to help children and families in the City of Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay. And, you were a senior editor for the Detroit-- Speaker 2: Yes, for thirty-six years I was a reporter, editor, and columnist for the Detroit News. I retired in October of 2005. Speaker 1: Okay. You are also a musician as well, right? Speaker 2: Right. About eight or nine years ago, I picked up music in my later life, in my thirties actually; picked up guitar and started learning blues. And, for the last eight or nine years, I have been, at night, a professional musician performing with my own band under the name of Luther "Badman" Keith. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Blues Band. Speaker 1: All right. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 8, 2007 [sic]; March 9, 2007-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I stand corrected. Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time? And, you don't have to give your address, just-- Speaker 2: Okay. I'm in my home in Detroit, Michigan. Story_ID: 130768 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: A favorite food? Wow, that's out of left field. I guess my favorite food would be chicken, basically (laughter). I was raised on it and I still eat it. So, there's a lot of foods I like but, you really can't go wrong with chicken (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: A favorite time of the year, I would say fall. Particular in this neighborhood in Detroit [Michigan] because we have a lot of beautiful old trees and leaves turn, it's very majestic. There's almost like a cathedral-like effect that is very enthralling. So, actual, fall for a lot of reasons, but that being one of them, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: When I can get a vacation. A vacation destination, I actually, returning to our family roots in Tennessee and visiting family in Tennessee is probably a favorite destination. Other than, you know, the warm weather places like Aruba, where we have a timeshare. But, I think connecting with family, and my family in Tennessee where I--where my, my mother is from. Where a lot of relatives, I think, that's probably, for me, that would be a favorite vacation destination. Speaker 1: Okay. And, that last questions is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying; I guess, in the context of a lot of things, the organization I'm working with right now, Arise Detroit, we have a saying that, be--"Embrace the Vision, Be Part of the Change." And, that would be, I guess, that would be it because the only way you can create a new reality is to do the work and make it happen. And, so, I would say, "Be part of the change, make it happen." That's one I've heard. So, along those lines of, you know, we have to take control of our destiny, whatever obstacles we face, and forward solutions. And, the way you can do that is to be part of the change and make it happen. Story_ID: 130769 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family. But, we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Her full name was, Mittie M-I-T-T-I-E, Savella S-A-V-E-L-L-A, Ashworth A-S-H-W-O-R-T-H, Keith K-E-I-T-H. Speaker 1: All right. And, what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born October 7th, and I can't give you the exact date, except she died at the age of eighty-seven, in 1999, and she was born October the 7th [October 7, 1912]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, and where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Wilson County, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Basically, one generation. Her parents and my grandfather which was, which were John Ashworth and Luella Ashworth. My grandmother who also, I believe, grew up in that area of Tennessee. My grandfather, her father, was a farmer and, you know, we visited down on the farm when I was very young. I know it was a large family, and I spent a lot a time down there when I was a boy. I don't have a lot of information in my head about his life. But, I really can't go back further than that, in terms of my mother's side beyond my, beyond my grandfather. Speaker 1: So, this would take us back to 1880s, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, it would be. Yes. Speaker 1: I just, I just did the math on your mother. She's 1912, I guess, she was born 1912. Speaker 2: Right. Right. You're right. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, her father, I guess we would have to go back to the 1880s, I guess for him. Speaker 2: Right. 'Cause her father, yes-- Speaker 1: Or, her, really. Speaker 2: Yeah, for your end, 'cause her, her father died like, I would think like in about in the '50s [1950s] and he was in his late 70s or 80s, I recollect. So, that would have put him being born like around, you know, 1830-1870, '75 [1875], or '80 [1880], somewhere in that range, I'm guessing. Speaker 1: Right. Right. Okay. But, he's as far back as you can go? Speaker 2: On her side of the family, yes. As a matter fact, on both sides of the family that--I could go a little further on my father's side because of some family historians. But, that's about as far back I can go on my mother, me personally. Speaker 1: Well, on your mother's side, do they have any stories about, any stories about reconstruction or stories about-- Speaker 2: I've never heard stories about Reconstruction per se, because I guess I was so young. And, even when my grandfather died, I wasn't even ten years old. So, I didn't, I didn't get a lot of like reconstruction stuff, you know. Of course, my mother talked about her father. And, she talked about, she talked about going to school herself in the horse and buggy. Taking the horse and buggy to school. She was a very, very good student. And, a matter of fact, I was actually, my middle name, Alton, is actually for one of her brothers who died when he was about eighteen or nineteen years old. She had a brother named Alton. That's how Alton became mine. I was named for him. But, she talks about going to school in a one-room schoolhouse. As a matter of fact, she taught in a one-room schoolhouse herself, before she came North, you know. And, just all the things that we had that they didn't have at that time. So, it was literally, they were, you know, went to school. They had a family of horses, family buggies and that's how they moved around. They lived on a farm-- Story_ID: 130770 Speaker 1: Now, where is Wilson City [sic]? Where is it at? Speaker 2: Wilson County [Tennessee] is actually, Wilson County is actually the county that the City of Lebanon, L-E-B-N-A-N [sic], Lebanon, Tennessee. And, that's actually where the family actually, they lived in and around Lebanon, Tennessee. And, you'll find this interesting that the family, of the Ashworth family, many of them grew up on a--my grandfather [John Ashworth] bought land in the area. And, he might have been some business things on the side too. But, basically the family, like about five or six families, they all lived along--for a period of time, even now they own land. Some still live there, along a road called Africa Road in Lebanon, Tennessee. And, the word is because so many black families lived along this road, though it's integrated now. And they, the family, as the family--when they were burned out a couple of times. But, eventually, all of them settled, many of them settled along--these are, by this, the sons and daughters of my mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith], my mothers' father's brothers and sisters lived along this road. Many of them are still there. It's called African Road in Lebanon, Tennessee. So, Lebanon is in Wilson County-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Tennessee. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sorry, I said, Wilson City 'cause I wrote county down as CTY, and I looked it and I (simultaneously). Speaker 2: Right. Right. Wilson County. Speaker 1: Wilson County, Okay. Tennessee. That's interesting, African, Africa Road. Speaker 2: Africa Road, yes. Speaker 1: And, those are the days, they often called the black community, Little Africa, and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, that point when we first started going down there, of course, it was a gravel road. They've paved it since, but it was all gravel. And, it was farm, farmland, you know, horse, and cows, and pigs. And, I remember going down there and my mother's sister, who she called Tiny, Martha Horton, and her husband, they had a farm and they raise tobacco. And, I can remember going down there and trying to help them with tobacco and all the green worms and all that stuff. And, when we were very young, in fact my mother, when she was pregnant, by this time she was up north. We actually went down, my sister, my sister and I, and lived down there for quite some time because my mother was having some ill health issues. And, my Aunt Martha actually took care of us. So, we basically ran barefoot, you know, when we were young, down there all through Lebanon, Tennessee, and with my cousins and things like that, so. And, I'm talking now, you know, three--some things I don't even remember, I've heard a lot of this when we were very young; three, four, five years old. So, that's why getting back to Tennessee holds a lot of, holds a lot of memories for me. Speaker 1: Now, here, I hate to ask you this questions again, but, now, where is Leb--where is Lebanon near that we might know is it near Nashville [Tennessee], Memphis [Tennessee], or? Speaker 2: Lebanon is about twenty miles, I think it's about twenty miles, I think its east of Nashville, east or west of Nashville, about twenty miles outside of Nashville. So, if you know where Nashville is, and I'm, I can't think of the name of the freeway, I-40, one of those freeways outside of Nash--but, it's like a, it's like a suburb. It's like, you know, twenty miles-- Speaker 1: Okay, I get it now. Speaker 2: Small town. Story_ID: 130771 Speaker 1: So, did you mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith], now she, did she go to teacher's college? Or, did she go-- Speaker 2: Well, my mother, who was an outstanding student, she went to college, and I know one of the colleges down there in the area [Wilson County, Tennessee], she got some--as I recall like, an associate's degree. And, she actually taught in a one-room schoolhouse, like first through the eighth grade. And, she actually had no plans to come to Detroit [Michigan]. But, she came to Detroit in the '40s [1940s] to work in the defense plants here in Detroit. There's a lot of people from the South came to work in the defense plants. And, that's in fact where she met my father [Luther Caesar Keith] who was a real estate salesman at the time among other things. And, she actually had no plans at all to live in Detroit. As a matter of fact, I remember her telling me, she was having a serious relationship with a, with a young man who she thought she might marry. But, she came up here to the defense plant and met my father, and the rest is history because she ended up getting married and we ended up growing up in Detroit. And, we could have gone--grown up in Tennessee as many of my, most of my cousins did there, you know, her sisters and brother stayed. And, then she had one brother that came up here and also, and he's still alive. The only one of the family, of her siblings that are still alive, my Uncle Grady. But, most of them stayed in Tennessee. But, she came up here and when she got married, she basically was a homemaker and did not work. And, my father's health was not the best. So, we never even had a car, my family, until I was about sixteen years old, when my mother drove. My father had some health issues. He couldn't drive. So, she did not work in a real job other than, she worked at the local state fair. But, she got a real job, when I be--when we were teenagers and the children were older. And, at that point, she worked for the Wayne County [Michigan]--a friend at the court office. And, she actually worked about ten or twelve years there and retired from there. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 130772 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is Luther L-U-T-H-E-R, Caesar C-A-E-S-A-R, Keith K-E-I-T-H. His birth date, I'm gonna have to do the same thing, was August the 19th [August 19, 1905] and he died at the age of sixty-nine in 1974. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, he was born in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family? How far back can trace that? Speaker 2: I know a little more about my father's side of the family because of my grandfather, the stories I've heard about my grandfather from my father. And, my father and my Aunt Marie were really like true historians of the family. What's interesting about my father on a number of levels, number one, he was born in Georgia. And, his mother actually, by the name of Lucille Collier, my biological grandmother, died in childbirth having him. And, his father who was Perry Alexander Keith, Alexander Keith, his father remarried a woman, my--Anne, Annie Keith and moved to Detroit [Michigan]. And, both of them died before I was born (unclear) before I was old enough to know them. But, my father always told me stories about my grandfather Perry, who was a very prominent businessman in Atlanta, and ran a lot of businesses involving a lot of social activities. As a matter of fact, we even have some family documents about his prominence, in and around Atlanta when he was there. And, he was very, very active, very prominent, very socially conscious. And, my father told me a lot about him. And, a lot of the things that, I think that were planted in me came from this, this idea of, you're here to do something. And, so this goes back to my grandfather. But, going back before that, you know, the family story is that my, one of my grandfathers' father several times removed, actually was the product of a relationship between a white slave owner and a black woman. But, in any event, he subseq-- Speaker 1: Now, this would've been back in before--during slavery? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. So,-- Speaker 1: This would be, 'cause your--I calculated your father's birthday, date is 1905. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, his dad (unclear) taking him twenty years back-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Talking about-- Speaker 2: Right, you go way back, and the story is, the family story is that, the family story is that the slave owner freed, I believe it is one of his sons who was--one of my grandfather's, sometime, you know, back removed, so that could've been my grandfather's father, probably was. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, your great-grandfather. Speaker 2: Yeah, great, yeah right. So, that's how that goes. But, anyway, he came-- Story_ID: 130773 Speaker 1: So, this idea of being involved in doing something, making a contribution, that was my father's [Luther Caesar Keith's] phrase, make a contribution. Started early on, he talked about all the things that my grandfather [Perry Alexander Keith] did to help people, to help people get jobs. And, my father adopted this, and it was his very strong social consciousness. He never was a rich man, and he sold real estate. He worked at the post office here for many years. But, he was involved in a lot of social efforts to open doors for black folks, or colored folks, or Negros as they were called at the time. And, one of a number of things that he started that I grow up with, he started an organization back in the '50s [1950s] called the United Committee on Negro History which brought--we call them now black history programs, to Detroit [Michigan]. And, my father was a converted Catholic. And so, he converted to Catholicism because he had, he had a speech impediment, and looked like an albino, very light, light-complected man. And, in any event, was a subject of some ridicule by some people. But, he really was a brilliant man in many ways, very conscious. So, he ended up going to Catholic schools and he converted. And, he had a very good experience with that. So, he was, he was very strongly Catholic, very strongly religious, and very strongly a "race man," as they use to say back in the day, if you know what that phrase means. So, he early on, I was very young, before me even, started organizing black Catholics here in Detroit. And, was involved in organizing the, one of the first, first few black parishes here in Detroit, here in Detroit. And, in fact, he started this organization called the United Committee on Negro History, which initially was a Catholic organization. And, they would have events every February down at Wayne State University McGregor Center here in Detroit. And, he would bring in dignitaries from all over, Benjamin Mays and people of that yoke, really giants. And, I was very young and one of the articles I wrote years later as a journalist, I talk about really living with the--not understanding the significance of what he was doing. And so, he would bring in people from all over the country and this was back--now we we're talking about the mid-'50s [1950s], Black History was not a popular subject at that time. But, he would bring these people in, and then he also would bring in black clerics from Africa. He would bring in priests from African. He would bring in bishops from Africa. And, in one case, I absolutely remember because we grow up in Catholic Schools. I was at Saint Agnes Catholic School in Detroit, and one day my father brought a black bishop home to our house. We were living on Columbus [Street] at the time, 2720 Columbus [Street] in Detroit [Michigan], right, "the inner city." But, anyway, he brought this black bishop whose name was Bishop Rugambwa [Laurean Card. Rugambwa, Archbishop of Dar es Salaam] to our home for dinner. Now, my mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith] was an incredible cook. I mean, she was a cook beyond compare in the old school. And, she cooked one of these great meals of fried chicken, my favorite food, fried corn, and greens, and corn bread, and all that stuff. And, the bishop, Rugambwa, loved it, we had a great conversation. It was at the table, with the family, and me and my two sisters and brother around the table. I must have been maybe seven or eight years old. Anyway, a year later, we're in religious class at school and we were reading about Africa's first black cardinal and his name is--I think he was from Zaire, now called--what's Zaire--it was called Zaire, at that time called -- Speaker 2: Congo. Speaker 1: Tanganyika, or it might have been-- Speaker 2: It was Con--Zaire was [Belgian] Congo then. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, Tanganyika. He was from--what was that Tanganyika [formerly German East Africa], I recall-- Speaker 2: It's now Tanzania. Speaker 1: Which is now--yeah, that's what I meant. And so, we're reading about this first African Cardinal, Rugambwa. And, I said, "Car--Rugambwa." I raised my hand, and I remember raising my hand and saying, "Sister, sister, he's been at my house, he this--he ate dinner at my house." And, I remember to this day, I'll never forget it, the sister said, the nun said, "Luther Keith, how dare you stand up and tell a lie like that, in this class!" you know. And, I was like crushed by that, because it was really true. But, I say that because my father did a lot of visionary things and he worked at the post office, he was organizing, got jobs for a lot of people at the post office. Story_ID: 130774 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Luther Caesar Keith] go to college? Speaker 2: My father did not go to college. Again, he was--just had a high school education. But, he had such a strong sense of social commitment, a strong sense of justice. And, he wasn't particularly interested about getting credit or money or fame. And, my mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith] often said that, you know, Luther, meaning my father, could have been a millionaire if he applied himself. But, he, he really was about helping people. Whenever we would go out someplace, he would always see people on a corner, and I walk 'em myself, because he used to give 'em some money. He said, "Always help the poor." He said, "Son, always help the poor." And, he was just very strongly--he believed that he was here to make a contribution in that--what he always told me is, make a contribution. Do something to help somebody else. So,-- Speaker 1: Was he ever a member of the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association], [Marcus] Garvey's organization? Speaker 2: I don't think he was. I don't think he was. But, he just had this very strong streak of doing something, being socially active, make a difference. And, when he formed the United Committee on Negro History he had these programs and my mother was the treasurer of the organization. So every, and they have programs ever February and they invite these dignitaries to come in. Carl Rowen came in. I remember, 'cause he was the first time I really was aware of a black journalist, Carl Rowen. You know, like I say, Benjamin Mays, I mean really, you know, really legends in this, in the arena of black history. And, people who were doing things at that time. And again, I just saw this as something my father did for black history. And, he would always sit at the table on the day and it would always be in February. So, if it was snowing, he would sit at the table and brood that no one was gonna come. And, my mother, I always--can always hear my mother say, "Luther, don't worry." He'd sit at the table like this and he'd be brooding like, I done all this work and it snowed, and no one's gonna come. But, people always came. So, I grew up with that very--of doing something, of helping people. That this is not about just seeking fame. It's about, you know, really about doing the right thing. And that, so, so this, you know, he didn't sit down and say, and teach me per se. But, you know, I'd observed him, he would talk about, you know, things and I observed him. So, I just kind of absorbed this as, you know, I'm here. And so, as I became, as I became a black journalist, I--and I didn't plan to become a journalist. I actually, thought of, well actually I wanted to be a pro baseball player. I grew up as a pretty good baseball player, and you know, that was really my dream to play center field for the Detroit Tigers [Detroit, Michigan]. But, by the time college rolled around and I had to declare a major, I actually wanted to be like a business major or something. I saw like--it sounded important. I saw myself as a CEO. They said, "What you wanna major in?" I said, "Business Administration," it sounds so long word, big, important. And, I said, "What do you have to be good at?" They said, "You have to be good at math to do that." And, I said, "Well." I could not pass Algebra in high school. I was a terrible math student. And, they said, "Well, what are you good at?" I said, "Well, I've always got good grades in English and Grammar." And, I would always get A's in writing. But, all my friends were, they were good at Chemistry, and Physics, and I figure, anybody can write. You know, that's nothing special. And, I said, "Well, there's this field called journalism where you can use that." I said, "Check that box for me (laughter)." And, that's how I stumbled into journalism and it turns out that that was the thing that, the gift that God gave me for communication in writing. And, as I got involved in that though I was always socially conscious about, you know, black folks in, as it relates to media. Because I would observe how the media covered the black community, how they would cover Detroit. And, I could remember, when I went to the University of Detroit [Detroit, Michigan], which is just two miles in that direction, not far from where we're, we're right now. And, I can remember some editors, one of the editors from one of the local papers. And, I remember getting up and asking him, "Well, aren't there more black journalist? Why don't he have black editors?" So this, we're talking about, we're talking about like 1969, '70 [1970] in the context of what was going on in the country. Where are they? He said, "Well, we'd, we'd like to hire 'em. We can't find 'em. It just aren't that many going in" and, and I remember writing the paper for an assignment for that class. And, remember, I'll always remember, I got a "B" on that paper. And, the white professor just couldn't get where I was coming from (laughter). He said, "Luther you had some good points, but you know, it's really hard" and blah, blah, blah, but-- Story_ID: 130775 Speaker 1: So anyway, so when I did actually-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't wanna take you too far into that yet. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm, okay (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Because we still have to go back to some other things. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry. Take me where you want me to go. Speaker 2: But, that's good--I mean, that was good. But, we need to go back to--I wanted to ask you a question about your grandfather [Perry Alexander Keith]. And, I was reading an article that was written in the Detroit News, Michigan Magazine, I guess, February of 1986, that Perry Keith, who was a businessman on, I guess, were his businesses on Auburn Avenue in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 1: I'm not sure the exact location of his businesses. Speaker 2: That's a historic, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right-- Speaker 2: Golden Street. Speaker 1: I'm not sure exactly where they were located. But, I know that he was very successful and very-- Speaker 2: He had, according to what you wrote, he had about--a Barber shop-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: A delivery, a freight service. He had about six different businesses. Speaker 1: Right. Well, he was, he was an entrepreneur. He was an entrepreneur. Speaker 2: And, he, for some reason, I mean, things didn't work and he had to end up moving to Detroit [Michigan], right? Speaker 1: Right. And, he, and he ended up coming to Detroit to work in a factory. And, it tells you, you know, you know, but that's what folks did, you know. Speaker 2: So, I just wonder if there's any story that's passed down through family as to what happened down there. 'Cause-- Speaker 1: You know what-- Speaker 2: We know racism is alive and well. And, we know that a lot of other problems, (simultaneously). Speaker 1: Right. I--to be honest, I didn't hear specifically of that. Basically, the story we got that, you know, he fell on hard times. And that, you know, Henry Ford and the five dollar, what it's five dollar a day wage, and all that was going on. And, that's when he came. I'm sure of, there are some people who may know, like my Uncle Damon [HM Damon J. Keith] who, my Uncle Damon who is a judge, who is the last surviving member of my brother's siblings. And, I imagine, he has some of those stories. Story_ID: 130776 Speaker 1: When you look at your parents' personalities, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Well, I think I have--my personality to a great degree, I think it's drawn from my mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith], because her personality is--her demeanor is very--I'm probably a blend of both. But, I think of myself as more of her because her demeanor is very respectful. It's--she always had a certain un--, you know, she had a temper but, she had, she basically secured herself with a kind of dignity and respect for other people. And, with a very charitable spirit in that she was not the type of person to gossip about people, to speak ill of people out of spite, to get caught up in judgments about people. And, so I, and I happened to be born under the sign of Libra where--October 9, where, however you feel about that, and she was October the 7th. So, however you feel about that. But, I think that even as a journalist and how I conduct myself, even as a columnist, I try to be sensitive and open to other peoples points of view. And, I tend to look for, even now in my new arena, look for opportunities where you can bring people together around a common, commonality rather than draw lines in the sand for a confrontation. Now, there comes time for that. But, for many times you can resolve things and find things--find areas of agreement, personally and professionally on a lot of different levels, if you adopt that approach. And, so that's kinda like the way--and so, I don't spend a lot of time--sometimes people ask me, "Well, what do you think about that?" "Don't you think so and so," and I really don't. I'm not thinking about that. I don't have, you know, that's just not the way my DNA works. For other folks, that's all they've got. But, I--that's just not me. It's not to say, I'm perfect or anything, but that's means what, that's the way my mother carried herself. And, she didn't, you know, she--in all the time I grew up, she--I never heard her use a profane word. Now, I can't, I can't make that claim. But, I never heard her or my father [Luther Caesar Keith], ever, either one of them exchange a cuss word of any type, ever. And, I think about that, and I say, "That's pretty amazing, how they did that." But, that was kinda like, they had this grace about both of them. And, my mother, particularly about the way she carried herself. And, I think she carried it far better than I do. But, I think that's the, that element of her personality, where you get more by being charitable, by being kind to people. Even at--and this is where my father--even at, even at your own expense. Even if in fact, if you suffer in the exchange, ultimately people will respect you for that. And, I think if I editorialize to some aspects, we've lost sight of that in today's society where we have become so caught up in me-ism and I'm the star-ism. And, it's not really about being a star. It's about what you're doing for somebody else. And, that's the way my mother, you know, conducted her life, helping lots of people. She was very active in the church. In a lot of ways, was not a high-profile person, was not a headline person. Was one of these people, like my father's initiatives, even though he was not--he was more socially out there than my mother but, my mother was very supportive and always doing things behind the scenes and seeing that everything was taking care of. Not because of she was in fear, because that's just was the way she felt that she could make the best contribution to the ultimate success of the family. So, I would think that most people, even though they're a number of aspects to my personality as there are with many people. But, essentially I'm a, I'm a pretty laid-back, reserved person. But, a matter of fact, not to skip ahead too much, but when I became a--I was a very shy, even insecure on many respects growing up. Like a lot of kids are, to the point where, when I went to my, one of my first interviews to try to get a job as a newspaper, one of the editors told me, he said, "You seems too shy to be a reporter." Because, I was. I changed and I can adapt but basically, I'm not trying to be out there. As it turns out, I'm out there a lot. Not because I'm trying to be. It's because that's just the nature of what I have done has taken me there. But, basically, I have no need to be, you know, a big star and be on TV or stuff and that. But, if I have to accomplish a goal to do that, I will do that. But, so, you know, I'm, you know, at peace, and that's how my mother was. So, I really think that, she's indelibly stamped on me from that standpoint as to how you carry yourself as a person. And, that how, that's how you get respect. That's how you get creditability and that's--in terms of, for the things that I have done in my life to build credibility to get things done. That's, that's something that you cannot get a degree for, no one can hand it to you, no one can anoint it for you. You--that's something that people chose to give you based on how you conduct yourself and what you do. And, so that's how I try to approach, approach life, and that's how my mother did it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 130777 Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Probably my earliest childhood memory is on a house when we lived on Northfield [Avenue, Detroit, Michigan]. I'm talking about, I'm probably a year and a half old, two years old. With my mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith] holding me in her arms washing me up in a bathroom sink or basin, and she's telling me nursery rhymes. And, I--it's the most fun time in my life. And, she always used to tell me the one that I used to get the biggest kick out of, was the story of the 'Three Pigs.' And, she would pull my toes, and this little piggy ran all the way, she would pull my toes, and I would laugh, laugh, laugh. And, it was just--and I had so much fun. And, she had a lot of fun doing it. And, it's one of those indelible memories that is stamped. And, I couldn't've been--I was just a toddler. But, she would tell me those nursery rhymes and pull my toes and go, wee, wee, wee, this little pig ran all the way home. And, I just thought that was so funny. So, that, you know, that was probably, when I think back to it, that's probably as early as any childhood memory I have. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting 'cause I, you know, I just remember the same piggy thing (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah (laughter), you know, right. Speaker 1: So, now, did you move around a lot when you were growing up or did you live on Northfield for a long time? Speaker 2: Not really, well, we moved, we moved, we moved when I was like about four or five years old. We moved from Northfield. 'Cause I went to, I went to kindergarten at a school called Sampson, a public school. And, it's the only public school I ever attended; Sampson Elementary School in Detroit. But, we moved from Northfield, Northfield Street [sic Northfield Avenue] to a street called Columbus [Street], between Linwood and Lawton in Detroit when I was five. And, I went through first to eighth grade at a school called Saint Agnes Catholic School. So, we moved there-- Speaker 1: Now, is Columbus on the west side? Speaker 2: Columbus is on the west side. Actually, both of these streets are on the west side. So, I've always lived on the west side. And in fact, my father's family jumped back; they grew, their family grew up on Hudson Street. So, the Keith family is actually a very prominent name on the west side of Detroit going back to my grandfather. And so, and we lived there for, I think about 1955 to '75 [1975]. My father died in '74 [1974]. And, right after my father died--we lived in a two family flat on Columbus. My cousins, my uncle, my Aunt Annie, who was my father's sister and my Uncle Martinzie [ph.], they're--I think he has six children. My cousins, they lived downstairs at the flat and it was a two-family flat, and we lived upstairs. And so, we were there twenty years and my father worked there in the Post Office during this period. And, when he passed in '74 [1974], my mother subsequently moved to a home further west in Detroit on Asbury Park, 13597 Asbury Park. And, she lived there from 1975 until 1999 when she passed. Speaker 1: Okay. Then, you basically grew up on Columbus? Speaker 2: Yes. That's my--that--yes. Story_ID: 130778 Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up. There's so many. First off, for me growing up, it all starts with playing baseball because at a very young age I became enraptured with baseball. And so, literally every moment I had, from the time I was about seven or eight years old until I was a young man was spent try--playing baseball. We started playing baseball in the alleys. And, it's hard to image that now when you go back there, but we were playing baseball in the alley. Me, my cousins, brothers, my brother when he got older and our, and our friends we'd play baseball. And so, we would go in the alley and play baseball. Then we, as we got older, we would go up to Northwestern Field, where Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan] was and we'd play baseball there. So, I end up playing a lot of baseball. I actually broke quite a few windows in the neighborhood playing baseball. Unfortunately, I got a reputation for, you know, Alton Keith has broken another neigh--window. And, I say the name Alton because my family, growing up, I was not called Luther by my family. I was called by my middle name to distinguish me from my father, though I was not a junior. Which I always emphasis to people, I am not Luther, Jr. I am Alton, Luther Alton Keith. My father is Luther Caesar Keith. But, all my family and friends where I grew up, they called me Alton. No one called me Luther growing up, in my family on either side of the family. So, I was never called Luther. But, at school I was called Luther. And, as I got into a professional arena, I was called Luther. But, anybody who calls me Alton, even though either my family or they grew up. Except, you know, my wife and I got older because I was Luther when I met her. But, in any event, but sights and sounds, so playing baseball or running up and down the streets going to Saint Agnes [Catholic] School [Detroit, Michigan]. And, at the Agnes School which was located on 12th and LaSalle, which is now Rosa Parks Boulevard. But, there was a bakery right across the street from the school. And, school started like about 8:30, but we would go to the bakery and they had something called lunch sticks, were these little long things with cream inside of 'em. We would go get lunch sticks and those were great to have those lunch sticks. I can smell 'em and taste them now, you know. You know, my mother's [Mittie Ashworth Keith's] cooking was unbelievable. I mean, she cooked, you know, rolls, and pancakes, and all that stuff from scratch. I mean, unbelievable cooking, of all the old foods that she might expect your typical soul food stuff. But, she could cook and bake. And, then she would can pickles and things like that. I mean, amazing things. And, my favorite thing that she used to make for me was egg nog. And, I loved her egg nog. And, she used to make homemade rolls, and egg nog at home. So, when it was my birthday, whenever my birthday rolled around, she would make me my egg nog. 'Cause that was my thing, you know. My brother's thing was her peach cobbler pie. So, when his birthday rolled around, he always--she always made him peach cobbler pie. So, egg nog and her chicken, the way she cooked her chicken, she always had garlic in it. So, that gave it a (unclear) taste. And, then she would cook hot water cornbread, and some people don't know what that is. It's just hot water and cornbread in a hot skillet, and grease. And, you know, my favorite dish was like pinto beans with lots of ketchup and things like that, chicken and dumplings. So, she, and you know, she put that love in the cooking, you know. So, a matter of fact, and this is not an exaggeration, our family, my entire time growing up, never went out to a restaurant to eat. Now, part of that is because we didn't have a car. But, even when we did, we never, ever went out to a restaurant to eat. Not one time. My entire time growing up. Which is amazing now, because now we go out constantly (laughter), and it's a different world. But, that, and that speaks to the love. And, then sights and sounds, it's like there's a rhythm to the day, you know. We would go to school or we'll walk to school about a half mile to school. We'd walk home. We'd get back home about 3:30. My father had to be at work like about 5:00 or 5:30. We got home, the dinner was on the table. My father would eat dinner with the family, all of us together, then he'd walk to the bus stop, 'cause he didn't drive. And, he'd catch the bus downtown to the post office. And, without fail, every day we'd have a family dinner and he would go to work and come back. He'd get a-- Speaker 1: So, he would work all night and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. He would work until--and he would get a ride home. It was an old gentleman named Mr. Baltimore who would give him a ride home. But, he would catch the bus. Story_ID: 130779 Speaker 1: And so, there was this, there was this rhythm to the household to how we lived that was really, when I think about it, and matter of fact, I haven't really thought about it. You forced me to kinda think about it. But, that's what it was. It was a rhythm and comfort level that you knew it was gonna be there. You got home, the dinner was there. Daddy [Luther Caesar Keith] was at the table. We sat around. We ate. The worst part about it, when we got to or somebody had to stay and do the dishes, which I hated. And, so, I was always trying to sneak out the house so I could go play baseball. I didn't wanna do the dishes. From time to time, my sister would (unclear), would catch me 'cause we had a two-family flat. And, so, we knew if you walked down, if you walked down the steps, they would hear you. But, if you kinda like scooted down, you know, like this (laughter) then they wouldn't hear you (laughter), you know. So, those are little things, 'but sights and sounds and then, of course, growing up where we grew up, of course, playing baseball, and we played football too, up and down the street. That was the sound of the Motown era. So, we lived not far from Motown [Detroit, Michigan], you know, we could walk. And, we lived around the corner too, from the Shrine of the Black Madonna, Albert Cleage at the time, that whole part of the black consciousness and movement that was exploding. So, we lived, literally, right around the corner from that. And, of course, the '67 [1967] explosion, the civil disturbances, riots, whatever you wanna call it, rebellions, we lived right smack dab in the heart of those. As a matter of fact, the church Saint Agnes, Saint Agnes [Catholic] School [Detroit, Michigan], the church was located right on 12th Street, like within ten blocks where the whole thing erupted. So, I can remember. And, it's interesting because this is the fortieth anniversary of that, this year in Detroit, 2007, July of '67 [1967] was when this whole thing erupted. And, I have very strong memories of that because we went to church that Sunday morning, as we all did, to 8:00 o'clock mass, 8:30 mass, and we came out of church and people running up and down 12th Street, as it was called then, breaking into storefronts and things like that. And we're saying like, "What's going on?" And-- Speaker 2: So, you were about sixteen then, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 130780 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the riot in '67 [1967 Detroit, Michigan riot]? Speaker 2: Right. And so, we came out of church [St. Agnes Catholic Church, Detroit, Michigan] that morning and people were running up and down breaking into storefronts and I didn't have a sense of how, how big that thing was gonna be at the time. Because later in that day, I had a baseball game on, further west at a place called Atkinson Playfield, and the coach at the time, who is still one of my best friends. A gentleman by the name of John Robo [ph.] who happened to be white. He was like twenty-one years old, coaching these young black kids and we were playing baseball. And, I was playing center field and I remember in the outfield looking up and I looked across the city, I was seeing black smoke rising up. And, I was saying "Wow," okay. Then you gotta understand, we haven't had a radio or anything so, we don't know what's going on. So, John, John Robo [ph.] generally gave me a ride home and he would go down Boulevard and drop--and then make a turn down Lawton Street which ran in to Columbus and he would let me off. On this particular da--ev--day until this day, I don't know why, as he was going down the Boulevard where he would normally turn on Lawton, I said, "John, let me out here, I could walk. It's only like five block, I could walk; you can just go on." Now, 'til this day, I don't know why I did that. 'Cause I never done it before but, that's what I said. And, I had no sense of what was going on in term--but, he went on. And, as I crossed and started walking down Lawton, I saw black folks throwing bricks at cars with white folks in 'em. And, I shudder to think what had happened had he turned down that street, 'cause I'm black myself, and he's white. And, we go down that street, what would've happened. And, that's one of those things that to this day, I'm baffled what made me say it, because I was not, because I knew what was going on, because I didn't. But, in any event, so the riot and, you know, I have vivid memories of, you know, gunshots and being stopped by the National Guard. It sounded like Vietnam [Vietnam War]. Ducking under the bed because the cacophony of bullets all over the place. And, a matter fact, the first victim of the riot, if you call it riot, was our shoe repairman. Our shoe repairman [Krikor "George" Messerlian] who lived on Linwood was an old Serbian [sic, Armenian] guy and he ran a little shoe shop. And, these guys broke into his shop and he went out there and tried to fight 'em off with an old Serbian sword from the Serbian Wars [sic] or something that is--and he got beaten to death. And, he was the first casualty. So, that whole experience, you know, is very strongly in my mind. Speaker 1: What--Did you have any sense of why this was going on-- Speaker 2: I really-- Speaker 1: Or, an impending sense that it was going to happen? Speaker 2: I--to be honest, I didn't. I know there are a lot of social (unclear) 'cause, I mean, I was sixteen years old and I didn't have a sense of that. I knew from time to time I've--some of my friends would tell me--my cousin told, I was stopped by the cops. And, he told me, you ain't--you aren't gonna do nothing nigger and slapped me, and I didn't do nothing about it, and things like that. But, some of the social things that were going on, in terms of the police brutality and some of the other social issues around black folks in Detroit, I really didn't have--and the older folks may have had a sense. 'Cause, I remember at the time Mayor [Jerome] Cavanagh of--was the mayor at that time as I recall, was recorded as saying, "Well, when the other disturbances happened in Europe and places like that, well you know, that's not gonna happen here in Detroit." And, he was totally wrong and they were completely stunned by the fact that this could happen. And, you know, there was certain people talking about this certain carnival-like atmosphere, where people were breaking into cleaners and this and that. And, some of my friends did that. But, I can tell you this, my mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith] and my father [Luther Caesar Keith], you aren't doing any--in fact, I wouldn't have done it anyway because that was not part of how we were raised. And, even if we had an injustice or something like that. But, I think there was a sense of desperation on a lot of people, and they saw this as an opportunity to, to get back. And yes, on one level it was just looting but on a larger level, and it's difficult to look at that because you can't see what's behind somebody breaking into a store looting. You just see the looting. So, you don't--that doesn't tell you anything about the social issues that are, that are fueling this. Story_ID: 130781 Speaker 1: And, there are still folks today who say, well, it was just a riot [1967 Detroit, Michigan riot]. It wasn't anything more than that. But, obviously it was more to it than that, you know. But, yes, that is an experience that, you know, being stopped by the [U.S.] National Guard, asking where you're going. And, I remember wanting to walk around and see things and I remember a young, young white National Guards guy, says, "Hey, man," you know, "You really need to go home. You don't wanna be out here." And, he was right. But, it--and it turned out to be a, watershed in the city's history because the city has gone through a lot of permutation since then. It really has been down on the death--how do I wanna put that? Been down and out, if you will, when you look at what followed the riot, the riot or the disturbances at that time, because you had, you know, you had the white flight and the business disinvestment. And, I can remember, a matter of fact, when we moved to Asbury Park, and at that point I was, what, nineteen, twenty-three, or twenty-four, five years old and still living with my mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith] and she had a white neighbor. And, I was thinking to myself, man, it's gonna be great, I've never lived next to a white person, you know, they were gone before we moved in (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And, so it's funny now because right now I have white neighbors on both sides of me. But, in any event, so that, you know, when I think of growing up, that experience was one that, that you never forget being in the middle of something like that. And, really, literally being scared, under your bed, while bullets are flying all over. Where you're seeing the tracers all over at night. It's not an experienced that I ever want to experience or see this city or any city go through again. Speaker 2: Did you know any of the people that were hurt or injured in it, or killed? Speaker 1: Other than-- Speaker 2: Well, then the shoe--yeah. Speaker 1: The shoe repair guy. But, personally I did not. Fortunately, I did not. So, I didn't have any of my friends, to my knowledge. But, there are other things, you know, you know, growing up, you know, we, you know, I loss a number of friends growing up through urban violence if you will, or accidents of one type or another, coming up. And so, you remember things like that as well, you know. One of my best friends got shot and killed. And, another young man had an accident running from the police; ran into a building, wasn't doing anything. So, and so, those things kinda stamp you. You--loss a classmate in high school who got shot and killed, innocent bystander, basically, at a drive-in or at a restaurant, you know. So, all those kinds of things, you know, as--probably not much different from a lot of people as you grew up, you're gonna experience some of that. Story_ID: 130782 Speaker 1: Now, you started school at Sampson [Elementary] School [Detroit, Michigan], public school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. That was the one year that I was, that was, that was kindergarten and to be honest, I have almost no recollection of that at all. Other than, I haven't mentioned of the--I have a recollection of the building and that's about it. So, my first school memories start with Saint Agnes [Catholic] School [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how did you like Saint Agnes School? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved Saint Agnes for the most part. But, I have to say, I was not, for much of my time there, I was not a great student. I was smart. But, I was not focused. My sister, Joyce, was an outstanding student who was the year--two years younger than me, was an outstanding student. I was just a rambunctious kid with a lot of energy. I did--really wasn't focused on books. I probably was--I wasn't a bad kid, but I was--wanted to do my own thing. My mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith] said, "(unclear)", I don't like people to tell me stuff. But, I was smart, even though my grades didn't show it. It's funny because my mother passed and we were going through her house getting it ready for sale, I found like my third and fourth grade report cards, fifth grade report cards. They were all like Cs and Ds. And, I said to myself, "How did she even let me live?" 'Cause if my daughter brought home a card like that, she wouldn't--so, but, you know, I think that says something about my mother. Number one, she never gave up on me. Number two, even part of that, I had this great energy. And, one of the things that I really tap into even--very young is that, I had this insatiable love of reading, which ended up teaching me to write. And, so, sometimes when I was being disciplined for something, I would be in religion class or history class, I would have a library book. Because, what I got, built a reputation for--in elementary school was, you know, Luther has probably read every book in this library. I love to read books about pioneers and history. So, I would, in the other class, I would stick a book in another book and read it. And, I loved reading. And, when I got my first library book, I remember going to the library and getting like eight books out. And, I just read constantly. And, this is, people would ask me years later, "Well, how did you learn how to write?" I learned how to write by reading. And so, even though, so when I got to like about the seventh grade, seventh and eighth grade, I had a teacher, who really was not going to take any BS. And, so I really, at that point, applied myself. 'Cause my mother always said, "Well, your teachers always tell you you're smart but you"--you know, I was just a young boy. I wanted to play baseball, and I just didn't, you know, despite their best efforts, schooling was not like a priority with me. But, came to seventh and eighth grade, I actually focused. I starting getting good grades, and found out that in fact, I had this talent to write. And, even more so, when I got in high school [Cathedral High School, Detroit, Michigan] where I had this--those I never viewed it that way, I just viewed it was writing is writing. It's nothing special about it. But, it turned out, it was laying a foundation for the rest of my life, and unknowingly, but that's what it was doing. Story_ID: 130783 Speaker 1: Now, did you, did your father [Luther Caesar Keith] introduce you to any of the black history books he was reading? Speaker 2: Well my, well, it wasn't so much black history books as about black, about people, you know. He never, he never gave me books per se, as I recall, but he would tell me about people like a Benjamin Mays, or like a Carl Rowan, or--and to honest, it weren't like a lot of black history books. It was more about living black history that he wanted me to become aware of. Speaker 1: So, when these luminaries would come to town, would you get a chance to sit down and talk to 'em, or be around 'em? Speaker 2: No. I never was, 'cause again, I was very young. So, I would--no. I would just know that this guy Carl Rowan is this journalist, this, you know, very famous or this Benjamin Mays. And, I try to think of some of the others. But, these people of great stature are very important Negroes, at the time saying, who are doing great things and you need to be aware of that, you know. And, so, I think the thing he wanted to impress upon me is that, you know, black folks are--have done and are doing things and you should be proud of that. But, it still was difficult in the, in (unclear) of the time because you remember like--and I went to even in well, elementary school [St. Agnes Catholic School, Detroit, Michigan] my, in most of my classmates who was, who was pretty--it might have been fifty-fifty, black and white. But, as it got in high school, and I went to an all-boys Catholic high school called Cathedral [High School, Detroit, Michigan]. There may be thirty black student out of a student body of about four or five hundred. So, it was different and so, we were taught by brothers of Christian instruction. And, I can remember like during history class, you know, white classmates telling me, "Well, slavery was bad but, if it wasn't for slavery you wouldn't be over here. You wouldn't have color TV." You wouldn't be this, you wouldn't be that. And, I would, you know, and I, and I didn't know a lot about Africa. But, you know, something told me that this did not make sense. And, I didn't know enough about Africa, you know, to counter that. Story_ID: 130784 Speaker 1: When you were at St. Agnes [Catholic School, Detroit, Michigan], was St. Agnes like mostly black Catholic school? Speaker 2: It was about, as I recall, it was, it was slightly predominantly white. It was more white than black. But, it was pretty close, it was pretty--so, I had a lot of, I have a lot of good white friends growing up from school. And, it's ironic that, or worth noting anyway that, it later became Martyrs of Uganda Parish after--in, just in the past couple years, it had closed down because the shrinking population like a lot of-- Speaker 1: So, they renamed it Martyrs of Uganda? Speaker 2: Martyrs of Uganda. It became Martyrs of Uganda. And, then because they simply didn't have enough families there in the parish, they had to close the parish, in just the last couple years. As a matter fact, I went back and saw some of my old classmates that I had not seen in forty years or, you know, more than that, forty-five years at St. Agnes. So, yes, so it was, it was, and I'm gonna say mostly white even. But, even then though, and I--and it's interesting you say that because I first became aware of the fact that being black was different from being white in the racial sense, though one of my class--white classmates. Not, for anything (unclear) his name was Michael Byron. And, it wasn't because of anything Michael did. We were both about eight or nine years. But, Michael lived on Lawton at that time and there were white families living on--and, we're talking about probably 1962, '61 [1961], and Michael invited me over his house. And, I was in the basement playing with Michael. And, his father came downstairs and you're talking about a stare that could kill. It was this iciness that I had never, ever experienced. And, so, I'd left and then the next day Michael told me that, you know, "My father said black folks don't know how to take any care of anything. They don't, they don't do things right." I made it up, "Oh, yeah," I yeah, you, you know I'm just saying--I don't know what else to say. But, that's when--I knew we were different, but that's when I thought--that's when I learned, you know what, there's some folks that don't like you, or think less of you, because you are black. And, it really hit home, you know. But, it wasn't the kid. The kid didn't have a problem. It was his da--it was his father. Speaker 1: Now did you have, any black teachers at St. Agnes? Speaker 2: I did have mostly white, but we were taught mostly by nuns, but there were some black teachers. There was a Mr. Ca--my--the only, the only--there were a couple of black teachers. There was a Mrs. Betta [ph.], and a Mr. Cottman [ph.]. I think Mr. Cottman [ph.] was more of a student teacher. He was a young black man, and you definitely didn't see a lot of those. But, most of the nuns were, most of the nuns were white. All the nuns were white. And, a matter of fact, in high school [Cathedral High School, Detroit, Michigan], again, all my teachers were, all my teachers were white. We had one black priest who came and visited from Africa for a while. And, what I remember about that, is he was very dark. And, I remember, I remember when he came in the room, all the white students really started laughing. I guess 'cause they never seen anybody that black. I mean, he was really, you know, really--and so, I really did not have black instructors of any significant that I had that made--that made an impression on me really until I got in college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I had a couple there. But, no. Story_ID: 130785 Speaker 1: Now you've got blue eyes. And, very few people in the black community with blue eyes. Was that, did that create any problems for you? Or, did it-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, you can't see your eyes like you can hear your voice when you're talking, you can't hear your own accent (laughter). And so, yeah, I would get, I would get comments. There were some, there were because call of my family is very fair-complected. My father [Luther Caesar Keith] was very fair-complected, my mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith] as well. And, my father had light eyes. His eyes were even like a really like grey. And, my sister Joyce has light eyes. My other sister, Gwen and my brother Terrance, they both have brown eyes. 'Cause I remember my mother had brown eyes. My father had these light eyes. And so, you know, I would--and one of my best friends were charcoal black; charcoal black. His name was Joe Joe. And, we were some pair. We were like best buds up--running up and down Columbus. And, you know, you know, 'cause black kids are sometimes could be cruel to you. And, you know, I remember being, you know, called albino, you know, stuff like that. People making fun of me. And, I would get, you know, and so the--I--you know, and I would get from time to time--now, a lot of people thought, you know, you got pretty eyes, this and that, you know. But, it wasn't a lot of--I was conscious that I had 'em. But, I didn't, you know, sure I had 'em, but I don't spend time, you know, just, it's just the eyes God gave me. What I get from a lot of folks, you know, and it's really not that unusual. There's, in my family, particular on my mother's side, there are a number of, I have a number of cousins with blue eyes. I guess, in the age, because now with color contact lens, you're never sure. So, and what I, even to this day, I get people who've known me for year, and one day they say--they really look at my eyes, and say, "Man, your eyes are blue." (Laughter) I say, "Really?" Speaker 1: Did you know that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Did you know that (laughter)? Did I know (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You know, I say, "I get that from time to time." And, so it's been, it's been, kinda like a two-edge sword. One, there's some people who, particular when I was young, use that as a, as a way to kinda make, you know, I'm different or almost like a freak. To be honest, most folks would tell me, "Oh, you got pretty eyes," and this and that. My wife [Jacqueline Keith] says, you know, "That was one of the reasons that things have got entranced her," whatever. But, it was, it was just who I was, you know. It was more so that my eyes were just being so fair-complected that sometimes, you know, people would, you know, some black folks, and these are black folks I'm talking about, would basically, you know, the whole color struck thing. Or, you think you're, or think you're better. And, that's probably it. You think you're better because, you know, you're light-skinned, you got like--you think you're better than so and so. You think you're--and I can remember a young lady said, "Well, you know what, you know, you're, you're too light for me," you know, you--stuff like that. But, you know, I didn't spend a lot of time dwelling on it quite frankly, I had so many other things. I didn't spend a lot of time worrying about it, thinking about it. This is--the good Lord gave me--made me the way I am for a reason. And, and so I'm good with it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 130786 Speaker 1: You went to Cathedral High School [Detroit, Michigan]? And, tell us about that now. Cathedral is that like a centrally-located high school? Speaker 2: That was located on Woodward [Avenue], on the, in what was called the North End of the city, behind Blessed Sacrament Cathedral which was the, which was the home of the residence of the archbishop for the City of Detroit. And, that's no longer there. But, it was an all-boys Catholic High School, taught by brothers in Christian structure. In fact, to go back to this whole Catholic, my father [Luther Caesar Keith] in fact, when he converted to Catholic, so, I wanted to be, wanted to be--at one point, studied to be a priest, wanted to study to be a priest. But, his health, he was very frail. And, there was some health considerations. So, my father, in fact, wanted to be a priest. I'm glad he didn't (laughter). But, nevertheless, so, in but, so, he wanted me to go to a Catholic school and for whatever reason he thought this was a school for me. And that's where I went. I had a, I got a great education, you know. The racial thing was stronger there because, at that time, we're talking now, we're talking between '65 [1965], '67 [1967], well, '64 [1964], '65 [1965], '67 [1967]; '68 [1968] when I graduated, right smack in the middle of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], black consciousness, black power, all of that. And, Cathedral was located like a mile down from all, virtually all-black school called Northern [High School]; gangsters, all-black school. And so, there were some dynamics there 'cause you had to catch the bus pass Northern. And, sometimes you had to transfer from Northern. And, there were a couple incidents where in fact the coach, one of the coaches at Cathedral was attacked in the parking lot; stabbed in the parking lot. As a matter of fact, he and several students were stabbed and attacked in the parking lot by some black radical students or somebody. Anyway, but, there was--but, from an educational standpoint, I got a great education. I was a good student, probably a strong C-plus student. I got excellent grades in writing. I really--there were some teachers there, Brother Berneer [ph.], and we called them brothers. Well, 'cause they were brothers. They were, they were not priest. But, they in the Catholic--Catholicism they were "Brother," they simply take the vow of celibacy, and poverty and all the rest of that. But, they do not say masses. They are not priests, much like nuns. And, I had some other teachers there that were kind of, were supportive. So, even though there weren't a lot of black students, and we were aware when we talked about race issues and, this and that. Overall, the number one goal was to get me with a solid academic foundation to prepare for the future. And, but, so, I have good feelings about Cathedral. A matter of fact, we--I went back to--we had a twentieth anniversary reunion and a twenty-fifth reunion, and I went back. And, I still, you know, from time to time, it's been awhile since I've bumped into somebody from Cathedral. Story_ID: 130787 Speaker 1: But, it [Cathedral High School, Detroit, Michigan] overall was a good experience for me. It got me ready for college. And, though I did not know how I was gonna go to college because at the, and if I'm moving ahead too far, tell me. When I got ready to go to college, 'cause my sister, I had my oldest sister was at Wayne, no, she was in, let me see, I was getting out of, yeah, she was in, she was in--already at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan], college, but I asked my mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith], you know, where I could, where I was going to college. She said, "Well, we don't have any money to send you to college." And, I said, "What do you mean?" She said, "We don't have any money." We got four kids, your father, and she told me my father never made more than, as a post office worker, never made more than about sixteen thousand dollars a year, you know, as a postal worker, sold real estate. So, we don't have the money. So, I remember this very vividly, I was coming home from school one day. I got off the bus. I was walking down Columbus and my cousin Cedric, he was about a year younger than me. Almost like another brother to me. We grew up, played together so much. He lived downstairs in the sec, in the first, in the flat. He came running up to me when I was walking home, he said, "Alton, Alton, you got a scholarship. You got a scholarship." A scholarship, what? "Yeah, college, you got scholarship." I said, "What are you talking about?" So, sure enough, I got home and my mother told me, that the University of Detroit [Detroit, Michigan] had called and this--and I, I'm getting emotional about this--and I, and I (clears throat), this is a surprise to me 'cause this really hitting back to some deep things in my--when I think about all my parents did for me. But, he said, my mother said, "Somebody of the University of Detroit called and they're starting a new program over there." This was 1968. "It's called Project 100 and it's for kids they think have potential and don't have a lot of money. And, they want, they're offering you a scholarship for four years to go." And, to this day, I don't know who gave them my name. And, we're talking about a private school. One of the best schools-- Speaker 2: It's a Catholic school, too? Speaker 1: Any--it's a Catholic, a private-- Speaker 2: University of Detroit. Speaker 1: Jesuit Catholic school. And, I was able to go to college because of that. And, which even further that idea of--because of this program, I got a chance. And, that's why as we jump a talk about affirmative action and those types of issues, I've been involved in area along those lines. Because, me personally, this has helped make Luther Keith--whatever success I've had is because I had that experience at the university. Which I would not have gotten--and I probably would have eventually gone to college, I don't know how. But, certainly having an opportunity when I got--having it come the way it did, and it was a, it was a landmark project. And, it was not just race-based. It was for low income students of "disadvantage" for whatever reason; economically or whatever. But, somebody said that this little, this kid Luther Keith has some potential. I think he just needs a chance and if he gets a chance--so, we had to go through a summer, kinda like a summer remedial brush-up just to see where your skills were to prepare you for that. And, that's where I went. And, when I got to college, I was a better student than I've ever been in my life. I was a B and B-plus student. A student in some classes, all my journalism classes. Wrote for the school newspaper. I wasn't active in a lot of things 'cause I was still basically a shy person. I was not--I didn't go to parties. I didn't, I didn't even have a girlfriend or none of that stuff. I was just a guy-- Speaker 2: Now, were you-- Speaker 1: It was a commuter school. So, I caught the bus to school and I came home. Story_ID: 130788 Speaker 1: Were you, were you active in social activities-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --in high school [Cathedral High School, Detroit, Michigan], at all? When you were in high school? Speaker 2: The only thing I played some--in high school? I played some sports but I was not, I was not the kinda guy who was in cliques and clubs and did this and that. I was, I was the person that you would say, no one noticed. Because I was very quiet, and I was very small. I was a little bitty kid. And,-- Speaker 1: So, you're about what, 6'1" now? Speaker 2: I'm 6'3". Speaker 1: 6'3". Okay. Speaker 2: I'm 6'3" and two hundred plus pounds now. But, I really grew when I (laughter), really when I got out of college. But, in high school, I was a little bitty shrimp, no one believes it. I was a shrimp. And, my mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith] used to talk about, you know, dropping me off at school, you know, when--by that point she had a car, and watched me walk in, she say, "and I was the littlest person (laughter), to walk into the class." And, as a matter of fact, I tried to play football a little bit and I was just too little. But, in any event, but, I was, no. I was in no clubs. I would've won no best, you know, these things for most likely to do this. Nothing. Nothing, nothing at all. Like even in college, where I wrote for the school newspaper and I had friends but I was just not into--'cause I didn't go to parties. See, I was not, my sister was, I was not, I wanted to play baseball, sports,-- Speaker 1: Did they--did you play any baseball at the University of Detroit? Speaker 2: I did not. I did not. By this time though, I'm playing like Class A ball in leagues here. So, I was on the sand, what they call sandlot baseball, if you heard of it. So, I was playing amateur baseball all over Detroit. And, I was very good at it. I played in All-Star games. I won, I've got trophies that I won. I won batting championships. I played in Tiger Stadium [Detroit, Michigan], the pro league with the All-Stars. So, I was a very good baseball player. Not quite good enough to make the pros. But, I was a very good baseball player. And, that's what I was doing. So, I wasn't interested in going to parties, and that type of stuff. That was just not part of my universe for me. So, I was a very quiet, shy kid. But, one things I could do, I could write. And, so when I, when I got, when I got to college, my teachers, my teachers start telling me, "Wow, man, you could really write." I was writing these papers. I was getting these incredible, you know, knocking these teacher's eyes out. Here I am, I'm thinking, oh, this is something that is good. You know, I was like--so, even though, so I kinda made myself, established myself as a writer. I wrote for what was called the Varsity News, which was the school paper at the University of Detroit [Detroit, Michigan]. And, but this time though--but, while I was in college, and this what people, a lot of people don't know, though I've told some people, is that I actually began my career at the Detroit News loading trucks as a jumper. I actually, when I was nineteen years old, got a job loading trucks and going out, they called 'em jumpers, loading trucks. And, I did this for three years in addition, you know even though I had a scholarship-- Story_ID: 130789 Speaker 1: Now, we didn't, we didn't talk about it but you worked at Hudson's Department Store [Detroit, Michigan] too as a teenager, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. I worked--my first job, my Aunt, my Aunt Marie got it for me 'cause she was an elevator operator. One of the old elevator operators that did the thing, you pull the crank, and take the people up and down for like thirty-five years. And, she told me about a, a Christmas job at Hudson's, and I was a stock boy. And, that was my first job. I worked just through the Christmas rush and I made my first money ever as a stock boy at Hudson's. So, that was my first job. And, then I got in school and even though I had the scholarship, you know, you know, you still need spending money and things like that. So, I heard, somehow I heard about some jobs down at, you know, Detroit News was hiring jumpers, people--and what you did is, you went, you loaded trucks, then you went out and delivered the trucks to the stations. And, sometimes you would deliver, you know, you drive these kinda like pickup trucks, and they call 'em jumpers where you jump off. They called it jumpers 'cause you would jump off, deliver the papers, jump back on. So, I did this all three years while, my last three years of college I was at Detroit News in the circulation department. In fact, I was a teamster. And, all the guys-- Speaker 1: So, you're in the union [International Brotherhood of Teamsters]? Speaker 2: In a union. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, meanwhile I was studying journalism at the University of Detroit. Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this, I can't let 1968 get away without asking you this questions, because we interviewed your uncle [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] a couple days ago. Speaker 2: Oh, really. Okay. Speaker 1: I know he was very close to Willie Horton. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In '68 [1968] the year that the Detroit Tigers won the World Series. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: With Willie Horton as the hero. The only--the first time a black hero was on the team, so. Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, man. That was awesome. That was, I can remember the celebration, and everybody just, you know, going downtown, people acting crazy, everybody--'cause of course they wanted in, they were in St. Louis [Missouri] and they came back. But, even that they're winner-- Speaker 1: So, that was the fall you started-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: University of Detroit [Detroit, Michigan], right? Speaker 2: Exactly, it was. So yeah, and Willie Horton was a big hero and I--you know, my uncle and him had a real great relationship. Speaker 1: And, he was his--he had his power of attorney and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: He was like his legal father in a lot of way. Speaker 2: Exactly. And, a matter of fact, speaking of baseball, I could remember my uncle in fact coming over on Columbus going in the back--my uncle batted left-handed and he'd come back and I said, "This pretty, my uncles back and hitting the baseball with us." And, he's been tremendously supportive of me through my personal and professional life on a lot of different levels. But, so, so, I actually started at the Detroit News loading trucks and I did that--meanwhile, I was studying journalism. Now, the guys on the loading dock, they know that I've studying, because they're out telling me that, "Hey, man, you're doing the right"--this, now this young man is going into college, trying to get a college education, blah, blah, blah. And, eventually when I graduated, actually, in college even though I was a good student, I really was worried about being able to get a job. I'm talking about 1972, black journalists, ain't a lot of 'em, aren't a lot of 'em. Story_ID: 130790 Speaker 1: Were you invol- well, when you were at the University of Detroit [Detroit, Michigan], was a black student movement going on then? Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Were you involved in that at all? Speaker 2: We had, yeah, we had rallies and things like that, and I may have gone to some. I was not a leader but I was there. And, I remember going to rallies and black conscious was very much the thing, and the big fros and one of my teachers was a woman named, a black woman named Mary Helen Washington who taught. And, she was really like-- Speaker 1: Now, she's a literature-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Legend now. Mary Helen Washington, Yeah. Yeah, yeah, I know about her. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know her? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I think she moved. I think she was out east. Speaker 1: She wrote an anthology of 'Black-Eyed Susans,' right? Speaker 2: Right. She was my teacher. She was my teacher at the University of Detroit in a literature class and she made such an indelible impression on me to this day. I would love to see her but, she, she, you know, people that make those, you know, they just--they're signature people in your life. When you meet 'em, for what they do, she saw my talent as a writer and above I mean she nurtured your idea. She made you think intellectually. And, she is one of those people that really--she probably doesn't even recognize that I'd imagine, but she really played a major impact on me. Just making me aware, on so many levels, and making me feel like, man don't you know you have, you have real talent, man. You have real talent as a writer. Story_ID: 130791 Speaker 1: I used to worry about whether or not I was gonna have what it takes to be a real journalist. I literally remember waking up in cold sweats my senior year worrying about, am I gonna be able to get a job. Will, will I be good enough. I don't know. And, so, when I graduated, even though I was working at the Detroit News, and the Detroit News had a reputation as a very racist paper with the way they cover black folks in the black community at that time. Speaker 2: Now, what is the difference, what is the difference between the Detroit News, and the [Detroit] Free Press? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were talking about that coming over here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, how many papers, daily papers were in existence when you started in journalism? Speaker 1: Well, when I started in journalism there actually were, in major papers in Detroit, they're actually two; Detroit News and the Free Press. But, in 1960, early '60s [1960s], there were also a paper here call the Detroit Times. So, there were three papers, the Detroit Times, I think the Detroit News absorbed the Detroit Times, and they went out, went out of business. Back in that time, the Detroit Free Press was owned by the Knight Ridder newspaper chain. And, the Detroit News was owned by the Evening News Association, a family, a family business company. So, so, that was the distinction at that time. Speaker 2: So, but, the Knight Ridder paper absorbed the-- Speaker 1: No. No. The Detroit News, Detroit News, which was the Evening News Association; they absorbed the Detroit Times if I'm not mistaken. Speaker 2: Okay. But, I'm--in term, in terms of the Free Press, and the Detroit News-- Speaker 1: The Detroit News. Speaker 2: They were separate, you said, at one point. Speaker 1: Yeah, they're separate. Yeah, they're separate. Speaker 2: But, now they're, aren't they together now? Speaker 1: Well, there's a joint operate, they're a, you know, it's kinda like a, it's a loose joint operating agreement. And, if you want me to explain that. They essentially back in the early 1980s caused the paper to lose some money. In general, the operating agreement, a law by [U.S.] Congress, allows newspapers to merge certain functions to survive. In so, while maintaining separate editorial and reporting operations, you combine your business and circulation, advertising departments to save money. But, when it comes to writing stories and editorializing, you're separate. So, they do this to save money. And, Congress created this. So, that's what's, that took place in the 19--so even though for all those years prior to that, they were just competitors, complete competitors. Now, they're kinda like joined at the hip financially, though this has changed somewhat because of the recent years, we're jumping ahead a little bit. See, in just in the past two years, Knight Ridder, Knight Ridder sold the Free Press to Gannettt, which owns the (unclear) owned the Detroit News. And, now the Detroit News is owned by the New Media--Media General [sic. Digital First Media], if I recall, New Media or something, the (unclear) escapes me, Media Company which owns the Detroit News now. And, so, what they have, they have a, they still have a joint operating agreement, but it's very loosely structured, much different from it--from what--Knight Ridder is no long in the Detroit newspaper market at all. So, but, to back up to that-- Speaker 2: Okay. All right, I just wanted, 'cause I always wondered people in the street will tell you they're the same thing and then some people will-- Speaker 1: Well, there is, it is, the joint operating agreement, it really confused people. Because what happened was, and I was actually around for, for all that in the early stages. Because, what you had is, you had separate papers saying the Detroit News or Free Press Monday through Friday. But, on the weekends you had a combined paper that said, Detroit News and Free Press. So, it's very confusing for people to understand that we're, we're different newspapers but we're really the same. And, the Detroit Free Press has always got, kinda like more public, public exposure because, you know, there was a Lou Grant TV Show set at the Detroit Free Press and this and that. So, there's always been that confusion about the Detroit News and the Detroit Free Press. But, of course, in fewer years they were distinctly different operations. And, then there was the joint operating agreement that brought 'em together, and now that joint operating agreement has been greatly revised with Knight Ridder selling the, selling the Free Press to, basically the company that owned the Detroit News, Gannett, which owns USA Today. So, they own the Detroit Free Press now. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Right. And, there's, and the name of the company that owns Detroit News now, which I should know is Media something or other. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I didn't wanna throw us way off-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, I just wanted to get a distinction--it's a complicated distinction (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. It's very confusing. Very confusing. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 130792 Speaker 1: So, so you're in college [University of Detroit, Detroit, Michigan]-- Speaker 2: Well, I was in college and I said I was worried about where I was gonna--I wanted a job as a reporter. And so, I actually--my father [Luther Caesar Keith] unbeknownst to me, arranged for me to talk to the local black newspaper, the Michigan Chronicle. And, the editor there basically, (laughter) he didn't like me, and basically I didn't feel like that he--he really was doing my father a favor, really had no use for this young kid who think he can be reporter. So, eventually I interviewed with the Detroit Free Press, and ironically that was some of the editors that I, with some of the editors that I criticize when I was a student at the University of Detroit. But, nevertheless--and basically they told me after I interviewed with them, you know, you're writing, you're a beginner, you're writing is not quite up to snuff. And, then basically my uncle unbeknownst, my Uncle Damon [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith], who has a relationship with the Detroit News, he said, "Well, he knew the editor of the News," and again that's the racist paper. Because, I did not want to work for the Detroit News because it was a racist paper. He wrote a letter saying, you know, "My nephew is graduating from the University of Detroit. And, he's a fine young man, and would you give him a chance?" You know, and I did not--so, basically he--the News called me in and interviewed me and hired me as an apprentice reporter. And, you gotta understand what this means. As an apprentice reporter, now I have my college degree, right, as--'cause I have graduated from college. As an apprentice reporter, I was being paid less than interns for the paper, who were still in college. That's how I was hired in. Story_ID: 130793 Speaker 1: Okay. So, you started at Detroit News as--less than an intern. Speaker 2: Well, less than an intern, as an apprentice, and started, you know, they started giving me some stories to write. And, again, in the context of being very few black journalists, and it's not unique to me by any stretch of the imagination, if you get any black journalists, we all have our stories. Especially, when you go to NABJ Conventions, National Association of Black Journalists, you hear people tell the stories. But, I won't bore you with all of 'em, but one, to give you some context of where we all came from. Not just Luther Keith but a lot of us out of that era. When I was asked by an editor, one of the top editors there, to write a story--and again, going back to the apprentice, I think why they hired me as an apprentice because I don't think folks, quite frankly, expected me to be able to, to write and perform. Anyway, I wrote, I wrote a story. Andrew gave me a story to write. I made the phone calls, did the research, wrote a story. And, I still remember this, the editor walked--I gave the editor the story. And, at that time when I started, we worked on something called a typewriter. We didn't have word processors back in 1972. So, I gave him my story. And, it was kinda like a personal assignment he did--wanted me to do for him. So, I made a research and wrote the story. He walks out of the story with--out of his office, rather, with the story and puts it down. He says, "This is really good." He says, "You can write." Then, he says, "I didn't think you could." And, didn't think anything-and I was completely stunned. I did not know what to say. And, I thought to myself, "I got a college degree in journalism. I spent four years, I've done everything that anyone at my position would be expected to do, and the guy says, 'I didn't think you could write.'" Now, what I subsequently learned as I perused other reports work and got a sense of that newsroom, that I could write better than 50 percent of the folks there at the newspaper, even if they had been there fifteen years. I could write better than them right then. And, so, then I got some confidence and felt that, you know, I can do this. What, what subsequently happened though, after about seven or eight months of being a general assignment reporter, which I was, they came--the managing editor of the paper came to me and said, "We want you to be a sports writer." Now, you have to understand that I love sports. I love playing sports. I follow sports. But, I never wanted to be a sports writer. Because, in my mind, a sports writer was writing about games and things. And, I thought of myself as being--having more intellectual depth than writing about football and baseball games. And, at the time, there were no black sports writers for the Detroit News or the Free Press. Had never been any. What I subtly learned that the white sports writers didn't wanna go out to the public schools. And, so, we've got this young colored kids, let's send him out. And, so they told me, we want a--you're kinda of a sports writer, do this for two or three months. Just try, try it out. It turned out to be five years. But, it turned out to be a great five years for me. Because, as a sports writer, number one, the black community, the black coaches, really embraced me. It's like wow, we got this young black kid. So, as a result of that, I got a chance to write about a lot of things and built some relationships that I wouldn't otherwise have had. And, along the way, a couple things stand out, I had to cover a--I remember I'd like twenty-three, twenty-four years old covering a high school basketball tournament where a Detroit [Michigan] team is ranked number one, and they're playing a team from Lansing, Michigan. Detroit team was ranked number one. Anyway, the Lansing team beats the Detroit team in like a state quarterfinal game. And, I come back and I tell the white sports writer, I say, "Hey, I've just seen the best basketball player, you could imagine. It's unbelievable." He said, and then Ed told me, "Well, Luther man you're, you're just getting started. They're a lot of good players. They're a lot--don't get caught up in that, he's just another good player." And, I would say, "This kid's name was Ervin Johnson." Ervin--rest--I rest my case. I think I was right on that one. So, I get a chance to cover Ervin Johnson in high school. Story_ID: 130794 Speaker 1: There was also an incident--case where I worked, had to work Sundays and also when--'cause I was the low man on the totem pole, a lot of those guys didn't answer the phone. So, I'd answer the phone and on one particular day this boxing coach said he had a young--some kids and would I put their, put their results in a boxing match. Boxers they travel to like to Kentucky, Indiana, these young black kids. And, I said, "Okay." So, I would put in the results and eventually I wrote feature stories and he had a--and this coach, he invited me over to his house and I'll watch fight films. Then, he told me about this one really young kid who he thought was really good. And, would I do a feature on him? I did a feature on him. And, I subsequently moved on out of sports. But, this guy--this man's name was Emanuel Steward and the kid was Tommy Hearns [Thomas Hearns]. And, to this day when I see Emanuel Steward, he says to me--he tells me Luther, you know, I'm world famous now, but back then, man, no one would--you were the guy that would write us. No one else would. So, I got an opportunity and I built a lot of great relationships as a result of that. But, after five years of doing--being a sports writer, and being good at it, I wanted to cover maybe a college beat, or a pro beat. And, what I was told was, "Well, the other sports writers are gonna be upset if we give a young guy like you a chance. You know, we can't, we can't do that--we, you know, we don't wanna upset, we don't wanna upset them." I said, "Well, wait a minute, I spent five years here. There's no chance for me to do anything?" So, I said, "Fine." Well, I think I wanna do something else. So, I went to them and said, "Well, there's no opportunity for me to move up. I wanna work--find another writing job." So, I actually got out of, I got out of--they put me in the Features Department. I wrote feature stories. And, one white editor said--who had noticed my work, his name was Al Stark. And, he had been noticing my work, my write--as I--some of my stories I wrote. He say, "You know what, I like the way you write." You know, he says, he says, "You know, the state legislative races and the [1978 Michigan] governor's race are gonna be starting, and I'd like to make you part of our reporting team to cover the state legislative races, and the governor." Now, here I am, by this time I'm twenty-eight, something like that, yeah. And, you want me to write about politics. I don't know anything about politics. He say, "I think you can do it." So, to make a long story short, they assigned me to cover the state legislative races. So, I start covering about candidates running for state senate, state--U.S. representative (unclear). And, I actually got the opportunity to cover the governor's race. So, I was, I was in the limousine with the governor [William Milliken], and with the candidates and I say, and I told my mom [Mittie Ashworth Keith], I say, "(unclear)." I said, "Six months ago I was writing about high school sports, now I'm writing about the governor." I'm riding with the governor, you know, so I'm riding--I'm covering, you know, these big political issues. And, they said, I was not even good enough to be--to get a promotion as a sports writer. So, I covered the race and it went so well they say, "You know what, why don't you--we'd like you to go to Lansing [Michigan], the State Capital Bureau, and be a State Capital Bureau correspondent." Again, where there had never been any black folks assigned up there. Not only that, "We want you to be our lead correspondent on covering budget and appropriations and the economy." Now, you gotta remember, I couldn't--and I am (unclear)--but, I couldn't pass algebra in high school. But, we're gonna make you the lead (laughter) writer on budget and appropriation for the economy. A very important job. And, I went, subsequently went to Lansing and was very good at it. And, spent four years in Lansing covering a lot of heavy political issues. And, Michigan was in a recession in the early '80s [1980s]. I went to Wall Street, I covered a lot of heavy-duty issues and actually began, you know, getting opportunities to appear on television as a commentator. That's where I first started doing that. And, this same editor called me back and said--offered me an opportunity to be an assistant city editor of the Detroit News. You gotta remember, there had never been a black editor, ever, in the newsroom at the Detroit News. Now, we're talking about 1982 by this time-- Story_ID: 130795 Speaker 1: And, the Detroit News [Detroit, Michigan] is-- Speaker 2: In the Detroit News. All the time I've been there, there's never been--which tells me that black folks, we aren't smart enough to run anything? And, I really didn't wanna be an editor. I didn't wanna be an editor. I was happy being a reporter. But, I said to myself, and I made some noise about it because there has been instances along the way where I'd been expressed my thoughts about why we don't have more black reporters here. And, I said--or editors. And, I said, "Well, you know, I really don't wanna be an editor, but, if I don't take this job, I don't know who, the next pers--black person is gonna get an opportunity." So, not because I wanted to be an editor per se, but because if I don't take this, then they gonna say, like we offered you the job, you didn't take it. So, you have nothing--so, I took the job. And, as it turned out, I was good at it. And, so, from that point on, my career in management started and I started--held a number of editing position at the Detroit News; business editor, assistant managing editor of Sunday. At one point, I was in charge of, for eight years, I was in charge of the Sunday newspaper. At that, at that point the newspaper circu--circulation was about eight hundred thousand. It was a combined newspaper between the 'News' and the Free Press. So, I was in charge of every, every story, every picture, every headline on the front page, for eight years. That was my responsibility and subsequent to that, you know, I did some other editing jobs in column writing. And, in the middle of all of that, I took a leave of absence in 1985 because again, getting this issue of, why aren't there more black journalists? And, I was making a lot of noise about that. They came to me with an idea. We have an idea to start a new program at Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan] to recruit minorities for careers in the media. And, we wanna to call it the Journalism Institute for Minorities, and would you consider becoming the first director of it. Take a leave to do that. Put this--where we would recruit the students out of high school, give 'em scholarships, give 'em internships, and get 'em jobs. And, again this was not something that I had planned for my career path. But, again, I thought, well, you know, if I don't do this, who's gonna do it. But, one thing I told them, and this was an editor by the name of Ben Burns, who've--out of lot of my abilities, but I told him, "I am not interested in doing a remedial program for colored kids. If I'm gonna have a program, I want it to be a program where we go after the best students we can find, give them the best opportunities, have them come out prepared." And, that's what we did. And so, that program has just celebrated its twentieth anniversary, has hired, people out of that program have been hired at newspapers all over this country, radio stations, television stations, become news anchors, out of that program the Journalism Institute for Minorities. So, again, it's not something that I set out to do. But, it was an opportunity that was placed in front of me. And, it just, and I just went with it, and it's gratifying to see now. And, that goes back to what I told you earlier about this idea of making a contribution--my father [Luther Caesar Keith] told me about making--position yourself to do stuff--something for someone else. It's not about just yourself. Your personal success is great as a personal success, but what does it mean if you haven't brought anybody else along with you. You haven't opened the door for anybody else. And so, I really, you know, to me someone who just succeeds for themselves and I've made a lot of money and I'm successful. Okay. What--so what. What are you, what are you doing because, you know, everybody is getting out of this place the same way. And, so, and that all comes back to my father and his emphasis on this life is about more than just your own personal accomplishments; about what are you doing to cre--smooth the path or open the door for somebody else. And, so, along the way and a lot of stuff I have done, not again, because I'm some great person. It's just become this is who I am. And, so, it's a very natural thing for me to do because people have helped me. People have opened the door to me, extended their--and then, hopefully you'll take advantage of the opportunity. But, I would be the ultimate hypocrite if, hypocrite or there may be another word for it, but if people helped and opened a door for you and then you don't do the same--what do you call it, pass it forward, however you wanna call that. And, that's helped me get to where I am and hopefully, you know, what I've done helps others and the line continues. Story_ID: 130796 Speaker 1: I guess I wanna ask you about some of your stories. That's one thing I wanna do before we get, we ask you about other things. But, are there any particular stories that you wrote, that you are--think are your best ones? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I don't know. There's been so many and, you know, for a long time, you know, I reported for ten years, and then I was an editor for, shoot, about fifteen years, then I went back to column writing. And, so, as a column writer, I wrote a lot of stories, opinion pieces about things. And, I think that--and, I wrote a lot of stories. I wrote, I always tell people, I wrote a story, most memorable story just because it was a horrific event. And, I once covered a murder story where seven people were shot and killed in the same family. And, I always tell people, guest what, it was in Detroit [Michigan]. It was in a little country town of Clare, Michigan. Where a guy by the name of Bob Haggart [Robert Lee Haggart], whose wife was getting a divorce. Shot gunned his wife, his kids, and his wife's parents. Killed them all. And, they sent me up there and that's maybe about 180 miles, further than that, north of Detroit, northern Michigan. Speaker 1: Now, this is a white guy? Speaker 2: This was a white guy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A white guy, and they had (laughter), because, of course, people think, you know, tell us about the biggest murder story you ever covered, but that was a case of, unfortunate case. And, for me it was challenging because of the fact, when someone tells you, go up there and talk to the family and friends of somebody who, in this family that got blown away. It's not a, it's not a fun assignment. And, you really have to find a way to reach people and respect them. Because, one of my tendency as a report and I think television and some of it is true reality. But, and I always tell, and that--'cause I, as I've taught journalism and talked to students, being a journalist does not give you a license to be rude, insulting, and disrespectful of people. I'm sorry, it doesn't. And, if someone, if a journalist approach you like that, don't talk to 'em. And, so, I believe the (unclear) you'll get what you want, even if you may not get right away by treating people with respect. And, that was always my attitude. And, for--and, as I had to talk to people up there, you know, it was very tough for a student, for some of the people up there. And, one young lady and I remember talking to in a restaurant, and she was just rebelling against all of these reporters. And, I say, "I don't want to, I'm not here to kind of revel in the tragedy, I simply want you, if you're comfortable with it, tell me something about these people so they aren't just statistics, they're aren't just numbers." And, ultimately they opened up. But, so, those are not fun assignments but, you know, I could do that. But, in terms of one particular story, I don't know, quite frankly the piece I wrote on my father [Luther Caesar Keith] in 1986 for the magazine, my father's life and what he did with the United [Committee on] Negro History. That's when I had a tremendous community response to that story because people needed to be connected to their own families. And, essentially I wrote about that story about the fact that my father and all the great things he did. I couldn't fully appreciate him as a--and I was very young because I kinda took it for granted. But, I would hear people talk about Luther C. Keith, my father. And, the most, and what a pioneer, what a visionary he was for all the things he was doing. And, the most amazing thing about it, to this day, I am still running across people who worked with my father, who knew my father's work, and said that Luther C. Keith was a brilliant man. He did a lot of great things. And, so, that piece, 'cause it was a personal piece and then, and it was a story as I indicated, and I really didn't wanna write 'cause I was too close to it. And, it took me a while, what it was twelve years after, twelve or thirteen years after his death that I found myself with an emotional state where I could write it. So, that's, that's kinda like a signature piece for me. Not because it's personal because what it connected to the community. Story_ID: 130797 Speaker 1: But, you talk about one particular story, if there's--it's one thing among other things that I have done is that one of the things I have tried to do as I tried to be a door opener and be sensitive to the fact that this role to play as it relates to the black community in Detroit [Michigan]. And, so, there came point in time, in the early 1990s where the black community or some leaders were boycotting the Detroit News and the Detroit Free Press. Because--and to some extent, they had some validity about what they felt was a preoccupation with stories that portrayed the city or played--portrayed black in the most negative light. And, not enough focus on some of the story--things that were of a positive nature. People who were doing the right thing in some areas of achievement that were overlooked for the more sensationalist view. And, so, these leaders meet with the Detroit News and the Detroit Free Press. And, actually the newspaper put me in the position of being a link to the community to bring these people in a talk. And, so, out of those discussions grew an idea of--for a new news product for our paper which, which I devised, implemented, and we called it "On Detroit." And, it was a weekly section that was focused on people who were doing the right thing. Kids who were great--kids who are achieving. The best of the city, you know, an inspiring piece. And, that product, we published it for ten years. And, people felt that the, you know, that the newspaper cared about 'em, that they saw--someone said they called--I see myself in this. And, so, that-- Speaker 2: How did it--I mean, why did it end? Speaker 1: Because management decided it was time to end it (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, just basically they felt like the circulation and the advertisement revenue dollars that the time--the business climate had changed and they simply didn't want to pursue it. And, so, that was their decision. But, it--I think, it represents, I think, a high point in community outreach for the Detroit News. Because, it said that, you know what, we're willing to come here, not just tell us what you don't like, willing to do something significant. And, a matter of fact, one of the leaders of the boycott who is the head of the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] now, Reverend Wendell Anthony--who, if you haven't heard about him, you will hear about him--who was a leader of the boycott, was so persuaded by the fact of what we're doing with this new, this publication we call "On Detroit," that he wrote a weekly column for us. That's how strongly he believed in what we were doing. That our ardent critic wrote for the newspaper at no compensation I might add. But, again, it goes back to where I think about win-win situations. And, from the newspaper standpoint, all you're doing, you're building good will. You're showing people you care and you are portraying a slice of life that isn't seen. I did have some of my white colleagues here talk, when we would talk about doing this type of a newspaper, said, "That's not news. News is people getting shot. News is people getting held up. That's not news." And, I still think that that's still a problem with some of our media. But, because there is another side of that equation that I think, it's not a question of ignoring the negative, it's a matter including the positive, because that's how life is. And, so, you can sure, sure you can show a hundred carjacking and a hundred murders; just show that and nothing else. But, that's not all life is and it would be unfair to do that. And, so, even though I was--and I wrote some powerful things to relate to. But, that idea, that concept of being able to create something like that for the community represents something really special to me because people really felt connected. Because our goal was all those stories that the other folks don't want, we want 'em. That's what we're, we're here for you for that. And, so, as well as, I also think it played a contributing role in turning the newspaper into other stories that could run throughout the regular newspaper that we wouldn't be aware of, because we hadn't established that kind of grass-root connection this allowed us to do. Story_ID: 130798 Speaker 1: So, that, and then you're talking about things that probably--and I wrote a lot of columns over the years and I guess, it's not so much one column that I wrote, but it's more the idea that I think, even though I had a relatively short tenure as a columnist, my, the purpose of my column was not to get people to think the way I thought. And, I think, many times columnist write in the--they're screeching at people. If you don't think like me, you're stupid. Everybody else who doesn't think--and, I try to approach it from the standpoint of I want you to un--I want, I want you to learn something from this column. I'ma get you to think a certain way. You don't have to agree with it, but just think about this. And, so, that's what, that was my goal and I used to get, as a matter of fact, I was--I got phone calls from clients where people would say, "Well, I can't, I can't figure out, are you a this, or are you a that?" Are you, are you conservative or are you liberal? Are you republican or are you democrat? Are you for--I'm saying, "Well, what are we talking about? 'Cause I'm not anything all the time." I'm not gonna be just conservative and therefore, I always write conservative. I'm not gonna be just liberal and I'm just gonna write liberal. What are we talking about? What's the issue? I might be liberal. I might be conservative. If you're talking about sex education and kids running amok, I'll be very conservative. If you're talking about opening doors of equal opportunity for young people, I'll be very liberal. So, what are we talking about? And, so, that's the kind of tone that I tried to bring. A conscious in a way of, a way of thinking that, that opens people's eyes and ears and that's kinda like the focus. It wasn't so much about one columnist, it's more about an attitude that I tried to impress upon people. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, as a senior editor, have you ever had a situation where you had to really try to oppose something or change something? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. I had to write columns, and I wrote columns for (unclear) opposing the mayor. The mayor, at one point, the mayor wanted a tax increase and I, and I criticized that. Speaker 2: Was this during Coleman Young's? Speaker 1: No. This was during Kwame Kilpatrick. Speaker 2: Kwame Kilpatrick, okay. Speaker 1: I've written a number of times, very forcefully on--in support of affirmative action. And, gotten white readership--It was just--you would've thought I said burn, burn the children, you know. And, why I--and let me tell you, one thing that you quickly learn and any columnist will tell you this, particular black columnist probably for white too, when you write around race, people go crazy. Even in the mildest terms. When you write about racial issues, people go crazy. And, they ascribe all types to opinions about you and who you are based on something they've read. And, so, I--there were time when I really didn't wanna write about a race issue, you know, avoid it. Because, I knew--everybody else was writing about it, and I knew what would happen. And, from time to time I would write, like I wrote about the black columnist, the black writer from New York, not The New York Times, but who--(unclear) I can't recall his name at the moment. A Jayson somebody [Jayson Blair, The New York Times] who was involved in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Right. Speaker 1: In the plagiarism or the fictional. And, I wrote about, I also about a white journalist and I, I said the premise when I wrote the column of both these guys are scoundrels. Jayson so-and-so [Blair] was black. He's a scoundrel. John Smith, whatever the guy's name, I can't recall. He's a scoundrel. And, I wrote, and I wrote this column. But, what the column I wrote was that all--the focus of this--because this guy is black he's, you know, his transgression is being used to attack affirmative action, diversity and (unclear). The white guy is just a white guy screwed up. And, what I basically wrote was, you know, what--both of 'em are scoundrels. Both of their behaviors are inexcusable. All I'm saying is that we should--'cause the one guy got a book deal, movies, and all that stuff; the white guy at the time. And, I said, "Well, this is, you know, we should have the same amount of scorn for both of them. We shouldn't reward one, and not the other. Speaker 2: Are you talking the white guy that wrote the book about his heroin addiction or something like that? Speaker 1: No. This guy-- Speaker 2: He was on 'Oprah.' Is that the one? Speaker 1: No, this. No, this. No, that's another guy. Speaker 2: That's--okay. Speaker 1: This guy wrote about, he created all these fictitional [sic] sources. He wrote for, I think, for the New Yorker or someplace like that. And, his name escapes me. But, he wrote all this--created fictional sources, fictional meetings and all this stuff. And, wrote all these stories and people thought he was a wonderful reporter and all the rest of that. He just literally fantasized all this stuff and wrote about it. And, before he was finally caught and nailed. But, basically, but the reaction was, the reaction was basically, well, you know, I'm defending, you know, you're trying to defend the black guy. I'm not defending any--I call him a scoundrel in the first sentence. Jayson is a scoundrel, how is that defending him (laughter)? But, people, you know, they just missed that. So, that, and that's one of the things again when dealing with issues of race. You find that. And, that is still the big bugaboo on so many arenas for American life today. And, it's unfortunate, but my thing with that is simply to get people to be open to hearing other points of view. And, start with the premise, you may not know everything, okay. And, that's where I tried to take it. Story_ID: 130799 Speaker 1: What were you doing as a senior editor? And, what's the difference between that and what you were doing before? Speaker 2: Well, a senior editor can be anything, you know. It generally means, you've been someplace a long time and you got some rank. In my case, I--they--I was named senior. I had been public editor prior to that. But, when it came to the point that I was gonna write a column, and they wanted a new title for me. And, the fact that I was the longest serving editor there, which made me senior to everybody else from a chronological standpoint, time standpoint, it was simply a way of anointing me with a title. I was actually a columnist who was called a senior editor. And, a senior editor, I guess, in my case, had something to do with the fact that, you know, I've done basically every job at the newspaper you can do. And, have a, hopefully some sense of history in understanding the community, that rates being called senior status. So, essentially it was a title. It wasn't anything duty prescribed me, because basically, I was a columnist at the time, I was senior editor. But, it's a recognition of fact, quite frankly, that my years of service and hopefully some, some level of accomplishment, and that's why I was given that, that title. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, off-camera during the break, we were talking about [HM] Angelo Henderson, and I don't know, was Betty DeRamus, wasn't she Detroit News or [Detroit] Free Press? Speaker 2: Betty DeRamus was the Detroit News-- Speaker 1: Detroit News, okay. Speaker 2: Betty was a colleague of mine. Yes, I knew Betty DeRamus, Angelo Henderson, who won a Pulitzer Prize at the Wall Street Journal. But, he actually--I like to joke with him, claim I have a piece of that because Angelo Henderson was--when I was business editor for the Detroit News, he worked for me. And, spent many hours and nights together editing his business stories with him. And, his wife, Felicia [D.] Henderson, the "On Detroit" section that I talked to you about, in fact, Felicia was my editor in charge of On Detroit. I was her supervising editor, but she in fact was my editor on the On Detroit section. Was a very good editor. So, the Henderson family, we have a lot of history together, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Did--Now, does--as a writer with the Detroit News with the newspaper, I guess you had a chance to see a lot of other black writers come along after you. How, I mean, what's the ratio like now, with the, you know, Detroit [Michigan] itself being, what 80 percent black or something? I mean, the city. Now, I know you serve a larger metropolitan area, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, right, right, right. But, yeah, Detroit's probably generally serves about 80 percent. But, terms of where we started in the mid-'80s [1980s] where the percentage was like 5 percent or something. The percentage has gone up and to be honest, I don't know the current percentage. But, in terms of locally, the current editor of the Free Press for instance, is black. Detroit News just hired a black senior editor, a gentleman by the name of Walter Middlebrook as director of community affairs. But, I--there'd been some, some advances, we have black sport columnists and there're some, there're some black columnists. But I, I think any objective look at the landscape despite significant advances, there are still room, vast room for improvement for more representation at our local newspapers. And, I dare say, in the media overall. Story_ID: 130800 Speaker 1: And again, with in fact the recent defeat of a, or passage of a proposal here in Michigan, Proposal 2, which outlaws affirmative action in public institutions, even though it has no bearing on the private sector. I think, there's some feeling in fact that back when I came along, at least the mid-80s [1980s], I would say the mid-'80s [1980s] to the early '90s [1990s], maybe mid-'90s [1990s], were the heydays of newsroom diversity as a big issue. And, I think, that that momentum to a great degree has been lost. And, I don't know what it will take to re-energize people. Quite frankly, I think, that that energy will have to come from the community to a great degree, if they feel that there is some--even more so than journalists to some respects. I think, because as journalists, you're in many--it's difficult when you're tied to the tether. And, there not--and, I've have people, black journalists tell me that. In fact, they work at certain newspapers and they can't make the noise that needs to be--they understand that things aren't where they should be. But, they can't make the noise. And, won't make noise because they gotta get paid. And, that's a tough position to be in. Frankly, I think that anybody who's honest, there comes times when you have to make stands event at the price of your own personal advancement. And, you have to make stands. And, I think, quite frankly, we need more people who are willing to make stands. Without going into details, you know, I've made mine. Other folks have made theirs. Sometimes there's a price to be paid. But, I think, that if you're serious about getting it done than just talking about an issue. What are you willing to do about it? What are you personally willing to put on the line for it? And, and this is, this is the story of life in America for many folks, not just black folks. But, for your principles, what you believe in. And, that's why, you know, doors are opened. If you look at the civil, the (unclear) civil rights (unclear) for public accommodations, to almost any arena, when we think of great people, we think of people, in many cases, who history holds up as emblematic of making a contribution. Many, and many times it may had been a personal cost of one type or another. But, they had to do it. And, so, I think there--we have not advanced beyond that stage. And, I think, my personal observation, I think, we've become too comfortable with the status quo. There are a lot of black journalists, like myself, who aren't in the business anymore for a myriad of reasons. And, that's troubling. That's troubling. Story_ID: 130801 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you this, was there, can you, is there a time in your life where you had to actually, when you actually wrote something and you knew you were gonna get punished for it, basically? Speaker 2: I didn't write anything knowing I was gonna--you mean punished by? Speaker 1: By the, by the Detroit News or by the-- Speaker 2: No. Nothing where I actually wrote something, you know. I think, we've all had--nothing where I wrote--I wrote some--I've written things, well, I wrote things where an editor wouldn't run a column, years ago. I wrote something. I remember I wrote a column about, I was in Lansing [Michigan] at the time and I wrote a column occasionally. And, I wrote a column about the fact that there were some legislation afoot to reward tax breaks to certain companies of some type. And, I used, I used a phrase called, was it corporate greed or something like that? And, I wrote a column around the idea. And, they refuse to run it. Because (laughter) they said, "Well, you can't use the word like (laughter) corporate greed." I said, "Well, that's my opinion. That's what I think it is." But, nothing where I was punished. But, I think that--put it this way, when you advocate for things, when you take stands that are not necessarily the stands that the power structure professes, it could sometimes come with, comes with a price. The price of advancement or getting certain opportunities because, you know, you're making too much noise, you know. You should be quiet and just go along with the program. Say what we want you to say. And, you know, that's not, that's not the way to get things done in my estimation. And, every person has to make their own call on that. And, so, you know, you just have to do what you think is best; what you believe in, and as I say, put it in God's hands and know it's gonna be all right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so. Speaker 1: I wanna ask you this, with Detroit [Michigan] has a, you know, quite a few, well, at one time, it had two independent black publishing companies doing mostly poetry things. Dudley Randall's Broadside Press-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember Dud--I remember Dudley Randall. Yes. Speaker 1: And, I just wondered what the relationship was between people like Dudley Randall and [HM] Naomi Long Madgett, Gloria House, Geneva Smitherman, and Mary Helen Washington, (simultaneously) Ron Milner, that--all that crowd of people? Speaker 2: Oh, man. Well, yeah, in terms of their contribution or? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Oh man, I think, I think all of those names are--I would hold tho--all those names you mentioned with as much reverence as any discussion of the Harlem Renaissance. In terms of people who wrote so poetically with such intellectual depth and really wrote for the ages. They wrote for the ages. I could have my fifteen-year-old daughter read what they wrote and be inspired by it. And, be--have it relevant today. And, all the internet, technological, whizzbang stuff in the world does not replace the power of the written word and the thought behind it. Everything that man has ever done emanated from a thought and a word and ultimate an act that flowed from it. And, those people are, those people are giants. And, I think that as they get old, and as God calls 'em home, it's important that we look back to their work for inspiration, for knowledge, and in some respects for guidance too. Because, all of this thing--all of this is connected and that's why--that's the power of the whole [The] HistoryMakers thing. That's what makes it so powerful. What's the point of knowing history of a person, of a people, of a culture, if all it is, is something to admire from afar. I think that's very limiting. And, you know, when you form that connection with the folks who have, who have written the words and showed us the way, there's power in that for us today. So, I, so, I think that, you know, Mary Helen Washington who taught me at the University of Detroit and some of the other folks who I, who I've known, and particularly for, you know, Detroit, you're talking about Detroit's legacy. Not just, you know, for Detroit these are all, these are all treasures. And, so we should embrace it, and cherish, and make sure more people know about their contributions. Story_ID: 130802 Speaker 1: Now, let me turn to music for a second and then we'll talk about the not-for-profit you started. But, now, how did you get involved in--as a blues musician? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's the darndest thing because the only thing I could play growing up was the radio (laughter), okay. I was a non-musical person, you know. I never aspired to be a musician. No people played music in my family. I always felt that people who played were like geniuses. Like, you had to be like, Stevie Wonder. You had to have this incredible intellectual something to play a musical instrument. Of course, I know that's not true now (laughter). But, nevertheless, but the way I got in it, this is, this is again where I guess the good Lord put something in you and sooner or later it's gonna catch up with you whether you, whether you want it to or not. And, when I was about thirty, in my thirties, early thirties, thirty maybe, I was living in Lansing [Michigan] at the time writing for the paper's [Detroit News] capital bureau. And, for some--this was back in the day when they had, still had albums, not CDs, albums, the vinyl, the big thirty-three and a third, right. And, for some reason I was in the record store or--and I bought this blues album. And, the blues album was by a guy name Luther Allison. And, I don't know if I bought it 'cause my name was on it or Luther--but, I look at it, it was pretty, it looked pretty cool. This guy had a big afro. And, I went back to my apartment and I put it on and I started--and I said, man these--interesting music. I always liked to listen to it. I had a big collection of rock and roll and stuff like that. But, anyway, I started buying blues albums. I started investigating and buying blues albums and listening. Meanwhile, I'm not thinking of play nothing, I'm just, you know, this is interesting music. And, one day I saw in one of the papers that this guy Luther Allison was gonna be playing up--down in Ann Arbor, Michigan, University of Michigan at a club in Ann Arbor called Rick's Cafe. So, I said, "What the hey, I'll drive down there and see this guy." And remember, I had never seen a blues show live in my life. I've never been to a club for nothing like that. And, I go in there and this guy does his show. Most of the kids are like white college students. And, I'm hearing a guitar. I never even heard a guitar played live for the first time. And, it was mind-blowing. It was like an, what'd call it, epiphany, epiphany experience. He's bending these notes getting screaming sounds. I'm watching these kids go crazy. And, I don't believe it. I mean, it's like, Wow! And, so right there on the spot I said, "I have got to learn this blues thing." I said, "I've got to get a guitar." I gotta--so I went to a pawn shop, bought a guitar, took a couple lessons from a folk singer, really didn't know anything about blues for a couple month. But, I basically bought, started buying blues records. I bought some books. And, I started going to blues clubs when I could, to see other blues musicians. And, every time this guy Luther Allison came to Detroit [Michigan], I would go see him. And, I started to talk to him. And, he was just a nice guy. And, he was playing out of Chicago [Illinois], I think, at the time. And, this was the early '80s [1980s], and he was playing a soup place. We would always come to the Soup Kitchen Saloon in Detroit. That was a big blues club at the time. And, so, I would go see him and got to talk to him, you know. I'd ask him about playing a guitar, and I'd always go see him. And, eventually, after a couple of years of this, I--meanwhile, I'm taking my little, practicing my little guitar a couple years. And, a friend of mine, a good friend of mine, named Art LaGardy [ph.]--Luther Allison was playing the Soup Kitchen again and Luther--on a break, I go to the restroom and Art tells Luther Allison, "You know, Luther really would like to play with you. He'd really like to play with you." I would never ever ask Luther Allison who'd play in Europe, to play, 'cause I could hardly play. But, don't you know, I get down, sit at my seat, and Luther Allison says, "I'ma call you up the next set. Don't get shaky on me." I said, "What!" So, son of a gun, he calls me up there, gives me his guitar, and I've got pictures of this, a matter of fact, if you wanted to take a picture of it, and start playing the little guitar. He's playing a harmonica 'cause he's also a great harmonica player, and this guitar player and I do a song I don't even know. He did a song called, "Garbage Can Man." And, so I'm playing along with the song, and I'm in like an out of body experience. I'm on stage with Luther Allison, and the band, and people are cheering. And, then he says--I'm getting ready to leave--he say, "Where you think you're going? Stay up here." So, I did like three or four more songs with Luther Allison. And, I went down, people are giving me little cheers, and I was like, wow, okay. So, at the end of the night, we're still there. The last song of the set, like the show-stopper set, the guys--the blues guys do the last show, you let it all hang out. He's playing like this, and I'm sitting at a table like in front of him. He puts the guitar on the table, he say, "Go up and finish." So, I pick up the guitar, he comes off stage, and I just started jamming with the band to the best I can. Story_ID: 130803 Speaker 1: I'm playing with Luther Allison. Here I am, a nobody, and Luther Allison--anyway, Luther--so, I continued to kinda dabble with the guitar. Luther this time goes to Europe because he told me that things were happening. So, he went to France, lived in France for about ten years. And, I lost--but, I told all my friends that Luther Allison is the man. Meanwhile, I'm, you know, playing with a little group, going to jam sessions in Detroit [Michigan], basically. And, I still was not that good, but I'm trying anyway. Luther Allison comes back to the [United] States to live. At this point, he comes back, and he's big time. He goes to Chicago Blues Festival [Chicago, Illinois]. He starts winning music awards. I mean, Luther Allison has gone worldwide. He is big. And, meanwhile, I start writing a few songs at jam sessions, going to jam sessions, trying out. 'Cause as a wri--you know, words are always my gift. So, words--natural marriage, words and music. So, I started writing a few little songs, going to jam sessions, and Luther is going on, going on another tour to Detroit and this would've been about 1997, I believe, yeah. So, he's touring and I left the newspaper that night. I was working Saturday nights. He had--played at a club called The Majestic Theatre, and I only caught his last song. 'Cause I thought, anyway I got there late. Anyway, Luther tells me--so I'm in line to shake his hand with everybody else, and, he said, "Luther go back stage. I want us to talk." So, after he had signed the autographs and stuff, he came backstage, just like you're sitting with me, and we talk about thirty minutes. He started--I say, "Hey, man, I'm so glad that you made it big and all that." And, I had a tape of a couple little songs I had written. I said, "Take this tape and if you think any songs are good, you know, whatever." And, I said, "Okay." This was in May of 1997. A month or two later, a friend shows me a news flash that says, "Luther Allison's been diagnosed with terminal brain cancer." He ends up dying in August of '97 [1997], I believe. And, mean--and so, I ended up--I think it was '97 [1997]. Anyway, I ended up forming my own group and doing my own CD, and start performing. I did my first CD, in 1999 it came out. And, what's interesting, Luther Allison's side man, a guy named James Solberg, and great guitar player, was coming to Detroit. And, some people had told him about me, and told him how much I liked Luther Allison. So, he was playing at the Soup Kitchen where Luther used to play at before he passed, and so, they invited me down. So, I wrote a song called "Luther" for Luther Allison. And, James Solberg, and lo and behold, James Solberg invited me down to play with him. Called me up to the stage to play with him. And, I got pictures of this too. So, I end up becoming friends with James Solberg. And, then, at the end of the night, James told me that Luther told him about a--and I had written a song called "Six-String Man." And, he said, "Luther played me a tape of"--, he said, "This guy from Detroit gave me this tape about this song called "Six-String Man, what'd you think? I really like it." And, it was like he was speaking to me from the grave. Luther Allison's sidekick tells me that Luther listened to my song and he liked it. And, then I become friends with James Solberg in the--and I played with--and I've sat in with him a couple times. I got pictures of us together too. But, anyway, so, lo and behold--My wife meanwhile says to me, "What are you doing? I did not marry a blues musician. You can't sing. What are you doing?" Meanwhile, now, I don't even know. I'm just--and I wasn't that good, but I just had this passion for the music. I put a lot of energy into it. Which is how I got the name "Badman." My drummer, a guy name Milton Alston [ph.], at the time, when I'd done a song, I, you know, I be screaming and hollering on stage, he say, you know. At this point I was starting--write--put out my first CD or writing songs for it, and I wanted a nickname. At this point, I say, "Well, I wanna do this blues thing. I need a nickname. I just can't be Luther Keith." So, if you remember Muhammad Ali when he beat Sonny Liston for the first time. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: He says, "I'm a bad man." And, so, people was clapping and my drummer said, "Hey, y'all give him a hand, he's a"--he say, "Luther--that's Luther Keith. He's a bad man." I said, "Badman. Luther "Badman" Keith. That's a blues name." So, I gave myself the name, took the name, Luther "Badman" Keith. And, it turned out to be the best thing I ever did, because people--I'm called "Badman" now as much as I'm called Luther, from playing-- Story_ID: 130804 Speaker 1: A guy from Belgium who comes up for the auto show [North American International Auto Show, Detroit, Michigan], said--had--a friend of mine said, "This guy wants to bring a blues band to Belgium for his clients." He was in the (unclear) industry, auto industry doing events. And, said, he was asking me--he said, send--"He want people to send him tapes of some blues bands from Detroit." He said, "You send this guy your CD." And, I said, "I'll send it. I don't think." So, lo and behold, the guy emailed him back and said, "Do you think that we could get this guy Luther "Badman" Keith to come to Belgium?" Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Here I am, a nobody. So, the guy flies over here. His name was Patrick Wendelen, comes to my house, sits out there in the backyard, drinking wine with my wife, who is a lawyer by the way. And, my wife tells him, "Well, you know, you can't get him to go to Belgium unless I go, and my daughter goes." Well, my daughter was about, what, 1999; nine years, eight years old. To make a long story short, the guy pays for me, my band, my wife, my daughter, we go to Belgium. We play in Brussels. We play in Antwerp. I'm treated like a big star (laughter). And, and I come back here, and I told my wife at one point when we were in, in Belgium, I said, "Think about this," and this the woman who told me I couldn't sing in (unclear) (laughter), I said, "Think about this, we're here in Belgium for free. I'm getting paid. All because a guy liked the way I play guitar and got a good--likes my band. That don't sound like a bad deal to me." And, so, come back to Detroit-- Speaker 2: So, what year is this that you go to Belgium? Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000]. Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000]. Okay. Speaker 1: Two--it was still pretty recent, 2000. And, I came back here and I started, you know, I started getting booked to play places. I start playing festivals, and clubs, and people started writing about my music. And, there's still a lot of musicians better than me. But, I just had to, whatever it is, I had something that people liked. And, that's what people tell me. There's something about, you know,--'cause I'm not just traditional blues. I kinda blend funk, rock, and soul. Plus, my persona is completely different when I step into my blues thing, I'm a completely--I'm not like this, okay, very much not like this. And, son of a gun, it's something that people--so my, you know, my music and I've been nominated for a number of music awards here locally. I just got another nomination as "Best Songwriter." And, I--and the most shocking thing about it is that if someone told me I'd be playing music and getting paid, people asking for my autograph, and putting out CDs, I would've told 'em, "You are out of your mind"-- Story_ID: 130805 Speaker 1: Tell me what, what are the themes that you write about? Here you're a person who's been a writer for a number of years-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Editor of the Detroit Free Press, but you're playing the blues-- Speaker 2: News, the Detroit News. Speaker 1: But, what do you--Detroit News, yeah. And, what are your themes? Speaker 2: Well, you know, what's so great about this because as a journalist see, I've--I haven't just done one just thing, I've done a lot--plus, you have your life experiences that you draw on. So, I write about everything. I've written songs that--with meaning. Like I wrote a song called, 'Get Along.' Borrowing from Rodney King, a song that talks about, you know, it's time for us to get along, put (unclear), let's get along. I've written--and I like to have humor. I've written a song called, 'Barbecue Baby.' "I got a Barbecue Baby, she sure knows how to grill. Her stuff's so hot, make a country preacher squeal." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You know, I've got a new song that I've just written. It'll probably be on my next piece, I--it's called 'Menopause Woman.' Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Now, when you, when you think of menopause woman, people do just what you do. They laugh. But, I have kinda of a different sense of humor. I say, "I got a menopause woman--people don't know, what is he gonna say next--I say, "all the men pause when the girl walks in." It's like, wow. I wrote, I wrote a song like 'Rocks on Mars' about Martians. I've written songs about "Badman." I had to write a story about my, my, you know, 'cause people always say, "Why they call you Badman?" So, I had to write a song. So, I wrote a song called "Badman." And, it goes, I guess a couple lines, I was, I was a young boy, I was only three, all the kids used to pick on me. One day I took a stand. I knocked them all out with both of my hands. They call me "Badman." You know, I got, "I got older. I went to school. I didn't learn no golden rule. Someone, somebody picked on me, now they're sleeping with the fishes in the sea. I'm a "Badman," you know. So, I--one of the things I'm noted for in my songs is humor. But, I also try to bring some thought. I wrote a song called, "What's the Use." And, it's about, you know, if you have, you know, if you go to church and don't love your brother, what's the use. And, so, a lot of themes, so, my songs run, there's sometimes humor in 'em. There's sometimes, there sometimes serious. So, just everything, and I try to make it, I try--as someone said to me in an article that was published just a few weeks ago about me, I was playing a blues festival here, I said, "The blues, you know, people misinterpret what the blues are about." See the blues are not to make you sadder. That's not what the blues are about, in my opinion. The blues are to help you through the sadness. To make you feel better. To help you get over, and through the sadness. That's what the blues is about. As I told, this one reporter who interviewed me, "I don't wanna play all night to be sad. I don't wanna play all night to make people sad. What is the point of that?" What you want 'em to walk out and say, dang, I'm feeling good man. Man, I feel good. I wanna hear, I wanna hear some more of that. I wanna come back next week and hear some more of that. So, that's what I try to do with the blues. Story_ID: 131123 Speaker 1: Okay, we were asking about your style. You were talking about your style as Luther "Badman" Keith. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, my style was a synthesis, you know, I, you know, 'cause I absorbed a lot of influence in music, rock, soul, funk, the whole--now, as for essentially what I try to do with the blues is find my own voice with it. And, so, while we all, you know, like and love [HM] B.B. King and Buddy Guy, 'cause those guys are the pioneers that wrote the language of the music. My whole thing is to try to find my own voice. So, when someone comes to hear Luther "Badman" Keith, their coming to hear my sounds and my approach to the music. All the playing in the world, you know, B.B. King, I'll never--I can only sound as, at the very best as good as B.B. King, or as good as Buddy Guy. I'll never be better at being B.B. King than B.B. King. Or, better at Buddy Guy than Buddy Guy. And, that's all great. But, B.B. King and Buddy Guy found their own voices and that's why we call 'em B.B. King and Buddy Guy. So, my thing is like, okay, Luther "Badman" Keith, who are you when you do your blues? And, that's what I try to do. So, when people come to see me, you know, this guy, he doesn't sound like that guy, or that guy, but I like him. So, that's, that's what I go for. Story_ID: 131124 Speaker 1: Now, I'd like to ask you about Arise Detroit, which is something that a lot of people in Detroit [Michigan], well, just the term--everybody is in favor of Detroit arising. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: So, I mean, how did you come up with this concept and what is it? Speaker 2: Well, as I say, I think, number the con--number one, I think the concept, the good Lord sent it to me 'cause quite frankly, I'm not smart enough to have an idea like this on my own. But, essentially, as I, you know, looked at some things and I thought about I had some opportunities to do some things after the newspaper business. I had an opportunity to take an early retirement. And, I had some contractual offers from media consulting that were gonna, that were going to compensate me well, and looking at some other things that I wanted to do. But, one of the things that you asked me about, writing stories, I spent a lot of time writing about or doing editing reports about what's wrong with the schools. What's behind urban violence? What's around all the litany of social issues that we say, why are, why can't we, or end up having a greater impact? And, when I write columns often times people from the suburbs would email me or call me and say, "Luther, why aren't people in Detroit, or certainly black people, doing anything?" Then, I get the black people in Detroit that would call me and say, "Luther, well, we got a men--we have a mentoring program. We have a tutoring program. We're trying to work in our neighborhood, could you put something in the newspaper about this? 'Cause, we're trying to do it. So, I'm saying, "What's wrong with this picture?" If you have these people, and I know in fact they're people are working 24/7 on these problems, but we're not having the impact, or we're not seeing the impact. And, we have hundreds of organizations, all of 'em are working, but what is, what is wrong with this picture? If we have all these organization working all these problems and we don't see like we're having the impact, or we're seeing the impact. And, what had occurred to me, a number of things. One of which is that, we have all these organizations going along their own path in competition for resources, in competition for volunteers, and competition for marketing. And, there's only so much they can do. And, what most of these organizations need, 'cause most of them don't have huge budgets, is they need more people to become involved as volunteers, more exposure or marketing, so then people can learn about them. But, if you don't have big money for advertising budgets, you don't have hook-ups with the media, it's only so much you can do. What we have, it occurred to me, that we have to find a way to get more people involved in the solution. We have to get more people connected to the mentoring programs, the tutoring programs, the neighborhood clean-up programs, we have to get more people. We have to issue a call to action, if you will, to the community, say, "You know what, every person should be doing something," you know. Find something that you can do and get involved with it. So, we need a, we need a way to help not just one organization. We need to find a way to help all--any organization that's working to improve the quality of life of children and families in our community. We should be trying to make a difference because all these organizations doing great things individually, and that's great. But, all these great individuals organization can (unclear) ultimately produce an individually result, and we have collective problems. You can't solve a collective problem with an individually approach. So, we need a more holistic approach that challenges the community, step forward, be involved. We're gonna connect you to the opportunity. I don't know what to do, or we'll find that opportunity for you. We'll connect you to that group that you can work with, or that school community, that school that you can work with. But, not only that, we're also gonna challenge our local media to do a better job of showing this change. Showing people involved. So, that's how you inspire other people. You don't inspire people by--with just the first six carjackings that happened overnight or something like that, those has to be covered. So, Arise Detroit was an ef--was in my mind a way to challenge communities, you know what, if we're really serious about making a difference, we gotta take this thing to a whole 'nother level. Story_ID: 131125 Speaker 1: And, to take it to a whole 'nother level, we're gonna have to reach out and say, everybody in the [Detroit, Michigan] community has to be involved. But, you have to get out there in the same way you get out there with football games and Super Bowl championships like we had here. If this is serious to you, then we have to show that kind of energy and that kind of passion on behalf of the children and families. Office buildings don't graduate kids from high school. They don't teach 'em how to read. We need people. Just like fighting the war, like right now, the war in Iraq, whatever. Know what, the president can have all the proclamations in the world. But, it's gonna take a soldier, a nineteen-year-old, scared kid from Detroit or Chicago [Illinois], to go down that alley in Iraq or wherever, with a gun, find the bad guys, and shoot 'em or arrest 'em, whatever. It's no different right here in our urban centers, in this case Detroit or whatever. A person, a body, has to go into the school and make a connection. A person, a body, has to decided that he's gonna tutor a kid. A person, a body, has to go into a neighborhood. A person, a body, has to decide they're gonna work in domestic violence. We have to get more people personally engaged in making a difference. And, we can't do it with the old paradigm that says, this the way it's always been done. And, so, one of the things we're doing with Arise Detroit, we're trying to challenge people to create a new paradigm. This is everybody--as we say, Arise Detroit, embrace the vision, be part of the change. And, then not to feel powerless. And, the whole, and the idea behind this is that, no one is coming to save us. We gotta do this our self. The governor, the mayor, Jesus Christ is not coming tonight. So, what are we personally willing to do, if you're serious about it? If you aren't serious about it, just say you ain't serious about it, you don't wanna, you don't wanna do it. But, if you are serious, then we're gonna get you involved, we're gonna connect you. And, that's what Arise Detroit is about. It's just like the modern Civil Right Movement, where everyone felt that they were a part of it. [HM] C. T. Vivian was just here in Detroit recently talking about his work with [Reverend] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. And, how, at the time during the Montgomery Bus Boycott, and Selma [Alabama] and all the rest of that, everybody felt they needed to do something. You either march in demonstration, or you drove a bus, you cooked for demonstrators. You did something to help the movement. Why can't we do this with the city, right now, with our communities? What are you doing? And, so, we're trying to get everyone connected. We're trying to get churches and businesses, non-profit organizations, everyone connected. Then we can move this needle. And, people say, people have told me, "Well, Luther you, you really, you really can't do that. I mean, this won't happen." And, I respond to that like this, history is replete with example of things that never were supposed to happen, that happened. That's what history tell us. Let's start about the--let's start with the United, history of the United States. England was the world power of its time. Thirteen little colonies gonna defy England? Defeat England in war? Are you kidding me? Could never happen. It happened. Black folks taken, made slaves; slaves for how many hundred years here? Two hundred years or more here in America, or longer. Weren't supposed to be free. We're never gonna be free. They were free. Women. Never supposed to be given the right to vote. They weren't supposed--what a, what a crazy idea. The Suffrage Movement; they got the right to vote. Nelson Mandela, in prison. Never is supposed to get out. He got out. The Berlin Wall; never was supposed to fall. The Civil Rights Law [Civil Rights Act]--segregation of the South. Segregation forever; never was supposed to change; it changed. Luther Keith, at risk, underprivileged, colored boy from Detroit; never supposed to be an editor of a major newspaper [Detroit News] with his name on his masthead, his own column; never supposed to happen. It happened. So, don't tell me that this can't happen. Now you may say, you don't believe in it. You may say, you don't wanna work in it. You may say, you don't wanna be part of it. But, don't tell me, it can't, it won't--it can't happen. Story_ID: 131126 Speaker 1: And, so, but, like with any, with any concept, we [Arise Detroit] are so overcome and overwhelmed by the, by the size and the scope of a problem. That's what we have to get people to understand. We have a huge problem in our urban centers. And, we got ourselves in a terrible position and we can work our way out of it particular. It's gonna take some new initiatives, some new energy, and it's gonna take people. It's gonna take bodies. It's gonna take personal commitment to make a difference. We just held, in conjunction with out of Chicago [Illinois] group called the Black Star Project, you may be familiar with it. They had something called "Men in Schools Day," nationwide effort that Detroit [Michigan] linked up with. We had men from suburb--from the suburbs, men from Detroit, black men, white men, come involved in the schools, spend a day as a hall monitor to speech, to mentor, to tutor. It's a small thing. But, the important things about it, it was bodies, people saying, you know, we're gonna do this. And, we just have to get more people. That's why we call Arise Detroit, it's a movement. It's not a campaign. It's not just an organization. It's a movement for change. The ultimate would be, we expect like none there's been. And, it's a, it's a small seed. Right now, we're a small acorn. But, from those small acorns, mighty oaks grow, and we're on that path. And, if we stay the course, we believe we'll get there. Story_ID: 131127 Speaker 1: Okay. That leads us to a question, well you've dealt with a lot of it already, but we always ask this question and it's, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the Detroit [Michigan] and for the, well the black communities in Detroit and the nation? Speaker 2: Hopes and concerns. I have hope, but we really have to get serious about and engaging ourself to create the kind of communities we claim we want. It's not good enough to call talk shows, or blame other folks; long past that time. Yeah, there all those problems. There's racism. There's folks, you know, we got dealt a bad hand, but that's just the way it is. What are we gonna do about it? And, we have to find a way. And, one of things we're working on right now is something we call, we hope to call Arise Detroit Day. We have to find a way to really reconnect to our family and spiritual values and the nurturing component of our community. We, right now, are so disjointed, so overrun with consumerism in the dollar and getting over at all cost, that we really are, I think, in danger of falling into a vast pit of nothingness. If we let the forces of consumerism, the forces of get over at all cost, the forces of it's all about me, some of the more negative aspects of our pop culture where we basically have decided that pop culture--we're gonna allow pop culture to raise our children. We are not gonna raise our children. We're gonna let pop culture raise our children. And, that is a terrifying thought because we're creating--sowing the seeds of--for mayhem, social mayhem in our community. But, the other side of that is just my short time, year and--or so with Arise Detroit, if we get enough people committed and they're people who are giving their lives, not just a time, their lives because they believe that they can make a difference. They care. They're willing to spent the time, spend the energy. And, we've gotta find a way to give those people the resources and the exposure so they can have the impact that we need to have to change our communities. It's only gonna come from the power of people coming together. There's no proclamation that's gonna do it. There's no law that's gonna do it. There's no preacher in a pulpit is gonna do it. It's gonna take some folks and lots of 'em to say, you know what, we aren't going down this road anymore. We're gonna create a new one. And, if--not only that, we're gonna create our own road. That may mean, we will create some new institutions and in today's technology, we will create some new media. Find some new ways to get our messages out. We aren't gonna be prisoners of "the media." We're gonna create. And, now that technology is such that it's 'coming more and more. That capability is coming, so we can do that. Story_ID: 131128 Speaker 1: It's just a matter of how serious we are. I was at a, I was at a black business group meeting just a couple weeks ago, and the issue came up and this may be true in some other cities too, but in Detroit [Michigan], we have many "party and liquor stores." And, many of them--or grocery stores, and many of them are run by Chaldeans [Assyrian Catholic immigrants] or people of Middle Eastern background. And, someone got up and said, "Well, you know, why, why don't we have"--we have lil--just one black-owned grocery market in the City of Detroit. One. Now, people wanna come up with, well, the Chaldeans are there and they're doing this and they're doing that. And, someone asked the question, I was on a panel, someone asked, "Why, why is that? Why is that?" And, people are looking for an answer like, because they do this and they do that. Why can't the black community have some grocery marts? When will it change? And, my answer is very simple. You know why we don't have 'em. It's not important. It's not important to anybody to do that. If it was, it would get done. It's more important to have other kinds of business, other types of opportunities. And, opening grocery markets and running liquor stores is not what black folks wanna do. Because, if they did, it would get done. Now, what if we had that same posture about opening churches. We can open a church. Is a church a business? You need people. You need money. You gotta have administration, inventory, if you will, take collection, pay bills. And, we have two thousand churches in this city and one grocery market. Because, you know what, somebody said to you, having a church is something we do. We do it well. So, therefore we do it. We haven't said that about grocery stores, and it's not important. And, it's not going to happen until somebody says, you know what, we're gonna do this. And so, I, you know, so, on--and I don't wanna hear that. I really don't wanna hear that because, you know. And, black people are brilliant people. Our history is replete with examples. We can do anything we wanna do. It's a matter of personal commitment and deciding you're gonna do it, and pulling together. Looking around the room, looking around the community, saying, where are the brains? Where is the money for us to do this? And, just do it. So, so, this thing can get done. But, the question to me is, how can we convince people of the magnitude of the problem, one, of the magnitude of the problem. Two, the fact that if you're going it, you have to help to do something about it. You. Find a way. A small thing. Maybe you can only read to a kid an hour. Maybe you can only give a hundred dollars to keep a recreation center open. Find a way to do something. If you get a thousand people, or ten thousand people doing a small thing, you get what? A big thing. And, so that's the thing that, and this is the thing that kinda frustrated me when I got ready to leave the newspaper [Detroit News]. And, I would led into these topics, they had the same ol' crap. Why are they, why are they doing this? Why they doing that? So-and-so did this, or so-and-so is doing this, I'm not going to do it. Regardless of, you know, I often say, "We need less me-ism and more we-ism." And, so, we wanna look for excuses, we wanna look to blame folks. And, the folks aren't, you know, 100 percent with folks. If they don't agree with everything we do, than we aren't--regardless, of the comment, even with, even with Arise Detroit there people who say, "Well, you know what, you know, you're funded by this group. We're funded by the Skillman Foundation and we don't like that foundation for this reason, or that reason. Or, you have this group as one of your partners, or that group, and we don't, we don't like--Well. People always looking for a reason not to do something. And, that's our problem, and it stops us, it blocks us. And so, the questions becomes, I think, the central question for the black community here in Detroit and indeed the nation is, what are we personally willing to do to create the kind of community reality that we want for ourselves? What are you willing to do? And, not just the same old, same old. And, that's our problem. Because, we're working hard. We got a lot of good programs. We got a lot of good organizations. But, are we where we wanna be? I submit, we aren't. And, it's, and it's, and there are no magic bullets out here. There's not magic bullets. But, we have some geniuses among us. We have giants among us. And, if we do, let's find a way to get it done. Let's find a way to get it done. Not, that it's gonna be easy. It's not gonna happen overnight. Bad things aren't gonna--bad things didn't stop, crime didn't stop in Detroit because of Arise Detroit. We can't stop, we can't stop crime. But, what we can do is start putting more positive energy into our community. And, the more positive energy that builds, that's less room for, that's less room for that negative energy. Story_ID: 131129 Speaker 1: And, just like cultivating--I use an analogy of cultivating the garden. You go in a garden, you got your vegetables and then because you see a few weeds, you're gonna stop growing a garden, or you gonna throw the weeds out? You're gonna cultivate the garden. You're gonna water it. Oh, there's another weed, well, I guess, I guess it's not gonna, I guess the garden is not gonna work, we got some weeds in it. No. You get the weeds out. So, setbacks and obstacles, that's the course of the human condition. Surely it's, it's a life experience of black folks in America. But, I think, I think, we want these instant answers. If you, if you get a black, you know, I always get this, you know, the books come out, "What black folks should do now," you know. "If all black folks did this. If all black folks did that," you know. And, we're looking for these--and this is what I said in this forum, we're looking for the simple, magic, microwave answers. And, there's not a mag--but, the answers are right around us. The answers are each--the answers are all of us. The answers are each other. We are the answers. We are the answers. If we decide that we're gonna connect on this. If I could get everybody in Detroit connected to this concept, involved in it, you know how much power that would be? Do you know who--but, well, I--as one agency told, a large agency told me when you approach--well, we're doing all those things right now. Why are we? Why are we on this?--We don't understand what you want. We don't want anything except to connect with you. So, we, we have the same goals. We wanna connect with you and push this idea. Build this thing. But, all they can see is, well, we're doing all this right now. So, why, why do we wanna, why do we wanna be connected with you? Because, it's not getting done. You're getting your program done. But, the community is not getting it done as a result. And, it won't get done until we form the connections as a community. Speaker 2: So, Arise [Detroit] is trying to coordinate the efforts of all these different-- Speaker 1: Right. It's trying to bring people--so, basically, we started with twenty organizations; we now have two hundred. What we do is, we connect people to the organizations. Ways to be involved. We also try to expose to the media. We publ--use our website, you know, and our information to publicize people who are doing events for all kinds of events for--on behalf of kids and families, and, you know, people looking for scholarships, you know. We do a lot of work with people coming out of the juvenile justice system it's a lot of anti-violence conflict resolution programs and things like that. So, we engage people to, on one level to get involved in one of these organizations. We point them (unclear) okay. You have an interest, for instance, I can teach kids how to write for instance, okay. Maybe you'll--put you--connect you with a program where they're looking for someone to work with the kids in a writing class or something like that. Or, maybe just come and talk about your life experience, you know. One of the things that we wanna do is actually, we want to one of the main things we hear in school is that we don't have enough black men simply coming into the school. So, and mentoring in general. So, we wanna, we wanna main initiative, we wanna do five thousand mentors. Five thousand for Detroit [Michigan] students because the need is that great. But, people don't understand that. And, so, we have a lot of mentoring programs. But, the thing is now, if we could pull, pull more people into all of those programs that targeted into our community then it's more than just isolated individual mentoring programs, and you're having a greater impact. So, the questions is, how do you leverage all this--all these folks already have good will, they have programs, but, they're falling far--it's like leveraging money. I can invest in my account over here. You can invest ten accounts and they're all twenty dollars. But, why don't we put all those twenty-dollar accounts together and get a larger bang for the buck. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, see, this is what the--in human energy, and human potential, and community transformation is no different. That's how you get it done. That's how you leverage, you know. One guy making a speech didn't change Selma, Alabama. It was hundreds and thousands of people coming together around a common belief, a common idea. And, that's what we gotta do to change these cities and to change these schools. But, people are stuck in, I want the simple answer. I want the simple answer. I want the simple answer. I want--pick that one guy to be superintendent, everything, everything's gonna be okay. Well, you can pick any superintendent you want, short of Jesus Christ, but you gotta have some teachers and committed people in the classrooms, in the buildings who can execute, you know. As I refer to sports analogies it's like, like playing a football team, you know. Everybody has a role to play, you gotta, yeah you gotta have a quarterback, but you gotta have some tackles, you gotta have some guards. Somebody's gotta play defense. So, you gotta have a kicker. But, you know, one--but one thing you can be sure of, you can't win a game if everybody's on the sidelines. We have too many people on the sidelines. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 131130 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question too. When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: Do differently, boy. That's a hard--start playing the guitar at fifteen (laughter) maybe. But, no, I guess that's a, that's one of those what-if questions that you just can't--it's hard to answer. You know, which is, which is not to say I've done everything perfectly by any means, I have not. I guess, maybe just be more appreciative of the time you spend with your loved ones, and you lose your parents, and things like that. And, other folks like that. I think, I think, ultimately as you get older, you cherish life, and the people you share it with. Because, you see how, you know, I think of all my aunts and uncles when I was a little boy that I had fun with and people I've known and you become someone meditative about that. And, you see yourself connected and discontinue 'em. And, you know, I think we could all probably do a better job of showing the people we love that we care about 'em. And, if there's probably a thing, it's probably that, you know, like most people, I probably have not done enough of that. And, this reflection hopefully will make me do a better job afterward. But, I've actually been tremendously blessed on so many, many levels, you know. I've got a wonderful woman for my wife who is a brilliant woman. I mean, I married a brilliant woman, and I'm not ashamed to say that and I'm sure you are--one point, 'cause she's a lawyer and she's been a judge. And, I try to remind her that doesn't mean she's right all the time. And, I often tell her that, you're smarter than me but it doesn't mean you're right all the time. But, I'll share you this very one quick, vignette, we were in, we were in Mali on a trip to Africa some years ago. And, we were--you know how they barter and I forgot what it was my wife wanted. But, anyway, we have, you know, we had caps and t-shirts, and some money, and these items and my wife wanted like five or six items. And, the guy was only gonna give her like one or two items. And, eventually my wife kept bartering with him, my wife kept bartering, eventually she had like about eight things when the guy thought he was only giving us two. And, he finally made the (unclear) and he looked up and he say, he said, "Mister, this is a very good woman for you (laughter)," you know. (Laughter) And, because she was a real good negotiator. But, so I've been blessed with her and I have an, I have an incredible daughter, you know, who is by far, (unclear) my confidence, the best thang that God has, that God has given me. So, I'm, I'm very, I'm very blessed and very fortunate and--but, I think as much as anything, and one of the things Arise Detroit appeals to me because, you know, feeling like that you connect people really are appreciative of the fact that someone is reaching out to connect with them, to make a difference in the community. And, that's an esteem, or a feeling of confidence rather, that goes beyond your boss telling you, you wrote a good story, Luther. See, my career was really not about the fact that Luther was a good writer, or Luther sure wrote a good story. I think that whatever success or confidence I've had is because people believing in me and feeling that I share the same humanity that they share. And, that you never wear title or accomplishment over your humanity. Story_ID: 131131 Speaker 1: You asked me about Muhammad Ali and that the physical resemblance. My flip response to that is my bank account does not look like (laughter) Muhammad Ali. But, it's something literally, certainly as an adult that I hear literally constantly. I cannot get through a week or a day without hearing it once or several times. And, I've had some interesting instances as a result of that. Being in Mexico or instance, in Acapulco, and being mistaken for Muhammad Ali. And, kinda playing along with the gag and telling the cab driver, who was driving me around all week, don't tell anybody. I'm kinda like incognito and then tipping him and say thanks for keeping my secret. And, he's probably telling somebody, "Yeah, I drove Muhammad Ali. And, at one point, I was in the Dogon [people] in Mali, in Africa, up in the hills, if you know the Dogon, very, very, primitive, I mean, by our standards. And, I'm up, way up there in--with a church group, and this guy can't speak English. But, he starts pointing at me and he does like this (laughter). I said, you know, and we're like in the airport there. So, I always considered that kind of like a gift to be connected with a man of such stature and such an historic figure, you know. And, I could look a lot worse, so I'll take that. And, but, it's kind of amusing because I hear it quite a bit. Speaker 2: Okay. And, I thought about that especially when you mentioned the nickname "Badman," you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I'm a bad man, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's straight from Muhammad Ali. And, he, and he was and he is. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 131132 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I have not asked you in this interview you think you need to address before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I can't think, it's been pretty exhaustive. And, I think you've hit--'cause I really was not expecting to talk about my music as this much. But, I think, I think you've hit the high points as recall--I can think of. Speaker 1: There's one thing I--now, do you plan to, with your not-for-profit, you plan to work with that, you know, for the rest of your life? Speaker 2: Well, we'll--I hope to--my goal for Arise Detroit is to, you know, where I am executive director is to make Arise Detroit work. I do, like I say, I do have, I do have some media consulting company that I do some work for as well. But, at the focal point of our life right now, and I have other interest, but clearly Arise Detroit is the centerpiece of my life. And, I want Arise Detroit to arise and that's where most of my energies are focused. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, the last question is really two in one in this case, are very similar; what today do you see as your legacy, and how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, at the risk of, you know, patting myself on the back, and I don't like to do that. But, since the questions is asked, as we all, all of us leave legacies of one type of another no matter what station we are in our life personally and professionally. Certainly, if you wanna looked at it from a professional--first personally for a standpoint, you know. I hope my family can say that, that I was someone who cared and was a nurturing brother, cousin, husband, father, even if I was not perfect. So, and, so, that's, it starts with that because all of my professional endeavors flows from that fact from the love and support that I've had from my family. So, none of that would be possible. And, so, I think first, you know, I want--I thank them and love them for that. Because, that has made Luther Keith the person who then can reach out professionally and do some of the things that I have done. But, I would, I would say that in terms of a legacy, one of making a difference by reaching out and opening the door, opening the door for others. Being sympathetic and seeing people in all their humanness, not judging people, helping people where, where I could. And, possibly putting out and sharing a vision for our community that makes a difference that inspires people. That makes people believe that they can achieve and just, just being willing to respond as a human, human being. I think that one of the things, again, I touched on it in the earlier questions that I think is really important as my, as my uncle said, my uncle Damon [HM Damon J. Keith] says about being a judge, you are appointed not anointed. And so, I've always tried to carry myself with the idea that I'm really am just a guy. I really am just a guy. The life as I have lived is a sum total of my environ--my experience and the people I have been surrounded with. And, I guess, basically, I guess if you wanted to sum it up, it would say Luther cared and he did something about it. Story_ID: 131133 Speaker 1: And, in a nutshell, when it's all said and done, when you look at all the things I have done and hopefully I'm a long way from finished from doing them, is that I do what I do because I care. But, caring is not enough, you actually have to do something. You have to take an action. So, it starts with that. And, I guess when I think about it being a implement for bring people together. I don't know if mediator is not, is not the right word or healer is not the right word but, I think that helping people see that we have more in common than the more separate us and as a result it's pointless. Many of our arguments are just pointless and get us nowhere. Let's focus on our common, our commonality as human beings and what we, what we need as a community, and as a people, as a country. And, let's use that to move forward rather than to engage, and it's kinda like where I think we too often, engage in the zero-sum politics, zero-sum relationship, zero sum whatever. I've, I have to--if I--for me to win, you have to lose. And, I think that that's stalls us, blocks us, and keeps us from reaching higher ground. So, you know, I would hope that people would say about me that, you know, Luther Keith just was a guy who, who cared, he did something about it, he helped other people. He didn't live just for himself. He wasn't perfect. Don't make me a saint. I'm not a saint. As someone said, "All the saints are in heaven." But, you know, I tried to do something. And, I don't think anyone could say that Luther Keith was a guy how was selfish, only thought of himself, only did what he could for himself, and nobody else. To me that would be the worst thing to go to my grave with. And, I don't know what they're gonna put on my tombstone, but I know that shouldn't go on it. And, because that ultimately, you know, that's all we have. And, you know, to help leave the--not in the world or your block or your family, leave something that can actually say, you know, it's better. My life is better. So, now when I see people, young people who have gone through, you know, the program I, the program that I put together at Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan], or a lot of the journalist that I've worked with, or my years as--at the Detroit News, people I've worked with, some directly, some indirectly, relationship in the community that I have with people. And, ultimately, all of that is not just about Luther Keith, you know, Luther Keith, you know, this guy from the Detroit News, you know. You know, I don't wanna be thought of as just Luther the guy from the Detroit News. I wanna be thought of Luther Keith, you know, a guy, a person, a man who really cared about other, really cared about other people and did something, you know. And, so that's kind of like a long rambling way to say it. But, and that's the legacy my father [Luther Caesar Keith] gave me. I mean, that's what my father did, you know. And, my daughter already is taking about she wants to be a U.S. Senator and she wants to do some things and she wants to be an activist. And, this probably not by accident because that's what she's, that' what she's been around. So, you know, I don't, I don't see myself as having done something extraordinary, but I did do something--something extraor--but, I did do something. And, that's, and that's what we should be doing. I mean, I don't think, and I've said this before, I don't think we could afford to live lives just for our self. We don't have the luxury of doing that. Black folks particularly, do not have the luxury of doing that. We cannot afford to do that. And, that's the way I've chosen to approach life and that's the way I will continue to approach it. Story_ID: 131134 Speaker 1: This is my CD Luther "Badman" Keith 'Thunder in my Blues,' the second CD I produced. It came out in 2003 and it's all original music that I wrote and arranged with my band. And, we were nominated for a Detroit Music Award [Detroit, Michigan] for outstanding blues CD for that year. So, that's a product of my musical work. Speaker 2: Picture of my father [Luther Caesar Keith] standing in back from my house over on Columbus. I think maybe I'm, I am on the far left. I'm about maybe nine or ten years old. My sister, Joyce is in the middle, and my little brother Terrence is on the right. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This picture is taken from the 1950s, I believe, and it's my father, Luther Caesar Keith seated to the immediate left of the Catholic dignitary bishop. This was taken during the period of his work with the United Committee on Negro History, and these are various people and supporters for an event there. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Ready. Speaker 2: This is a family portrait of our family. I believe this is probably during early 1970s, I'm gonna guess. It's my mother [Mittie Ashworth Keith] and father seated up front. To the left, my sister, Joyce. To my father's left and at the top, from left to right we have, I think that's my brother, Terrence; my sister, Gwen, and myself. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a portrait of my father's family. I believe this is probably during the period of the 1940s because my Uncle Nap is wearing his military cap 'cause he was in the Service at the time. And, in the back row we have my father, Luther Caesar Keith on the far left. Next to him is my Aunt Annie, my Aunt Marie, next to her, my uncle Perry, Jr. who died before I was born. My uncle Napoleon again in front with the military cap. My grandfather--my grandmother Annie, and my grandfather Perry both of whom passed before I was born, I believe or when I was very young. And, then my uncle [HM] Damon [J] Keith on the left of my grandfather. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a, this is a picture of my grandfather Perry Keith. I think this was around, the period around 1902. And, this is my biological grandmother Lucille Collier who was very young. I think in her early twenties and she is my father's biological mother who died in childbirth while my father was born. And, of course, I've never got to meet her but she is, she is my grandmother. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Ready. Speaker 1: This is a picture taken in February of 2007. Centered at my Uncle Damon's soul food luncheon that he has each year. And, on, well, in the back is my brother Terrence Keith. I'm next to him. My sister, Joyce, next to me. And, then in front in the red it my cousin, Laura Parks; my Uncle Damon; my daughter, Erin Keith; and my sister-in-law, Carole Keith. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 1983 on one of the great nights of my life when I got a chance to share the stage with Luther Allison, when I was just getting--learning how to play the guitar and he invited me up. This was taken at the Soup Kitchen Saloon in Detroit. And, he invited me to play guitar with him. And, you see I have a big smile on my face because I'm having a ball. Speaker 2: Affirmative Action and in it I used the point to write about, and this picture notes students who came through the Journalism Institute Program for Minorities at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan]. And, the are--these are all students that now have jobs at that time, had jobs as working journalists. I think, all of these were at the Detroit News. And, there's Daryl--without taking it in order, Darrell Dawsey, Greg Bowens, Ruby [L.] Bailey, Aaron Heights [ph.], Howard Darren Nichols [ph.], Kim Trent, and Marcus Franklin [ph.]. And, each of them became professional journalists as a result of that program which was targeted at attracting and opening doors of opportunities for minorities to become journalists. Speaker 1: Article that ran in February of 2007 when I was playing in the Ferndale Blues Festival [Ferndale, Michigan]. And, they did a profile of me as a blues musician here in the local area. And, the picture is of me on the guitar doing my thing. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This was an article that was published in January of 1995. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-five [1995] and it says, "Detroit News's Keith elected to the Journalist Hall of Fame." This was the announcement of my induction--election into the Michigan Journalism Hall of Fame for a lot of things I have done over my career. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: This was a going away, or going out of business gift, if you will, from my staff at the Detroit News Business Department. After I was promoted to assistant managing editor and I left the Business Department where I was business editor for three years. And, this is going out of business and they had some fun with me including pictures of me at various points of my life, with vary--with my hair in various styles. And, get a lot of (laughter) chuckles out of that when I look at it now (laughter). Speaker 2: Erin was fifteen years old at the time this picture was taken. She's a tenth grader in high school. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. That's your daughter? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself with my wife and my daughter. I think my daughter is about maybe eight or nine years old in that picture. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And, what's your wife's name? Speaker 2: Jacqueline. Speaker 1: A picture of myself with my wife in 2006 in Memphis, Tennessee where my band played in the International Blues Challenge and that is at one of the clubs that we played in. We're having a good time. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. This is my wife, Jacqueline and myself on our wedding day which was September 17, 1988...