 Story_ID: 18351 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers. The videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Dr. Maulana Karenga [born Ronald McKinley Everett]. Maulana, M-A-U-L-A-N-A, Karenga, K-A-R-E-N-G-A. Speaker 1: And can you give us some information about your name? Speaker 2: Yes, well, my name evolved during the Movement days. It means, the first name means, Maulana--actually, my whole name is Dr. Maulana Ndabezitha Karenga. Maulana is Swahili for "master teacher." Ndabezitha means "constant concern to the enemy." And Karenga means keeper of the tradition. And these are kind of goals as well as sub-definitions of myself, evolved during the '60s [1960s]. People used to say, Maulana, you're a master teacher. So that became my first name. Then people were saying, I'm radical and aggressive and that the established order is gonna try to put me down. And they're following me and watching me. So then out of that came the Zulu word, Ndabezetha, the praise name of Shaka [Zulu], constant concern to the enemy. And then Karenga, I chose as a vocation to keep the tradition of African, to recover it, reconstruct it and use to speak our special culture truth to the world and to create a framework by which we could make our own unique contribution to the forward flow of human history. So that's how those three names. And Ndabezitha is N-D-A-B-E-Z-I-T-H-A. Speaker 1: Can you give us your birth date and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 14, 1941, Parsonsburg, Maryland, a little small town on the eastern shore, but I take pride and sense in that because Harriet Tubman, Frederick Douglass, Gloria [St. Clair] Richardson, they all came from the eastern shore in Maryland. Speaker 1: Can you give us your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a university professor. I'm an activist scholar, okay. I organize. I chair an organization called [The Organization] Us, which means "just us", the African people and was chosen to stress the community and focus of our organization. I'm also executive director of the African American Culture Center, and I'm professor of the Department of Black Studies at California State University [Long Beach, California], where I've just finished a thirteen-year term as chair of the department. Speaker 1: And can you tell us today's date? Speaker 2: Yes, today's date is November the 18, (laughter) 2002, okay, or, or 6,432 in Egyptian calendar. Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in--some sound like a psych question (laughter). We're in Los Angeles, California at the African American Culture Center. Story_ID: 18352 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite food. Okay, I don't, I don't have a favorite. I mean I like different kinds of food. You ask me that, I like African food, East Indian food, Chinese food, Mexican food, I mean I don't have a favorite food. I, I never thought to have a favorite food. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black, red and green (laughter). Those are my three favorite colors, black, red and green. Black for black people, red for struggle, and green for the future and promise that come from the struggle. Those are, are my colors not only because of the honor that Marcus Garvey them to, but because it speaks to what I'm all about too. First, for the people, then for the struggle for the people, and then for the future and the promise that comes from that struggle. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No, because every day is a good day to struggle, okay. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, no, no cause every, (laughter) every day is a good day. It's a good day--as the ancients say, "To struggle to bring good into the world and not let any good be lost." So I don't, I don't think like that. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I haven't thought to think that. But if I wanted to say, you know, how could I sum up what I've done, and, you know, I would, I would teach that it's a good day to struggle and that we must remember the teachers of the Odu Ifa, that we are all divinely chosen to bring good into the world and not let any good be lost. Story_ID: 18353 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your origins and your family background. Are there any traditions in your family about where your family came from and what they were doing during the nineteenth century or, you know? Speaker 2: Well, my, my, on my paternal side, my paternal side, my grandfather was in the holocaust of enslavement. So they grew up in enslavement, okay. My mother's people were what they called freed Africans or free Africans. So they grew up outside of that context. So those are the two traditions I come from, the tradition of the holocaust of enslavement and the tradition of free Africans in this country. "Free" in quotation marks, of course, because as long as the system of enslavement and racism existed, everybody was vulnerable, of course. Speaker 1: What part of the country did they come from? Were they both from eastern shore, Maryland? Speaker 2: No, they both were from North Carolina, and they moved up to Maryland, through Virginia. They went first from North Carolina to Virginia, and then they came to Maryland. And it was in Maryland that I was born and many of my brothers and sisters. Speaker 1: Now, can you give us the names of your parents and their birthdates and places of birth? Speaker 2: No, I can't. Records were difficult there. I mean we use approximation, and I can give you the name of my mother and father. My father is the Reverend Levi Everett and my mother is Ms. Addie Melton Everett. Speaker 1: Can you spell their names for us? Speaker 2: Levi, L-E-V-I, and Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T and Addie, A-D-D-I-E and Melton, M-E-L-T-O-N and last name, of course, Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T. Speaker 1: Now, can you give us an approximate date of birth? Can you approximate it? Speaker 2: I'd rather not hazard a guess, okay. Speaker 1: Okay, do you, did your mother and father have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Yes. My father was a young minister, and he met my mother and actually, and built a house for her, and then asked her to marry him. They were married, but they found out--found out they were kind of young, and so they then went back and stayed with my paternal grandmother. And she raised them and taught my mother how to be an African woman in the world. And so, that is how they did it. But it was, it was a very beautiful story because, you know, they used to court then. And so he went and made his case and convinced her that this would be a good life to live. And then he built his own house. And his mother and father were very proud of him for doing that. My grandfather was very assertive. He had come from the holocaust of enslavement and therefore, he was very race conscious. He was resistant to white domination. He was active, and worked hard for his family. So he was glad that my father was showing responsibility at a very young age. And so he praised him for that and helped him to establish himself. And my grandmother, my paternal grandmother did likewise. Speaker 1: Now, your grandfather, your paternal grandfather, was he--you said, he was active. Can you think of any organization he was a part of? I don't know he was--was he a member of--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: He was a member of a farmers' association down there. He owned and, and he farmed. And he bought the [Farmers'] Almanac on a regular basis and read and shared it with people in there, people who couldn't read and write and also people who were literate as he was. And so they actually organized and pooled their resources to buy their land, to cultivate and harvest their products and to sell them on the market. So I heard a lot about that. Story_ID: 18354 Speaker 1: I should say that I'm not used to talking about my family life because for a long time, you know, I mean I mainly talked political. So this is like different for me, I mean to do this. So I have to try to remember these things. And if I knew you were, were to ask me these, I would have reviewed them before I came. But I like, those are like personal things we bring up when we come to family reunions, which we go to--we have one every year. So we do that, but we don't--I'm not used to sharing these things. This is the first time I shared things like this. I've always said normal things like, you know, my grandfather and my grandmother, grand--mother and father, those kinds of things, but mainly, I talk about my life. I don't talk about their life. But, you know, as far as I can go with this, I will. I just want you to know, I don't want the people hearing this to know that that's my reservation. I grew up, in fact, forgetting some of these things because in, in the '60s [1960s], we used to imagine getting captured, of course, which we, some of us did. And we should not know anything that people could use against our family or against anybody around us. So a lot of the times, I wouldn't even say I had a family. You know, I wouldn't even talk as if I had a family. So that's what this is coming from. And I'm not used to this, so I'm better at talking politics and, and about social issues, critical issues like that. And certainly, I can talk about my own life, but about their lives, I'm not used to doing it. But, now, and so I'm gonna talk general, and some things I won't answer and some things I'm not going to remember. And I'm not trying to put you off or anything, it's just I'm not used to talking like that. Speaker 2: Well, the reason why I'm asking is the oral history. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I know, I know. And most people, that's what they talk about. But I usually talk political oral history rather than personal oral history. That's, that's the thing. I--in fact, I just did an oral history, about 300 pages for UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, California], and most of it is about what I did. I mean it's not about my mother [Addie Melton Everett] and what she thought and anything, although, I can. And I, I can do better with my mother and father [Levi Everett] than my grandmother and father because they were--they had passed when I was born. I'm the fourteenth child in the, in the, in the large family, the last child. I'm the seventh son. And I received a lot of care and attention because people had seen me as a kind of wonder, and sort of like signs, if you're the seventh son, fourteenth child, born in the seventh month, on the second seventh in the month. And so both my family and my neighbors and the elder people, especially, they saw this as some kind of good omen and that they always stressed that I would do something of value for the people. They'd say--they used to say for the race, that's what they used to say. They would call race, people. So they would talk for the race. And so that kind of commitment was like cultivated in me for a long time. And so, that's how I thought. I thought collectively, and so a lot of times I never talked about my life except in political terms. And so that's a, that's a great challenge for me to do that. I, I don't--but we'll, we can, we can do it. So, I just wanted to let you know that. So most of the time--and even, even in terms of being a young person, I spent most of my time with older people. I never played like everybody. I read or talked with them, sat around them or asked them questions. But I didn't do, what you'd call the normal child things. Story_ID: 18355 Speaker 1: Now, I'm just curious about, if you heard when you were coming up about any of the organizations like the UNIA [United Negro Improvement Association] or any of the people that were in your family were associated with the Masons or (simultaneous) Speaker 2: My father, my father [Levi Everett] has a Masonic background. And so he was into that and, in fact, he was a organizer because he was actually pastor at four churches at one time. And then, of course, things--the economy changed, and so he moved and became a farmer, a migrant farmer kind. In fact, I did migrant work myself. I, I was, did--most of my life, before I left home, we did farm--field work, okay. And so things had changed. And then they had gone through the Depression, great poverty. I heard the stories about that. And then Pop mentioned Marcus Garvey, and also other people who had race consciousness, Benjamin [Elijah] Mays. He mentioned him. Certainly, he was an important figure as an educator and also as a spiritual leader. I mean people saw him both as educator and spiritual leader. So, certainly he was. And then my, my principal, Mr. Chipman, was very much concerned with us knowing black history. And so I learned a lot there. And then we talked it at home, and my mother [Addie Melton Everett] and father reaffirmed it. Pop also liked Jack Johnson, and he used to tell me how Jack Johnson would knock white people out. He could count the, he could count the round he was gonna knock him out, you know. So when I saw Muhammad Ali doing that, I saw that as a duplication, okay, and I thought what my father would think if he were living and had seen Muhammad Ali. Speaker 1: Well, we usually spend a half hour talking about, you know, background and that sort of thing. So I don't want you to think that we, you know, it's what we do with most everybody. Speaker 2: No, no, um-hum, yes. Speaker 1: We'll frequently ask you to spell, you know-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --because it's gonna be transcribed. Speaker 2: It's good enough. Speaker 1: But can you tell me then--now, I'm gonna ask you about your mother too, but can you give me an idea, like, as much as you want to, what kind of a person was your father and what denomination was he? Speaker 2: Baptist. And my father was a, a strong person, a strong disciplinarian, very intellectual. You couldn't just say things to him. You know, you had to reason and you'd have to bring argumentation. So what I've gained in terms of that, I've gained from him and from my brother, Chestyn [Everett], but it started with my father who would question, you know, and constantly question. So I got from him this sense of the power of the intellect, and the power of reasoning and the power of, of knowing, of knowledge. There was nothing like knowledge. And my mother also stressed that and--but more as a possession that people couldn't take from you because black people were always vulnerable. And they would always say, this, they can't take you from you. Learn this, and so I got from my mother a sense of compassion, caring for others and being considerate. My mother, my mother and father gave me two balances, that is to say, on one hand you have this strict, almost strict concern with the rational and then with my mother, the strict concern with more sensitivity toward others. And so I was always struggling with those things because sometimes they seemed like they would clash. I mean later on, of course, in life, I understood the need of the balance, studying ancient Egyptian culture and other African cultures where say, for example, in ancient Egypt, the Ib is both heart and mind, and that you must balance them in order to have a disciplined and successful life. That was very important. In fact, there's a, there's a text in the [The Admonitions of] Ipuwer that says, "One who can master"--pardon me, "One who can discipline the heart and mind has the equivalence of all the teachings." So I'm thinking that if I could master what my father taught and my mother taught and bring those into a beautiful centeredness, I mean I would have the equivalence of all their teaching. So I, I learned from that. I also learned race consciousness from my father, who was what people called "a race man" and who believed that black people had to stick together, had to build their own community and had to, in fact, resist whites' attempt to deny them digni-dignity and a decent life and the rights that other humans had. My mother taught caution all the time because as a mother who needed to sustain us and to send us out into a hostile world, she was always cautioning my father about not telling me too much that would make me angry or would make me careless and bring harm on myself prematurely. And so, even Pop, when Pop would talk about the holocaust of enslavement, he would try to put it in such a way where it would cause a deep respect for the loss and for the tragedy of the holocaust, but he would do it in such a way that would provoke anger, although, when I'm hearing it, I'm, I'm angry, okay. And then my mother would always--sometimes even say, let's not talk about it because it's too painful. It was too painful. And even though her family were free, nevertheless, her identification and love of Pop and her love of his family, and especially, his mother who raised her honestly, made her feel it was just too painful sometimes to talk. And, you know, most people do that who've been in oppression. It's very difficult for them to share it with their children. Speaker 1: Are there any specific stories that you still remember that your father told you about slavery? Speaker 2: No, he just was talking about how--I mean, I wouldn't say particular stories, but it was in general. Speaker 1: That deal with a specific person in your family or--? Speaker 2: Just my father, my grandfather, my grandfather and his resistance to being broken, that he would not be broken in spite of what the European enslaver tried to do to him, that he constantly resisted. And in his heart, he was always free. And so they taught me that. You know, a lot of times you can't speak out, but you owe it to yourself to be free. You might can't act to a certain time, but you must always be free. And so, and they argued that knowledge, knowledge and moral grounding, that you had to have knowledge and you had to have moral grounding; otherwise, you would either be quickly defeated or you would be deformed like the person who was oppressing you. And so the lesson here was that our oppressor cannot be our teacher, that we must speak our own special cultural and moral truth and act according to the best of what it means to be African and human in the fullest sense. Of course, they didn't use the word African then. They said black, the best of the race, the best of what it means to be human. Story_ID: 18356 Speaker 1: Could you tell us about your mother [Addie Melton Everett]? What kind of person was she and what did she do? Speaker 2: My mother was a, a farm worker and a domestic. My father [Levi Everett], as I said, was a preacher and a farm worker. And a very gentle, very kind, very loving--whatever, whatever moral sensitivity I have, whatever conscious I have, whatever caring and considerateness I have, comes from her and, of course, my sisters who I grew up with because most of my brothers--in fact, all of them, except one, and he left soon, were, left the house, well, had gone and gotten married. And so I'm--my being the last child, I'm after three girls. And so I grew up with them. And so being sensitive to them and seeing how they felt was very important to me in how I understood the world, okay. And especially, my immediate sister, Mary [Everett Watson]. I had three sisters that were home with me, Unice [Everett Leonard], which was the oldest, U-N-I-C-E, Shirley [Everett Armstrong], which is obviously, S-H-I-R-L-E-Y, and Mary, M-A-R-Y. And Mary went before me. I will always tell this because it's very important because in a day where you have sibling rivalry, I mean we didn't have this kind of thing. So, but Mary, she was very, very intelligent. I mean made A's all the time, so she like, paved the path for me. So sometimes, I mean I would get lax. Everybody expected our family, which was the Everett family, they used to say we were smart. So they--there was a burden on me when I'd come in that I need to do that, that not only because of this kind of legendary understanding of what I'm supposed to do by the old folks, but this whole idea that this family is a smart family. So I'm coming behind her. And when I come behind her, people expect me to perform. So sometimes, I mean--because things came easy to me, I wouldn't study as much. And so, particularly, I'm thinking about my Latin class. I took Latin--we didn't have but one foreign language in the black school at that time. And just before I left to come to California, we had a French teacher, and I took that. And so I learned that too, but we had Latin, and I used to like it. I used to like to read the language. I'm very much into languages, and read eight now. But I would, would not take my book home because I was far ahead of the other students for the most part. And so, when I would come back, sometimes I'd make a mistake, unnecessary mistakes, where if I just reviewed, I would. And so my teacher would say to me, you know, she called me by my European name [Ronald McKinley Everett], and say, you know, "What, what are you saying that? Does that make sense to you?" Then she would say, "Now, your sister, she was always ready." Now, I know that would make people mad and, but it didn't. I felt ashamed because I wanted to honor her as she had honored me. And so we were always mutually supportive. My mother taught us that, that we must, in fact, do things collectively and that we rise together or fall apart. And so I think those were very good lessons for me and my, for me, from my mother. My mother was very religious too. I mean she--I, I would sit down. She would come home tired, and I would two readings for her. One, I would read the newspaper for her so she could know what was going on. She would like--she could read, but she liked for me to read because she had glasses, and it was just comfortable for her to do it. Plus, it gave me a chance to practice, you know, and I was a young person--I started early about when I was in, in grade school. I used to read for mother, and I read until I left for her. And, it was just a joy for me, for her to come home, sit down, relax and say, you know, "Would like to read the paper for me?" "Yes, I would." I'd--sometimes I'd come and tell her, "Do you want me to read the paper?" But I would also read the Bible for her. She was very much into Christianity, a very serious Christian. Of course, a lot of that has to do with, of course, black people from the South are usually very, very, very religious people because they're closer to African culture, and as I later discovered, I mean that's one of the fundamental and defining features of African culture, is deep, profound spirituality and moral grounding, I mean. So I, I saw that. I mean I didn't see that. Now, I've learned that since then. So those things I remember. I remember also walking with my mother and father through the woods. We would do that sometimes Saturday or Sunday afternoon, and, and they're identifying plants and trees and talking about how they used to be taught in a similar way by their mother and father. I used to like to plant flowers with my mother and help her in the garden. She liked gardens. And so I remember those things. I remember walking for long walks, just not going anywhere; going down the road and coming back. We lived in, in the farm area, and there was woods to one side and fields to another. And we would walk and talk about the fields. And I also remember my mother and father staying up late at night and my listening to them talking about how things were at their best and how large the crops were, how nice they grew and how people helped each other. And not--they weren't mourning about this. They were just talking about it, as it was a beautiful thing and wanting to share that. And memories of, kind of recalling memories and re-enforcing them, but because I used to listen to them, I stayed up and listened to them, I would hear them talk about that. Story_ID: 18357 Speaker 1: So are there any other sights and sounds and smells that you remember from growing up and farming, and--? Speaker 2: Oh, there's a lot, I mean there's a lot. I mean there's a joy of planting and smelling the earth turn over, and seeing the birds come and get the worms, and anything else that might be turned up when the tractor or the plow turned them up. There's the smell of watermelons when the field is finished and they--the owner lets us go into the field and bust the watermelons and take the heart out. And there's nothing, because the season is over and you can have as many as you want. I mean there's the smell of early morning flowers and dew on, on things. And there's the coldness also of winter and the wind is howling and sometimes the windshield is broken. We paste it over with paper or cloth, and there's the time of sitting by the fire and roasting nuts or doing some popcorn. Sometimes Pop [Levi Everett] and Mom [Addie Melton Everett] would be, we called it shucking corn, and that is tearing the, the sheath off the corn and, and leaving the corn for feed for animals. And sometimes they would have popcorn among those. And Mom and Pop would bring those in, and we take those and pop popcorn. There's times of cleaning up the house, having like a spring cleaning, and everybody take a room or a part and do that and see what you can do. Flowers everywhere; you go and get your flowers and bring them and make your room smell nice. Story_ID: 18358 Speaker 1: I sort of liked the smell of the woods, pine. You know, it's a lot of pine trees in Maryland. I used to like that. I liked the smell of, of the earth with fresh rain. And I liked the feel of rain. We used to run in the rain. And one of the most beautiful times for me is when the crops would grow, and my sisters and I would go into the cornfield. They would be tall, and we would go in there, roll up brown paper and smoke it and do what we called, "talk politics," you know. Talking politics meant talking serious. Now, we were just young people and, you know, politics, that was talking serious. But we, I mean the paper didn't smoke and anything, but we was imitating the adults and, you know--I never smoked by the way. It never, none of us ever smoked, but we were imitating the grown-ups in doing it, and it was just some good time to lose ourselves in the wonder of all this greenness and growth and nice smell and to sometimes lay up, as all children must do, lay up and look at the sky and find patterns and meanings in, in the clouds. Also, even though sometimes it was frightening for us as young people, the whole question of hurricane season. I mean hurricane season was challenging to get ready for it, to sit down. And Mom [Addie Melton Everett] and Pop [Levi Everett], of course, very religious, they believed that that was a time when the Lord was doing his work. So we need to sit quiet and be reverent. You never know, you know. So we would sit there and wait, but we really wanted to go out. We wanted to see the things being knocked around and roofs being pulled off, tree always ripped, the branches being taken. So I mean, it was like an exciting time. At the same time, it was a little frightening to it, and then we'd go out, and we'd clean up afterwards, you know, those kind of things were good. I liked summer and, and spring, I guess, most. Winter was terrible sometimes because it was very cold, and, of course, we burned wood when I was at home; not until last, when we finally got a house that was, had what we called 'lectric. We called it electricity now, but, you know, we talked Ebonics and it was 'lectric. And I got electric (laughter) and we then got gas. We had gas a long time before electric, but we, we got gas. And so it was better. But for a long time, we used to cut wood. One of the ways that we used to cut wood is whoever lost the checker game would go and get the wood, mainly, the men. The women never went and got the wood, but my brother and my father and me. We would play, and we would play for checkers and see who would go. We had this game, I know--I don't know if other blacks or how many other people played, but this was a black game called "Give Away", you know, you just give away your checkers. Instead of trying to get people's checkers, you try to give away. That sound like a black game, doesn't it (laughter)? Take something and try to give it away. So we, we gave away (laughter) the checkers and you got--I got very good at that, and, you know--but sometimes, you know, you would just lose because if somebody else lost too much, Mom required that you lose and get up and go, even if you could win. Or if you won, get up anyhow and go so that we could share the wins. So those were very good times. And I, even though we didn't have a lot of material things, we were rich in love and in care and in relationship. And we felt grounded. I never, ever felt inferior. I've never felt anyone superior to me. I certainly never thought the European was superior to me. In fact, we felt morally superior to the European in many ways because he seemed crude. I mean, and it wasn't until I got here to California that I saw a different kind of European. I used to think all Europeans had some serious mental problems. And we used to say, you know, they may kill you or they might do anything because they seemed so mean. And then we would hear stories. Even though we lived in Maryland, you know, that was like a border state. And it nevertheless had a segregation system, a separate segregation system. We, we used to think that these people, these people are like monsters because we would hear how they would lynch people, burn people. And so Mom was always cautioning us, you know. And they would these--some of these people, they would call them "rebbies," rebbies from rebel, from the South. And you have to watch them rednecks, you know, you have to watch them, be careful, always given instruction, and you have to go, you know, get out their way, stay out their way. Sometimes we would walk, we'd have to walk sometimes five miles to the bus stop from where we lived. And sometimes the Europeans would drive by and try to run over us or splash water on us after a rain, for no reason at all. So when I come out here, my idea about them is kind of, you know, like rough. So when I heard nationalism, I mean certainly this sounds very real. I mean we didn't have any nationalist movement where I lived, but by the time I got out here and heard the Muslims and the Harlem Nationalists, I mean, hey, you know, that resounded, you know. So I think--and resonated. Story_ID: 18359 Speaker 1: So it was good to come out here because what happened is that, I was leaving, coming out here. I always wanted to come to UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, California] because I had come here in '52 [1952] to go to school, to go to James [A.] Foshay [Middle School], a junior high. I stayed here one year with my brother who lived out here. But I always wanted to come back and go to school. So when I finished school in York, Pennsylvania, I finished high school in York, Pennsylvania. The majority of my schooling was in Salisbury High [School], Salisbury Elementary [School], Salisbury High. There used to be one school. You do the elementary and the high school all in the same-- Speaker 2: Now, this is in Maryland? Speaker 1: In Maryland, Salisbury, Maryland. Then finally, we got a larger school. And so we moved to a very modern, new school. It was very nice. But anyhow, I left, and I came to Pennsylvania, in York, Pennsylvania. And I finished high school there in '58 [1958]. And then I spent a summer working in Ocean City, Maryland to get money to come out here and go to school. But I still didn't have enough money, so I, I went to [Los Angeles] City College to establish residence. There, you could--and I think it must have been $7.00 or something like that, just to go to City College. California used to be known for an excellent education that was relatively inexpensive. So was New York once upon a time. Speaker 2: Let me backtrack maybe a little bit in high school and just, high school and grade school for this question, but are there any particular teachers or students or people in the community that served as mentor or models for you? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, certainly. I mean that's, that, I mean that's why I have such a strong concept. Sometimes people think it's arrogant, but it's really a strong concept because, you know, everybody I talked to gave me reinforcement. I mean my grade school teachers, my junior high teachers, my high school teachers, all of them. And I can name some. In fact, I was just recently back to Salisbury, and the mayor came out. The head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League and other community leaders came out and honored me for my achievements for African people. And some of the teachers that came were Ms. Martin, Ms. Watson, Ms. Cleo Watson. Ms. Brown had passed. She was my Latin teacher. I really liked her, I mean, I liked all of them, but she was good because she would challenge me. She wouldn't let me get away being intellectually lax, you know, cause we were reading the [Julius] Caesar and the Gallic campaigns, and I liked that, I mean it was like war and struggle and all that, I mean. And she would tell us, you know, "Be ready, and be ready to talk," but sometimes I, like I told you, I wouldn't take my book home. So I'm reading while other people are studying. Then if she call on me first, I'm trouble, you see. So, but she challenged me, and hopefully, I got out of that, and I, I began to do my homework. And I did it, as, as again, because the social obligation I felt for my family to maintain respect for my family's name. And that was a lesson for me, that I could do more for others than I could for myself; that it was important for me always to be doing something for others, and then I could do an extraordinary amount of things. So anyhow, I also liked my history teacher, Ms. Waller--Mr. Waller, rather, who taught us a lot about African history and, and about world history. And I, I really liked him. That's when I first heard about the Muslims, the Ottoman Empire, the Crusades, Saladin. I, I really liked Saladin. I still like Saladin as a major man who, you know, defeated the Christians, you know, took back his land, and, you know, was ready to actually go. And even though I'm a Christian, I'm identifying with him because I see him as a person of color, you see what I mean. I, I didn't even know about Islam as a practice religious except as an intellectual concept cause I'm in school. And the whole world looks Christian, you know, at least the farm is in Maryland and the United States. Everywhere you turn on television or the radio, the people are talking Christianity so I didn't even know there's other faiths. And even though some of my, my--a friend of mine works for a Jewish family, I, I didn't even see that as a major religion. I don't even know, honesty, that Christianity comes from Judaism. So I--they didn't even tell you anything. They just--it's Christianity and it's the dominant religion. But little by little, I'm gonna get out of that, you know, and I'm going to begin to explore and see that there's a rest of the world. But it's my training, my education in high school that makes me ready for that. And again, I say I liked Mr. Wilson, was our music teacher, and taught us that our music was classical, and, you know, he taught European classical music, but he also taught African music there. And it was classical music. I mean that we should appreciate it as the finest music in the world. Speaker 2: By African music, are you talking about continental African music or--(simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Black music here, African American. Yeah, it was African American. They were referred to continental African music, but it mainly was talking about African American music. Speaker 2: And in those days, you're talking maybe jazz or bebop or something like that? Speaker 1: Oh, the full range, spirituals, gospel, jazz, bebop, swing, rhythm and blues. Now, rhythm and blues, they saw, saw that like popular, you know. The classic was always like jazz or spirituals. Spirituals were like, you know, they had both a spiritual meaning as well as a culture meaning for us. So that's what--that's how he taught it. He structured it like that. Ms. Martin was my English teacher. I just liked her. I thought she was smooth, dressed real nice, very refined. I, I was very impressed with how she presented herself as a teacher. My algebra teacher, Ms. Watson, I liked her cause she was sharp. I mean she just--she was into math. She knew it; I appreciated it. I liked our principal, Mr. Chipman, too. He was an inspiration to all of us. He would give nice, short, pithy lectures on the glories of the race and our responsibility to ourselves, our people and to the world. I, I used to like that. I mean he would always give us an expanded vision. And I used to like assembly. I used to like to leave the classroom, and when we would assembly, he would just like--I mean he would just make us soar, and that we--we saw a sense of possibility. And like I think--oh, yes, I can--. Speaker 2: No, I just wanted to ask you, this is a black school, right? Speaker 1: Yes, Salisbury High. Speaker 2: Right, and I'm doing this because I assume it is, but somebody watching in the future may not even have an idea. Speaker 1: Oh, no, this is, this is black--see, this, this is another reason I'm, I eventually--I mean I didn't have to become a nationalist, but this is one of the reasons I came because I already had a grounding in my culture, but I didn't know how to interpret it, you know, in a more expansive way the way I would when I get a Pan-Africanist consciousness and begin to go back to the continent, not just to know Harriet Tubman, but Ya Asantewa, not just Sojourner Truth, but Hatshepsut, you know, like, going like that. And not just [Marcus] Garvey and [W.E.B.] DuBois, but also [Kwame] Nkrumah and [Ahmed Sekou] Toure; not just Mary McLeod Bethune and Anna Julia Cooper, but also other African women who were--Madame [Jeanne Martin] Cisse, and later on, of course, Winnie Mandela and other people who were instrumental in our liberation struggle. So it was very important, and, and I thought for a while--I was just thinking about the development of this and how at City College, I began to make this leap. But it took time for me to do it. Speaker 2: How do you spell your principal of the school that you (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Chipman, C-H-I-P-M-A-N, Mr. Chipman, okay. And I--in, in '58 [1958] I left and went to stay with my brother in York, Pennsylvania. In York, I finished high school there. Speaker 2: Was that an all-black school, as well? Speaker 1: Oh, it's all white--predominantly white. But blacks--(simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: That was changing all of a sudden. Speaker 1: Extremely, extremely. Story_ID: 18360 Speaker 1: Before, before I came out in California, there was only two type people we knew, and that was black and white. Then just as I was leaving, the Puerto Ricans came, and that was real good because they were both African and Latino, you know, and so they were like, people felt, you know, liked welcomed them, felt warm toward them, welcomed them. Some people, you know, felt like they were different, but the majority of the people embraced them and began to relate strongly to them. And that's also when I, first time I got interested in speaking Spanish is when I saw them and I went to talk to them as other black people who spoke a different language. I mean I was fascinated by that, but, of course, as I told you, we didn't have but one language, Latin. And then as I was leaving, the last year before I left, we had French. So when I got out here, I started doing independent study in Spanish, and I learned that, and I was able to master that. But it was very good to see another kind of people. And so when I came out here in '52 [1952], I mean it was just like the UN [United Nations], I mean it was like a whole world out here, Africans, Native Americans, Asians, Latinos and, of course, Europeans, but it was just good to see that many type people. Speaker 2: Now, you came out to California in '52? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Now, how old are you about this time? Speaker 1: Eleven. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Eleven, I was eleven. I was born in '41 [1941], so I came out here, and I was eleven, but I had, I was--again, because people saw our family as kind of, what they called smart or intelligent, I skipped a grade. I, I--and I did it for two reasons. One, I could do it and the intellectually I could do it sustained me, but second, the family--I couldn't, I was too young to work, and the family needed to work. There was no such thing as child care unless somebody wasn't working and most of the people were working. So that also played into it as I needed to go to school early. At first they kind of told me I couldn't do it, but one of the teachers there was able to arrange it for me. So I went, I went to school at five. And then, so when I came out here, even though I was in the sixth grade and should have been twelve, I was eleven. And again, I stayed here one year, and then I went back to Salisbury in Maryland, and I finished school. I, I, I went to--'58 [1958], and then I went to York [Pennsylvania], and I finished school in York. Speaker 2: And that's about 1958 or '59 [1959]? Speaker 1: Fifty-eight. I finished school in '58 [1958]. I was sixteen then. Story_ID: 18361 Speaker 1: Now, what--at that time the country, I mean in terms of our history in this country, the country was just focused on the events of Montgomery, Alabama, and did you follow that in the news, and what did your family and what did you think about what was going on in Montgomery? Speaker 2: Oh, I wasn't just hearing about Montgomery, but by that time, things were happening in Maryland too. And by, and a few years later, you know, I mean one of them major struggles was in Cambridge [Massachusetts] with Gloria [St. Clair] Richardson, so I'm very much into it. There's some activity already, but when I come out here, I, I don't, I don't do anything much until I come back here because I'm working in the summer at Ocean City. It's a resort in Maryland, which is thirty miles from where I lived in Parsonsburg [Maryland]. And I get my money there, and then I come to California. And then here I, I join a lot of causes. I mean I start with--of course, the Civil Rights Movement. We invite students, we invite and support and help raise money for civil rights workers who tour the West and the North and the Northeast, Northwest. So that's the first thing. And the second thing is, I join the peace movement, SANE, [Committee] for a Sane Nuclear Policy, the movement. And I joined also the anti-capital punishment movement. So I'm very active on campus, and, in fact, I start doing a lot of politics on campus, and I become the first black pres--vice president and finally the first--next year, I became the first black president of the school. And I did it by organizing--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: No, this is L.A. [Los Angeles] City College. I'm sorry. I leave, as I said earlier, I come out here. I wanted to go to UCLA, but I don't have the money. I have to establish residence. So I go to LACC, and I go there for two years to establish residence. It's very inexpensive and at the same time, it gives me a chance to learn the climate of this state, this new state. I mean I'm in an integrated environment. I'm used to segregation. So I'm getting used to this integrated environment, and so I like, I like going to college. I mean I like the intellectual atmosphere. We form a nice, little small group that is radical and really intellectually inclined. We read all the European greats, Bertram Russell, his critique of Christianity, it rings in my mind, read [Georg Wilhelm Friedrich] Hegel, you know, [Johann Wolfgang von] Goethe. We, we, we were into it deep. And, but, you know, that same thing alienates me from European culture because I'm enmeshed in it, and enmeshed in it, I'm asking [Marcus] Garvey's question "Where's our literature?" Okay. So--and it's real funny because the group we're in, it's--we organized around--they had coffee houses then. And our coffee house was named Pogo Swamp, and the brother who was over it named Levi Kingston. And Levi used to pull us all together, you know, all-we're all nations. We'd go there, and we'd talk about how the world should be, and how we should be. And we would work in these, these causes; the civil rights cause, the peace cause, the anti-capital punishment cause. And we had radicals, Marxists, Socialists, Democratic Socialists, Fabian Social--we had different kind of radicals in, in this group. And finally though, I'm, I'm thinking, I'm sitting there, I'm talking, and I'm talking about everybody's culture except my own. And as an intellectual, I can't sustain this. I mean where's the black man's voice. So I began to study other cultures. I first studied the Asian culture because I'm not even aware there's African text, with something like the Odu [Ifa] or even ancient Egyptian text that I collected and put in the--a text called The Husia, I, I'm not even familiar with that, you see. So I have to, I have to first break and have a rupture with Europe by studying another culture that's available, and Asian culture becomes available. I had actually started this in high school when I started reading 'The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayam.' My brother introduced me. My brother, Matthew [Everett], was very, I met--two brothers were influential in, in my life, Matthew was a carpenter and merchantman, seaman, and Chestym [Everett], who was a professor, university professor, grade school teacher, Shakespearian actor, I mean just a brilliant man, I mean extremely intelligent. And, in fact, when I came out here, I sharpened my, my skills that I'd begun with. My father [Levi Everett], I, I sharpened them with him because he was like merciless. You could not just say anything, you know, like, for example, when I first became a Nationalist and I was trying to talk to him and explain the concept, he would not let you just say it. You had to sharpen it. So if I give you long answers now, it's because I, I learned how to do that struggling with him. But it was a good one. You know, we were very close, very close. And so when I came out here I was, I'm, I'm, I'm reading this literature. I had started reading it in York [Pennsylvania]. I used to go to the public library there, and I would read (unclear) and Omar Khayam, and my brother would tell me these things. He also liked other things too, like [W.] Somerset Maugham and a lot of other people he used to tell me about. This is Matt, Matt, his name is Matthew, but we called him Matt. And then Chestyn is C-H-E-S-T-Y-N. It is a different name. But anyhow, I came out here, and when I came out here, I became alienated from European culture because I was tired of just discussing Europe and just reading what we called, one long, self-congratulatory narrative about Europe, in the classroom, in the Pogo Swamp, we were talking Europe. Speaker 1: And it was actually named Pogo (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: Pogo Swamp. Speaker 1: After Pogo the cartoon character (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, Pogo Swamp. Yeah, and you just get your coffee and sit on the side, get in the group and talk philosophy. We used to talk philosophy and social issues. That's all we would do. Sometimes people would dance, but most of the time, we, we would sit there and talk, you know, and go through the male, female exchanges, but mostly we would talk intellectual things. Story_ID: 18362 Speaker 1: And after a while, I mean I just, I started becoming a Nationalist. And it's a stage here because first, I do the rupture with Europe. I don't want to congratulate Europe anymore. I want to ask, "Who else participated in the construction of the world and the world history?" So it's clear, the Asians, but then it's interesting because as Africa is struggling, there is this interest that's a turn-back to first, African American history to see what is in there. There's [W.E.B.] DuBois and DuBois is a Pan Africanist. There's [Marcus] Garvey, and Garvey is a Pan Africanist. And actually, as I'm on my way to Garvey, I find him in [Kwame] Nkrumah, and Nkrumah has this quote from Garvey that says, "I ask where is the black man's king and his kingdom; his army and his navy, his men and women of big affairs. I could not find them, and I declared I would help make them." Okay, so this is a very important point for me. It's a turning point for me. So I should find these, and I should help make them, okay. These institutions, these ideas, what other, what are the processes I can engage in to, in fact, build a foundation and framework to improve and enrich African life in the world. So again that we could speak our special culture truth and make our own unique contribution to the flow of human history. And I, as an intellectual, I need to come to the table, you know, talking to other people, not naked and in need, but fully clothed in my own culture so that if somebody has a point to make, whether it's about how to create a just and good society, what is the proper relationship between men and women; how do we, in fact, honor our obligation to each other in the world; how do we treat the environment; what is our position on capital punishment? I need to know it from an African point of view. This is the beginning of my transformation because I need, as an intellectual, I need to have my own answer. I need a culturally specific answer. And so I dedicated--from that point on, I dedicated my life to creating the kinds of institutions I have subsequently been able to create and the kind of philosophy, Kawaida that I constructed to answer these questions. Speaker 2: Now, what figures--were there any figures here in Los Angeles [California] at that time that were--or anywhere else, I guess, that were key in your intellectual development in terms of focusing on Africa. I know, I think, what comes to mind--he may not be a factor, but Mr. [Alfred] Ligon was here, had the Aquarian--did he have Aquarian bookstore (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: No, Dr. Ligon wasn't into African. He was into gnosticism. He didn't link with African, no, he didn't link with Africans. No, there was no one here that I related to on the point of African. I, I did much of my study in books in intellectual exercises so that the people that shaped my thinking on it were, certainly, Garvey, DuBois, to a lesser extent, Sekou Toure. I'm very impressed with Sekou Toure's 1958 book 'Toward Full Re-Africanization.' That's a turning point. That, that's a seminal source for me. The whole conception that we must recon--what he called "reconvert" ourselves, you see. It was a very important conversation for me. And then (unclear), in junior year. I--by here, now, because I believe I'm an African; I know I'm an African, I ask myself, why don't I speak an African language? I'm at [Los Angeles] City College, I ask this. Why don't, why don't I speak African lang--so I begin to learn. Now, I'm, of course, I can read four, but before I couldn't. I'm--and I'm a little bit angry about this. I tell my students sometimes this in class, you know, we're the only country in the world, the United States, the only country in the world to brag about knowing one language. You can go to Africa and you got to know four languages; Asia, you might know, you got to know four. Latin American, you got to know four; even in Europe, you got to know more than one. So what is this country talking about, just know one. I'm thinking, suppose my people didn't suffer the holocaust of enslavement. How many languages would I have started out with? And how much deeper an intellectual grasp of the world would I have had if I knew these languages? Story_ID: 18363 Speaker 1: Okay, as I was saying, I'm, I'm thinking about people that influenced how I thought. It's mainly in terms of the intellectual search I'd go on, the intellectual quest to grasp African culture. It dawned on me from reading these people--I also liked Aime Cesaire, his discourse, discourse on colonialism is every important. I read him both French and English, Sekou Toure, I read him in French and English, Julius [K.] Nyerere, I read him in Swahili and English. I, I really liked it. And I'm influenced by this. I'm influenced by the communitarian conversation that comes from both Toure and Nyerere. In a way, I mean--it doesn't mean other people weren't talking it, but Toure and Nyerere are talking a serious African communalism. And, of course, Nyerere has Ujamaa. And so it dawns on me, I should create some principles to introduce this communitarian value. So I construct this value system of seven principles, Nguzo Saba. And then I construct an institution that can house and advance these principles, and that institution is called Kwanzaa, okay. And, of course, as you know, there are over 28 million people throughout the world, African country--throughout the world African community on every continent in the world practice these holidays, I mean this holiday and these principles, and not just during Kwanzaa, but on different projects. For example, we held our thirty-fifth anniversary in 2000. And people from thirty-seven cities came, and they came to celebrate the thirty-fifth anniversary of our Organization Us and the seven principles. And they were from groups that economic cooperatives, religious caucuses, independent schools, rites of passage programs, educational retention and improvement programs, psychological treatment programs, male and female group programs, all of these people used The Seven Principles. In fact, I just came back from up north at a lecture where they have a public health program called The SevenPrinciples Project, that uses The Seven Principles. So these become fundamental ways Africans, orient themselves in terms of African values and give themselves culture grounding. Speaker 2: I want to backtrack a little bit. There's a couple, but it's one very important--a couple of important things I think in terms of the development of Kwanzaa and the development of Kawaida idea of thinking. And one is Kiswahili, and I wanted to ask you how you first, you know, began to learn Kiswahili, and who your teacher or teachers were, and I wanted to ask you about, you told--I heard from you a long time ago about your meeting Malcolm X here in Los Angeles [California] at one of his lectures, you know, and, you know, your relationship with him? Speaker 1: Okay, so that's another person in the '60s [1960s] that influenced me, as I'm going through this list of people. I also read [Lopold Sdar] Senghor. I'll talk to you about that in terms of his concept of all life is functional, collective and committed. And I just absorbed in my philosophy Kawaida as you know. But anyhow, Malcolm was the major African American thinker that influenced me in terms of Nationalism and Pan Africanism. And I, as you know, toward the end when Malcolm is expanding his concept of Islam and Nationalism, he stresses Pan Africanism in a particular way. And he argues that--and this is where we have the whole idea of cultural revolution and the need for cultural revolution, he argues that we need a cultural revolution. He argues that we must return to African culturally and spiritually, even if we can't go physically. And so that's a tremendous impact on Us. And Us saw itself, when we founded it, we saw ourselves as the sons and daughters of Malcolm, as the heirs to his legacy. We say other groups say they are, but they're mainly integrationists or Marxist groups. They don't, they don't have his legacy. We have his legacy. The man is a Nationalist. I don't care how many times he goes Mecca [Saudi Arabia], he clearly told us no religion, no god, no nothing would ever make me forget the suffering of my people, you see. And he said, "Any religion that would not let me fight for the freedom I--for my, my religion--any religion that would not let me fight for the freedom of my people, I say, to hell with that religion". Story_ID: 18364 Speaker 1: Now, back in 1967 when I was seventeen or eighteen, I went in a black store and bought a bumper sticker that said, "Wherever we are, Us is." Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: I loved that. Speaker 2: "Anywhere we are, Us is." Speaker 1: I put it on my car (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter). Speaker 1: But since that time I've heard all these--and I think I understood then what [The Organization] Us, the organization meant, Us as opposed to them. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right, clearly. Speaker 1: Those who are oppressing us, Us, you know. Speaker 2: That's right, Us as opposed to them the oppressor (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And later on, I read that Us is supposed to stand for something else and other--can you clarify what--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Us doesn't mean any of those other things. People did that to try to undermine our emphasis on blackness and togetherness. Us mean, it's just the pronoun, Us as distinct from them; Us as a people; Us as distinct from them the oppressor; Us as African people, as a community, self-conscious of itself. That's it, and yes, that was our motto and remains our motto. "Anywhere we are, Us is," which means that black people, wherever black people are struggling to improve and enhance their life, we are obligated to go there and assist. And this really developed the politics called "programmatic influence", that we go and help people, but we don't try to take them over or stay there. We were always a vanguard movement. We never tried to be a mass movement. But we organized mass movements. That's why every major movement that has taken place since the '60s [1960s], Us has played a vanguard role in it, up until right now, the Reparations Movement and the Million Man March, Million Women March, Million Youth March, starting with Black Arts Movement, Black Studies Movement, Black Students Movement, Black Youth Movement in the Simba Wachanga, the Ancient Egyptian Studies Movement, the Rites of Passage Movement, Independent School Movement, the Black Liberation Theology Discourse and Ethics, even though people, people a lot of times like to give--don't give us credit for a lot of things we do, but if you look, you'll see us right there. We're the Black Convention Movement, the Black Power Movement, we put out there that, you know, black power is the collective struggle of people to achieve three things: self-determination, self-respect and self-defense. We talked about that. We put out the idea of Operation Unity, unity and diversity, unity without uniformity. We're, we're the ones who did that. I mean Adam Clayton Powell called me and other people in '67 [1967] to Washington [D.C.] for the first planning meeting for the Black Power Conferences. I was chosen the Vice President of the Continuation Committee. Dr. Nathan Wright [Jr.], out of Newark [New Jersey], was the chair. So everybody knows that I became the de facto major person there, and certainly, the theorist for that movement. So, they--if you look at the major movements, and, and even like the Million Man March, Day of Absence, I was the author of the Mission Statement for the march. I helped pull together the National Organizing Committee. There was no organizing committee before our organization had a meeting, called a meeting and talked about our need to intervene in the march because it was a good thing, and people were savaging it because Minister [Louis] Farrakhan had originally said, "Women should stay home, and the men should go". And we wanted to rephrase that, so that we kept the emphasis on black male responsibility, but at the same time, did not suggest we were suppressing women. Actually, you know, it was all about a lot of nothing because we got black sororities, we got black fraternities. There were women groups; there are men groups all the time. But that was the opposition, wanting to demonize Minister Farrakhan and deny him the brilliance of this idea and the timeliness of it. So we said we'll go in it. And we called and asked Haki [Madhubuti] to make the contact. We asked to, can we have the meeting at his place? We had the meeting at his place. Minister Farrakhan agreed that we need to rephrase our, our agenda. The group there chose me as the person to write the Mission Statement, to express the agenda, and really, it was a excellent public policy statement that we were able to come up with, and it still stands as an important document in the history of our people. So what I wanted you to--I said all that to say that Us organization has always been about the positive and always been about focus on the community, okay. Story_ID: 18365 Speaker 1: Now, so Malcolm [X] was very important to us as, as, as a teacher, as a mentor. I met Malcolm in '62 [1962], and the first time I met him we, he took me home afterward. We went and talked. We--it's a restaurant, it used to be a restaurant on 51st and Main, a Muslim restaurant. And you--after the mosque, you would go over there and eat bean pie and talk abstract. So Malcolm welcomed us. We were right from UCLA [University of California Los Angeles]. He welcomed us back there. We talked a long time, and every time since when he would come in town, I would try to get there. And, in fact, when there was a crisis, Malcolm asked me to be the emcee for a memorial for, Ronald 26X [sic, Stokes] actually, that was shot by the police. I don't know if you remember that. But-- Speaker 2: Is that the scene with him, even in the movie shows the picture of the man, the poster, the famous picture of Malcolm showing a poster of the body was full of holes--(simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Yes, shot, that was it. Yes, that was the major police shooting of the Muslims at that time. And I learned a lot from Malcolm, and I always enjoyed his company and the brilliance of his intellect. See, I'm, I'm writing now a book on his social, ethical thought because people usually think of ethics, they think King [Martin Luther King, Jr.]. And they think Christianity. But Islam has ethics and certainly Malcolm had an ethical philosophy, and I, I think he has a rich legacy that's still to be taped. And I challenge all those people who have written books on him, who seem to be janitors of history, looking for stench and stain, and reductively translating his message. Mine is to speak his special culture, true, and to show the brilliance of his mind and incisiveness of his analysis. That's what I want to show. The rest, FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], [J. Edgar] Hoover, got data for all this, you know. It's just like writing a book on King and trying to talk about King, what he didn't do and all that. The question is, what does he mean to us? You see, and one of the problems I find with modern intellectuals, black intellectuals, is that they've so limited themselves to deconstructionism, that mainly what they do is janitorial service and look stench and stain, peeling paint and criticize and condemn things, but they have no capacity for conceptual generation, that is, the production of concepts to enrich and expand our lives, to give us the capacity to understand ourselves and assert ourselves in dignity-affirming ways in the world. That's a whole different kind of project. Story_ID: 18366 Speaker 1: Now, we were talking about Swahili, and you had asked me about, maybe why I chose that language and how it started. Well, as I said, I was becoming a Nationalist, and I'm becoming very conscious of my identity as an African, and I'm saying, why don't I know an African language, and, of course, the holocaust of slavery, enslavement is clearly the reason for this. And so I said, I need to choose one. So I have to choose a language. What language would I choose? If I choose an ethnic language, clearly ethnic language, I'd choose against another ethnic group. So if I choose Zulu, then somebody says, why did you Yoruba. If I choose Yoruba, then why didn't do Akan, like that. So I chose Swahili because Swahili, even though it belonged to a small ethnic group, it was, at the same time, a Pan African language that did not simply belong to that group, but belonged to the African in general and was the most widely spread African language on the continent. In fact, in 1974--1977, I was chosen as a delegation head for the African American delegation to FESTAC, the Second World [Black and] African Festival of Arts and Culture. And in there I made this same argument for Swahili, being the continental language and Wole Soyinka, the Nobel Laureate for Literature, argued the same thing even though his language is Yoruba. And so I was glad to see that. So, now, we don't have--when I decided to study Swahili, there was nobody teaching it. So certainly, as an intellectual, I, I can, I can master it. So I started to master it. But when I get to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles] I found out, there is a course there. And so I take the course, not because I need to know it because I've already done an independent study. I can do the knowledge of it, but I already have the basics, but it also gives me a scholarship, a fellowship, a N.D.A. fellowship because Swahili at that time was considered, in the early '60s [1960s] what they called a critical language for the U.S., like Arabic and some other languages. And so Swahili was key. So that's how I financed my education, is by studying the language that was already mine and that I already had competence in, but I deepened my competence in it. And I was supposed to use it. One time I had wanted to do diplomacy work, but I can't represent the government. I wanted to do UN [United Nations] work and do translations, but then I decided I wanted to do politics. Then I decided I wanted to organize and teach, and so that's how I ended up teaching. But that's why I, I learned Swahili, and then when I started Swahili, I started also studying Zulu because Zulu is a Bantu language. Much in the vocabulary or many words in the vocabulary are, are also similar to Swahili. And then, more recently, I studied, for my second doctorate, I studied ancient Egyptian and then finally, most recently, I studied Yoruba. But all this is independent study, all of it. Story_ID: 18367 Speaker 1: And so what I wanted to do is kind of chronologically line these things up, you know, studying Kiswahili and study of observations of Malcolm X and other people that you read (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes. Speaker 1: --and you digested this information and you come with the Kawaida theory? Speaker 2: I did this--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: And this is nineteen--we're talking about 1966? Speaker 2: Beginning in '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Sixty-two. Speaker 2: Sixty-two to '65 [1965] are kind of watershed for me. And really, I began actually in '61 [1961] cause this is when I break and become a Nationalist, and I'm studying African culture tremendously. Now, I mean I'm, every night, all the time, and I begin maybe in '62 and three [1963]. We, I met, we sort of, we began to build a Black Student Union, and we hear about this man named [Donald] Don Warden. His African name now is Abdul Khalid, Khalid, I, I think. I'm not--and I'm sorry, I don't know his whole name. But Abdul Khalid, I'm almost sure, and he--his name is, European name is Don Warden. And he has the African American Association. And he's based in Oakland [California], dynamic speaker, right on it. All the major intellectuals in--that are active in California, both north and south, begin to belong to this organization. I'm elected chair of the southern region of the African American. People like Bobby Seale and Huey [P.] Newton and them, they belonged to the northern section of it. So we had these interactions, we'd go up there, and we'd talk. They'd come down here. So we have this, but also there's other people like Kenn Lumumba--his European name is Kenn Freeman, but he's Baba Lumumba now. Baba Lamumba, Mamadou Lumumba is his African name, his real name. And he creates the 'Soulbook.' Then there's Abdul Karim and Aubrey Labrie, two brothers, they do the 'Black Dialogue.' So we're having these conversations. I mean we're talking and having rallies and doing street speaking. And then '65 [1965], the revolt hits. That changes everybody. Also, the assassination, of course, of, of Malcolm in February before the revolt in August. Speaker 1: You're talking about what most people call the Watts Riots. Speaker 2: Yeah, the Watts revolt, we're talking about the Watts revolt. That's what we're talking about. The revolt comes in August in '65, and it's a turning point. And it's in that year, in September the 7th that I called a group of people to my house and formed The Organization Us. And I began to organize in the community, and I began to teach my philosophy of Kawaida, which I had been developing since like City College [of Los Angeles], but more definitively toward the end of UCLA [University of California Los Angeles]. Now, I was in UCLA up until '65. I got my Masters--I got my BA in three years and I got my Masters in one year. So I'm on a fast track. I'm ready to go to my doctorate. I'm in my doctorate, but the movement comes, the revolt comes. I quit. I'm gone; I don't come back til '75 [1975]. And I, I am--I go out, and I organize the organization. I begin to train black and brown organizers at the Social Action Training Center. I even do some of this at the Center for Social Action at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. I, and I begin to lecture across country and begin to help build movements. I also begin to build the Black Congress, which is a United Front organization, that has all the major groups in this city, SNCC [Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee], CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], the rest of the organizations in the, and the certain local organizations in it. And we're strong then. We can actually call a meeting with the police and tell the police whether to ride two deep or one deep. We'd tell them, you know, you got too many people in the car. You know, we used to have that kind of strength because they knew that at any moment we could call people into the streets. We could, we could actually do that. So, they would listen to us. The mayor, same way, and they resented us, but they respected us for the organized power that we represented. I mean, we always go back to those times. I also worked, with organization worked with Latino organizations. We support the UFW [United Farm Workers] strikes and the building of the union. Later on, of course, as you know, union, the union is not simply built by Latinos even though they're the major people, but the Filipinos are very important in there, and when they go south, black people are also organizers in the UFW. So that was important to us. The Brown Berets, we worked with those. And we also worked with--and had an alliance with [Rodolfo] Corky Gonzalez with the Crusade for Justice, Cruzada por la Justicia, and with Lpez Tijerina with the Alianza Federal de los Pueblos Libre, which is the Federal Alliance of Free Towns out of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico. We signed a treaty with him. And the Hopi Nation, represented by [Thomas] Tom Banyaka, the spiritual leader, Tom Banyaka. We traveled to Albuquerque to do that. So there's a lot of activity going on in this time. This '65, '66, '67 [1967]. So at that point, just to, just to stop for a minute and let you intervene, I'm transferring from being simple student to being activist scholar, and then taking my philosophy and use it to build structures and processes. And at the same time, we began to work--in '68 [1968] we began to work with SNCC on independent incorporation for Watts [Los Angeles, California]. But by this time, SNCC is disestablishing itself, and it can't follow through with the project. Story_ID: 18368 Speaker 1: But leading up to, you know, at what point did you say, okay, I have--did you call your philosophy Kawaida, and can you tell the, whoever's gonna view this, like what Kawaida is? Speaker 2: Yes, Ka--I created my philosophy over a period of years. It reaches this definitive take-off point in 1965 when I create an organization and can actually teach it and give it to people as, as a kind of intellectual grounding, okay. Kawaida means literally "tradition," but it means a synthesis of tradition and reason the way we normally use it. And Kawaida can be defined as an ongoing synthesis of the best of African thought and practice in constant exchange with the world. There're several parts of this. First, there's an ongoing synthesis. That means that it's a living philosophy. It's not like static. You can't change it. You can't change the fundamental principles, but you can change according to new circumstances. And so it's an ongoing synthesis of the best of African thought and practice. We don't take everything in African culture. We seek the best of what it means to be both African and human in the fullest sense and we integrate that into the philosophy. So it's the ongoing synthesis of the best of African thought and practice. And this is the next point, in constant exchange with the world. This is to keep us from being isolationist. We borrowed from the best of human thought too. We engaged the best of human thought and the best of human practice in general. So we can learn lessons from other cultures, and we do. We absorb, but we are not absorbed. The fundamental, last one is, afraid to learn from the world, okay. They're afraid you're gonna be changed by the world if you take anything from it. But no, you shape it in your own image and interests, you see. It's like taking math or science or you take some technique, but you give it your own culture value, your own culture faith and substance. That's the, that's the most important thing for us to understand, to absorb without being absorbed, to absorb the best and to be strengthened by it. In all great civilizations, whether we talk about the earliest ones and the Nile valley or the Chinese ones or the Indus Valley civilizations or the Native American classical civilization. They're crossroads. And they build on and borrow from the best of the people they encounter. Speaker 1: So that, you're talking about a kind of dynamism that's a little bit different from what--I know there are some groups, many of them religious groups, the black community will pick one particular aspect, usually it's an aspect of religion, and we're gonna go back and be, we're gonna prove we're the ancient Hebrews, and we're gonna live just like they, the Hebrews did or there are some groups that are Yoruba now that say, we're gonna do everything that the Yorubas did exclusively, you know, right now-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in 2002 without changing anything, you know. And so you don't advocate that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no. We believe in tradition and reason. We always ask ourselves, when we're engaging a problem, a question, an issue, what do our forefathers and mothers say about this? What lessons do they offer us about life? That's why we study history. We study history for four basic reasons, one, to learn its lessons, okay. That's what Malcolm [X] means when he said, "Of all our studies, history is best prepared to reward our research." Second, we study history to absorb its spirit of human possibility. That's what [Marcus] Garvey means when he says, "What humans have done, humans can do." Third, we study history to extract and emulate as models of human excellence and achievement. That's what [Mary McLeod] Bethune means when she says, "We're heirs and custodians of a great legacy and we must bear the burden and glory of growing that legacy with strength, dignity and determination." And finally, of course, we study history to observe and practice the morality of remembrance. This is what Fannie Lou Hamer means when she says, "There are two things we should all care about. Never to forget where we came from and always praise the bridges that carried us over." So it's in that context that Kawaida seeks to learn these lessons, absorb this spirit, take the excellence and--human excellence, human achievement and honor the memory of those who came before us, by not only raising up their name, but practicing the best of their lessons and teachings, okay. And so, no, we don't stand on one thing. We asked ourselves first, what is the tradition? Second, does it measure up to the best of our moral thinking? We must always have ethical thinking. That is--that's the, one of the defining characteristics of ancient African culture. And so when I was translating, for example, I, I got involved in recovery of ancient Egyptian ethical teachings and ethical culture by studying Diop, Cheikh Anta Diop, in the '80s [1980s], okay. Really in the late '70s [1970s], and that is why we, [The Organization] Us organization called the first ancient Egyptian studies conference that led to, of course, the founding of ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations]. We met here at our center here, and argued that this would be a good way to teach Kawaida to rebuild the movement and to introduce a new way to engage African cul--classical culture. No one had done this before. This is what I was talking about earlier, that, how Us tries to be a vanguard organization and programmatically influences the development of the movement without needing to always or anytime control any given segment of it. It's very important to see that. So we, we argued that here's a good way to rebuild the movement because people need a sense of possibility. Story_ID: 18369 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the development of Kwanzaa out of Kawaida theory. Speaker 2: Yes, right. So first, I'm, I'm at UCLA [University of California Los Angeles] in '64 [1964], just got my Master's. I decided to go on to get my doctorate. I'm studying on my doctorate. The revolt comes. I quit and join the Movement, and I create my organization. And I fur--[The Organization] Us, and I further developed my philosophy, Kawaida. And I call it Kawaida because I believe that culture and tradition are the foundation for our life, our future and our effective assertion in the world. I think culture is a fundamental way of being human in the world. And so at the heart of Kawaida philosophy is this argument that we must constantly dialogue with African culture, asking it questions and seeking from it, answers, to the fundamental issues of human life. How do you create a just and good society? What does it mean to be human? What is our moral obligation to each other? What is our rightful relationship with the environment? Those questions, we usually don't ask Africa those questions. We usually ask Europe or Israel. We ask Greece or Israel or some other culture, but we don't ask Africa. You know, we don't--we just don't ask Africa what does it mean to be human? What is my relationship with God or anything like that? What is, what is that? So, I wanted to do that. And so I began to draw from the best of African culture, synthesize it and put into this philosophy called Kawaida. And it's subconsciously called Kawaida, a Swahili word, it means tradition because that is the core of it, tradition and reason. Speaker 1: Can you spell Kawaida for us (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: K-A-W-A-I-D-A, Kawaida, okay. Now, I've already--as I said earlier, I've already decided to use Swahili to do this, okay, because the language itself contains philosophical concepts I need to stress the communitarian value system I'm going to create with the seven principles, Nguzo Saba. So I'm in the philosophy, and I'm asking how can I teach this philosophy in a simple, but profound way? How can I produce concepts that would create both a discourse and a practice of being African? Okay. And I decide I, I need a value system that is manageable. And I decide the way I can do that is study African cultures, and I studied African culture, and I asked myself, what is the social cement and the social glue that holds these cultures together and give them their humanistic, moral content? And I believe that it is their communitarian values, values that stress family, community and culture. And so the question is how do I choose these values? Okay. I choose ten, twenty, thirty? Well I choose seven, and I choose seven for several reasons, because first of all, the spiritual significance of seven in African culture, all the way back to ancient Egypt. Seven is like a sacred number, okay. Second--so it has special value as well. Then the second thing I do is manageable. People would be saying, why didn't you do ten? Well, try to get seven, you know, then we can talk about the other. If we could just do some of these some of the time, a whole new change would come in our life. So, my argument was let's do these seven. So now, I have to choose seven values, communitarian values that form a system of thought and practice. And I have to choose them according to what I think is most important, not just now, but of enduring importance. And that's a very important thing. I can't be a faddist. I can't choose values like Green Power, I mean that goes out, you see. I have to choose that which endures in the midst of that which is overthrown, as the Husia said. And so what I do, is I choose what is enduring values, and I organized them such--there are seven values, Nguzo Saba. First of all, look at the name, Nguzo means "pillar," okay. It's both a pillar as a strength in the community and as a protection for the community, okay. Okay, so Nguzo is pillar, and it means principle. And Saba, of course, means seven. So I start with Umoja, unity. Why? Because unity in the family community, nation and race. Why unity? Because without unity, you can't even start a project. I mean the fundamental requirement for a people to actually understand and realize itself and assert itself successfully is unity. So Umoja, unity, is the first principle. Second principle is Kujichagulia, to define ourselves, create for ourselves, name ourselves, be up for ourselves. That's a very important thing, to speak our own special culture truth, make our own unique contribution to the forward flow of human history. Third, Ujima, collective work and responsibility, to make our sisters and brothers' problem our problem and to solve them collectively. We, we have to see ourselves as responsible for each other, and we have to, together, build the world we want and deserve to live in, okay. Ujamaa, cooperative economics, shared work and shared wealth. People want to do the wealth, shared wealth, but a lot of times they don't want to do the shared work. So we say to build our sisters and brothers stores, shops and other business and to profit from them together, just to tell people, you have to work together and you have to get profit together. That's a very important discourse in the '60s [1960s], whether we go capitalist or whether we go communal. Okay, we say we have to go communitarian. We have to do communalism. We have to do cooperative economics. The cooperative economics comes from the word Ujamaa, and jamaa, the root word of jamaa is--Ujamaa, jamaa, which means "family" or "kinship." And so what it says is we must do economics as if we are related, related not just as a human, but related to the environment too. That's a whole different discourse. So what I'm doing is giving categories. This has been Kawaida's main strength and Us organization's main strength, it's creating a series of categories, philosophical concepts that encourage a discourse about African life in a way it has never been done before. That's what we did with Kwanzaa. That's what we did with the Husia. That's what we did with Odo Ifa. That's what we did with Operation Unity, etc. Okay, now, next, Nia, purpose, the collective vocation of rebuilding our nation so that we can restore our people to their traditional greatness, okay, to bring good into the world and to give black people both permanence and power in the world. And then the sixth principle, Kuumba, creativity, to do all we can in the way we can to leave our community and this world better and more beautiful than when we inherited it. And finally, Imani, faith, faith in ourselves, our leaders, our teachers and the righteousness and victory of our call and faith that through hard work, long struggle and a whole lot of love and understanding, we can again step back on the stage of human history subconsciously as a free, proud and productive people, speak our own special culture truth to the world and make our own unique contribution to the forward flow of human history. Now, the question is, how do I build an institutional process to, in fact, teach those? I mean I could just put them out there, but it doesn't work. So I think of, what about a holiday? Again, I'm a scholar. I have to do research. I'm very concerned with culture and with authenticity. I can't just--they just don't drop from the sky for me. I have to study them from a social context, from a historical context. So I studied, I decided that I would use the oldest celebrations, and that way, I thought they would be more authentic--authentic, than one that was later created and might be influenced by Europe. So what are the oldest celebrations? They're agriculture celebrations. It's the same way when we go to Egypt. It's before the European comes, before there is this question of influence, you see, back then. And so I studied first fruits celebrations, harvest celebrations, okay. And I'm very struck by umKhosi, a Zulu celebration, which is seven days, and happens at the end of the year. Part of it is in the beginning, part of it at the end. So I straddled Kwanzaa the same way. Most of it is in the first of the year, and then there's one day in the new year. And that day I set aside for meditation, January first. So I put Kwanzaa December the twenty-sixth to January first, and it duplicates the umKhosi celebration of the Zulus, okay. I don't even tell everybody all this. I'm, I just do this, okay, because I'm, I'm, I'm saying, this is my culture. I, I can do it. I study also the Yoruba and the other festivals, and always, there are five fundamental activities that they engage in regardless. The first is that, the holidays are a time of ingathering of the people, a time when the people come from all over to reaffirm the bonds between them. Second, is the time for thanksgiving for the Creator and the creation, okay, a time not only to give thanks for a good harvest, but to recommit ourselves to the protection and preservation of the earth which provided the harvest. Third, is the time for commemoration of the past, time to raise and praise the names of those who gave their lives so that we could live fuller and more meaningful one; time to remember Fannie Lou Hamer's teaching that there are two things we all should care about, "Never to forget where we came and always praise the bridges that carried us over." Fourth, is a time for the reaffirmation and recommitment, a time for recommitment rather; time for recommitment to our highest culture values, values that stress and strengthen family, community and culture, speaking truth, doing justice; honor thy elders and the ancestors; cherishing and challenging our children, caring for the vulnerable among us, having a rightful relationship with the environment, constantly struggling against evil and always raising up, praising and pursuing the good, but especially time for recommitment to the seven principles, Umoja, unity, Kujichagulia, self-determination, Ujima, collective work and responsibility, Ujamaa, cooperative economics, Nia, purpose, Kuuma, creativity, Imani, faith. And finally, the fifth activity of Kwanzaa after ingathering of the people, a special reverence for the Creator and the creation, commemoration of the past, recommitment to our highest culture values, is celebration of the good, the good of family, community and culture, the good of life, the good of the environment, the good of our history, the good of our awesome march through human history, the good of existence itself, just the good of the world. And so we celebrate that, I mean, the good of the harvest, it used to be, but the good, above all, of the ongoing challenge to constantly bring good into the world and not let any good be lost. Now, people often say, why did you create Kwanzaa? I mean I think I've said, but I've--in the context of my discussion, but I created it for three basic reasons, one to reaffirm our Africanist, to reaffirm the fact that we're an African people. When you're in the process, you know, Kwanzaa is, is created in the context of the Black Freedom Movement. The Black Freedom Movement is from ninety--1955 to 1975, and there are two sections to it. From 1955 to 1965 is the black, is the Civil Rights Movement, and from 1965 to 1975 is the Black Power Movement, and I'm more in the Black Power Movement. In the Black Power Movement, even though I participated in the Civil Rights Movement, in the Black Power Movement, one of the core elements is the return to Africa, to step back to black. In fact, we used to say in Us, the first step forward is a step back to your own culture and your own self, okay. And so what we argued is that we have to reaffirm that we're African. We must say we are African people, okay. So Kwanzaa gives us a time to do that. And if you look at it, more than any other time in the, in the, in the year, black people talk about Africa, even corporate types wear African clothes, want their kinara and their Kwanzaa set to be aside other end-of-the-year celebration sets, right? They talk it. Okay, we've got a discourse, a conversation around Africa. Second, I created it to give us a time as African people all over the world to come together, reaffirm the bonds between us and meditate on the meaning and awesome responsibility of being African in the world. And if you look at it all around the world, you see that that has happened. Twenty-eight million people celebrate this holiday on every continent in the world, throughout the world African community. And finally, of course, as I said, early, I created Kwanzaa in order to introduce and reaffirm the importance of community and values, especially, Nguzo Saba, the seven principles. Story_ID: 18370 Speaker 1: Let me ask two, and these are questions that I've heard, and I want to know what your response is, and here's a question that--I was in at a Kwanzaa gathering once, and a Ghanaian continental African came to the gathering dressed in a suit and a tie, and he says, he says, why--he says, "We don't celebrate this in Ghana." He says, "You all think you all are doing something African. We don't have anything like this," you know, and I had a response to him, but what would you say? Speaker 2: Well, first of all they do celebrate in Ghana, and that people in Ghana celebrate holidays they don't celebrate in Nigeria. That's no reason to say it's not African. That's not intellectually sound. That's what I would have said to him. And then also, it is African, for several reasons. One, an African created it, and second, the African wove it out of the rich and ancient culture of Africa. So I don't know what else would be African. What, what, what--how do you make things African if you don't make them from the people and from the culture? I mean that's the basic two criterias. Speaker 1: Yes, I hear you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes, and besides, it is celebrated all over Africa. In fact, when I, I've got an Honorary Doctorate from, from the University of Durban-Westville, South Africa, and when I went there, I mean the seven principles are up in the student union. I left there and went to Trinidad and there in one of the largest of--not the largest, church in the island, the Episcopal church, the priest had the seven principles around the wall and used them to do mass. In Canada, we get the same thing the people practicing in Turkey and India, and Japan. We get letters and inquiries. We got a, a paper from Brazil in Portuguese with the seven principles and a discussion of Kwanzaa and the African community and values in it. Wherever Africans are, that's African. Africa's not a continent. It's a world community. That's what [Marcus] Garvey taught us, "Africa is a world community." Yes, the continent is our ancestral home. It is a central place for us as Africans. But Africa is a world community, and we have to realize that. Speaker 1: Now, here's the second negative kind of thing that you often hear so much, not in, and people all over the world are celebrating Kwanzaa and embracing it like and going to it like thirsty people going to water, there are those who would sit and say, I've heard them say it, they say well--and, I think it has to do with the mystique of the early development of Kwanzaa and people didn't know. It was put out there by some that Kwanzaa was directly from the continent and it had some, you know, and it's an ancient, it has some kind of ancient-ness to it in terms of its--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: It does. Speaker 1: --origin. But people--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: But go on. Speaker 1: You know, I mean at any rate, there are those who say well, this is a made-up holiday. It's made up, so, you know, this somehow--I mean it's dismissed as being made up by somebody. And they may say something about, and we know who made it up, so it's not--therefore, it's not--I shouldn't, you know, I can (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, all holidays are made up, if you want to be that vulgarly pedestrian, and use the word "made up". Actually, I would think they were intellectually created. That's why we jet invention. I did not invent Kwanzaa unless the Jews invented Hanukkah and the Christians invented Christmas. There was someone who sat down and decided what to do on Christmas and even to honor Jesus or to go into buying and selling madness. Somebody sat down and thought about that, okay. And Hanukkah, somebody sat down and said this is what you do. Every holiday in the world, men and women made up--mostly men, okay. And so that doesn't make sense to say Kwanzaa should be different. We would never make a claim that Kwanzaa fell from the sky (chuckle). We do this, you know, we, we don't get revelations. We use reason, and we are intellectually capable of creating out of the rich and intra-fabric of our culture things of value that speak to the best of what it means to be African and human in the fullest sense. So that's trash. And the twenty-eight million people that embrace the holiday have already rejected that. They probably don't even hear it. Oh, yeah, I don't even do that. I mean some people argue against Christmas, argue against Hanukkah, you're gonna always find that. So don't make--I don't want people to think if somebody finds something wrong with Kwanzaa, you don't have somebody also finding something wrong with Christmas and Hanukkah, in fact, a lot, if you hear the conversations. So people can do that. The question is what does it mean to the people who embrace it? And how many people embrace it? Millions and millions of people. In fact, more people celebrate Kwanzaa than Hanukkah. Speaker 1: It's interesting, another interesting thing that I bet you hear out here in the world is that, this isn't native, this seems to have reached upon, is that I've heard of groups of white people and Native Americans and others in the United States have decided that it's a good idea to celebrate Kwanzaa, and they embrace the value then and have their own celebrations, Kwanzaa celebrations, you know. Speaker 2: Um-hum, well, I appreciate what you said, if I understand correctly, but that's the strength of the holiday itself. Every great message, and pardon any sense of immodesty it might suggest, but it's mainly for my culture, not for me. Any great message, always has both a particular and a universal aspect to it. In other words, it emerges from a particular people, but because it represents the best of the culture of that people and the best of human thought and aspiration, it appeals to people beyond it. For example, the great religions of the world, okay. We taught--start with maat, ancient Egypt. People borrow from that, Jew, Gentile, Hittite, Hiksos, Roman, Greek, Persian, Libyan, they all came to borrow from and build on the great message, the spiritual and ethical message, as well as the signs and, and aesthetic message of ancient Egypt, right? Buddhism, same thing. It originates in India, but it's all over the world. Speaker 1: It--more Chinese celebrate it than Indians (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Right, yeah, it speaks to not only the best of Indian thinking, but the best of human thinking. Hinduism, same thing, Judaism, Christianity, Bahai, they started in a particular place. They speak to a particular people, but their message is both, what? Particular and universal, and so is the ancient African message of Kwanzaa because that's what makes Kwanzaa so effective. It speaks to the best of our aspirations, our aspirations for unity, a sense of oneness with and in the world. Our aspirations for reaffirmation of the dignity of the human being as a bearer of dignity and divinity and, and having a right to speak their own special culture truth and to make their own unique contribution to the thought and flow of human history. I could go down all the seven values, and they are values that you can find in the best of human thought, in any culture, okay. So that's why other people might celebrate it or embrace the holiday and see in it something of value of himself, but we must always remember and never deny, it's an African gift to the world. It is an African practice. Story_ID: 18371 Speaker 1: It is rooted in African culture, and that's why when you say--people say, oh, I thought it was ancient. It is ancient. It is as ancient as the first agriculture celebration because it is woven out of that fabric, out of that culture fabric, and it is also new because we created. We reassembled it, recovered it and reconstruct it, which is [The Organization] Us's primary mission, to rescue and reconstruct African culture and to speak this special culture truth to the world. So it is new, '66 [1966], we did it. I think that's good, and I think what people get thrown off about is that a man is alive that did it because a lot of times I go to places, colleges, schools, community venues. People can't believe I'm alive and did it. They thought it was somebody from the past. Speaker 2: That's another strange aspect of this, is people don't think you're still around. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: I mean it's really--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: And a lot of it has to do--it has to do with two things, one, you know, and again, I don't want to seem immodest about this because I've done a lot of things. And I'm telling you, our organization has played a vanguard role in so many things that people can't believe this is still here or that we're still doing this. And then, of course, sometimes people judge you by how often you appear on television. And if they don't see you in the media, they might think you're not there any more. So that has a part of it. But I think it mainly has to do with the cognitive dissonance that is created when a living person is said to have done all these things or that a group is still existing that has done these things. These things seem like they belong to a past era, you see, that's the problem. Speaker 2: Now, you've often, and you always say that, when you discuss Kwanzaa--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: Oh, and--just like, you see, all the great things that usually people think about happened in the past. If people look at their religion, all the things, ain't no more prophets, all the books been written. It's over. Speaker 2: The miracles are finished--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: All the miracles, they're finished too. So how do we do miracles here? How do we write a new sacred text? How do we translate the Husia and make Egyptian spirituality and ethics live again and create a whole discourse around it and put it in Black Studies Departments and teach it as a fundamental aspect of Black Studies? So, it's a lot of things that happened. First, people resent that. I know people write me, "Who are you to translate these things?" You know, the Europeans been translating them a long time, people might say that. People used to say, people wrote [William Jefferson] Clinton, you know, Clinton gave us a, a Kwanzaa message, right. People were writing, how do you put Kwanzaa on the level with Christmas and Hanukkah? Well, you know, African people did it. Bill Clinton was just responding, okay. But people don't understand the agency with which Africans think, speak and act. You know, and they have to get used to that. It takes time, but we can do it, we can cultivate that. And that's what we mean when we talk about a multi-cultural world, where there's mutual respect for each people and culture, mutual respect for each people's right and responsibility to speak their own special culture truth and to make their own unique contributions to have the society and world reconceived and reconstructed it, and where there's mutual commitment to the constant search for common ground in the midst of our diversity and finding where there's mutual commitment to an ethics of sharing, shared status, no inferior or superior people, shared knowledge, shared space, shared wealth, shared power, shared interest and shared responsibility for building the world we all want and deserve to live in. Speaker 2: I wanted to go ahead and ask you about the Kwanzaa rituals, and you stated before the rituals are reinforcing gestures--(simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --to reinforce the values, and--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and I think black people like rituals and other people do too. Speaker 1: Everybody likes it. In fact, the Catholic church, basic sermon, their mass is ritual. Everybody does ritual. Rituals reinforcement, reinforce how we think, how we feel, how we understand ourselves, how we assert ourselves. People need that. But a lot of times, they want to make black people different from that. One of the things that I criticize the media for is that they never want to deal with the Kwanzaa ritual. They want to show us dancing and singing. They don't want to discuss the philosophy of Kwanzaa cause black people not supposed to have a philosophy, okay. So every time we get to talking about it, they'll find some little small phrase somebody said, "I think Kwanzaa is commercialized". Well, it's not--it's becoming more comm--no, that--mixing that up with Hanukkah and Christmas, that starts advertising in October, you understand. So, it's a little different. And we have to make a distinction between Kwanzaa, the Ujima activity which black vendors, artists, creative people and producers, the activity they engage in to produce products for us to celebrate our holiday versus the corporate attempt to penetrate and monopolize the Kwanzaa market. So that's two different things here, okay. But people always want to find something--a lot of people do, not many people, and I'm glad that the majority of people don't accept that, and that Kwanzaa has grown in such leaps and bounds. I'm very impressed with how black people have embraced this, all over the world, and see it, as not only central, value-orientation and culture grounding for themselves, but pass it on to their children as a legacy, worthy of being embraced and practiced. Story_ID: 18372 Speaker 1: Okay, I think there's one interesting story about Kwanzaa before we, I guess, end our discussion on Kwanzaa. I'd like to talk about, and that's the--I think it's just so visually appealing of the, the story of the seven children holding up the Kwanzaa letters--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at Kwanzaa--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --in your school. I mean, can you discuss that for us? Speaker 2: Kwanza, the word kwanza means "first" in Swahili. It's a part of a phrase, "Matunda ya kwanza" or "Mazawi ya kwanza." Either one is okay, without--it's the more crops, "matunda" is fruit. But we made a distinction between the word "kwanza" and the holiday by showing consideration for children in our organization. Kwanza has six letters, the word Kwanza, K-W-A-N-Z-A, and there were seven children in the organization that wanted to do a representation of Kwanzaa. And because there were only seven--six letters, we added an extra A to accommodate the seventh child, showing our emphasis on the person. And so it stuck, and we said, good, that way it becomes distinguishable from the word, "first," itself. Speaker 1: And it follows suit, seven letters, you know, seven principles, you know, seven candles (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes, yes. It did follow suit. Speaker 1: Right, okay, now, with the development of Kwanzaa in 1966, the organization, now, give me some sort of a history of what happened next, you know, with (simultaneous). Speaker 2: I should say but, you were saying it followed suit, I should say that it wasn't planned like that. It was, in fact, and also people can read something mystical in that, it had worked out that way, that it would have seven letters (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, this is, there's approach and some people would find spookistic meaning in this and all these sevens and so forth. Speaker 2: And so does Kawaida have seven letters, and I didn't chose it because it had seven (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, can you kind of give us an update on--I mean kind of, you know, follow the (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Maulana has seven letters (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So does Karenga (laughter), okay. Speaker 1: Okay. This is, you know, and there was--well, at any rate, I know you don't attach any more meaning to it than (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Story_ID: 18373 Speaker 1: But, yeah, give me a--follow along from '66 [1966], what happens and stuff. A lot happens with this between, you know--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Okay, well, right. Well, the first thing that happens of great importance, of course, is that we began to build the Black Power Movement, okay. And we began to play a major role in that. And the take-off of that is the August '67 [1967] meeting that Adam Clayton Powell calls. He's then chair of the Ways and Means Committee, and he sees me as a rising young leader, and he wants me to come and meet with a group of people he's invited to ask how do we organize this Black Power sentiment. And out of that discussion came the formation of the Black Power Conferences. And as I said earlier, then I became the vice-chair of the Continuations Committee for calling the Black Power Conferences to develop policy agendas. And Dr. Nathan Wright out of Newark [New Jersey] became the chair of this. And there were four people that were important, and the other two people were Omar Ahmed of New York [New York] and Reverend Robertson of upper New York. And so what we--Isaiah Robinson, I'm sorry, Isaiah Robinson of Upper, New York, I think Rochester. I'm not sure now. And so we are sort of the core committee to call the first Black Power Conference in Newark, and then the second in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And there, what happens is out of Newark, I meet Amiri Baraka, and we began to talk. And what happens is when he goes to California to be in the [San Francisco] Bay area to do, at the Black House there, to do poetry, he comes in conflict with the [Black] Panthers. And the Panthers, under Eldridge [Cleaver], shut the Black House down, said they didn't want no cultural Nationalism. I don't know why they did it, but he comes, I bring him to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I began to talk to him about Kawaida. And I began to say to him that really what we ought to do is organize for you a group that is both political and one that is paramilitary so that you never have to leave a place again. And I modeled it off of the Simba Wachanga and the Simba Wachanga means "young lion." Simba means lion, wachanga. And this is modeled off the Simba in the Congo. And Malcolm [X] had called attention that we must be young lions like that and he praised the Simba in the Congo for winning independence. And so that's another link between Malcolm and [The Organization] Us, is the Simba Wachanga, and the became--actually, and again, some of the things--I don't want to sound immodest, but anybody that's a fair and objective observer would know that we had the most tightly knit and organized, ideologically grounded, philosophically grounded paramilitary group in existence at that time. And we believed in armed struggle. We believed that [Frantz] Fanon was right, we, we took Fanon. And we also believed what Malcolm said. We would see this as defensive struggle, armed struggle as defensive struggle. It shouldn't glory in violence or want violence, but to see the people's right to defend themselves. And that's just a reality. And from that we also organized, as a result of that, something called the Community Alert Patrol, which the Panthers--we did this in '65 [1965] after the [Watts] revolt. The Panthers used this as a model and began to do it themselves, that is, follow the police around and take pictures, have lawyers to read their rights. Well, we, we formed that here, the Community Alert Patrol, and ran that for a, a year or more to protect citizens' right, black people's, a right to read them their rights and to represent them in court in their struggles with police abuse and brutality. Nevertheless, I then go back to Newark after the conference, I go back to Newark to try out the whole idea of politics, black politics, taking over the city. And so I help Baraka build a self-defense unit, but I also helped him build the Community for Unified Newark, and I make him an imamu, and I changed his name from-- Speaker 1: CFUN, right Speaker 2: CFUN, Community for Unified Newark, and I stay back there for some time. And I also helped formulate and name a program called "Peace and Power", which led to the election of Ken Gibson and also the election of black polit--black councilmen. And not too long ago, a few years ago, the city council called me back and gave me an award for that participation. So that was a good experience for me. I enjoyed doing that. I enjoyed working with CFUN and with The Spirit House that Baraka was on. And Baraka and I used to be friends. I, I mean he turned when he became a Marxist, but, you know, before that we, we were strong, together. And, of course, he benefited from that, and from there, he began to emerge as a, as you know, as a national leader, a culture Nationalist leader. And he built a Kawaida organization. He accepted my philosophy, integrated it into his own organization and built--was a prime mover in building the Congress of African People. And if you look at that Congress in Atlanta [Georgia], which some of us attended, but mainly, he did that himself with other groups. All of it is Kawaida, I mean and same with the Gary [Indiana] convention, if you look at that, it's Kawaida, I mean it's just there, the national assembly is Kawaida. So the Kawaida Movement becomes a major force in the Movement and takes it all the way to '75 [1975]. So I was very glad about, I mean how Kawaida grounded itself in the community and among the people and became the fundamental battle cry for the Movement in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], okay. Speaker 1: Those Black Power Conferences included a number of people from different walks in life, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, I've seen the picture of him, Jim Brown, yourself, I mean a lot of--everybody sitting there, you know, and listening, whoa, you know, these are all black people--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that we recognize, all from different places, and they're talking about power. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And it was a thrilling thing to see. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You know, to see (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Right, and what we saw is that the Civil Rights Movement had exhausted itself. I mean it had won exactly what it wanted, that is, laws to protect us and to keep violence from being, imposed on us without penalty, okay, the kind of senseless, mindless and brutal violence that we knew so well from the South and from the urban North police, okay. But at the same time, we got a sense that we didn't control anything. So the question was, "What do we seek now?" And we said, power. So then the original three goals that we had is collective vocation, freedom, justice and equality. We then added to the new one which was, what, power, that we want power, the ability to control our destiny and daily lives, the ability to define, defend and develop our interests and to realize our will, even in the face of opposition. That's what power is, the ability to realize your will, even in the face of opposition. And so we struggled for that. And we believed that this key to that was organizing in the community. So you have a lot of community organization projects, you have a lot of institution-building. You have a lot of service projects for the people. So those kinds of things we did. We have independent schools. We have culture centers. We have political parties. We have political structures like the one in Newark, the Peace and Power initiative. And it's real interesting because the way we designed it, we had a fist and an ankh on the fist. So it shows that even then, before we got into the Ancient Egyptian Movement, which we initiated in '79 [1979], we started in earnest doing it in the early '80s [1980s], still we, we had this idea that we should link ourselves with classical African civilization, even--I have up here in the office a picture of a gift I was given from ancient Egyptian culture. But we didn't stress, and this is interesting--this a side note, we didn't stress ancient Egypt then because we wanted to take people to the core of Africa, central and west Africa because if you put them in the north and they never go any further, they would always think that somehow, something is wrong with the south and the central, and the west. So what we wanted to do is start right out there--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: Take them to the blackest part first? Speaker 2: That's what we think. That's right, not that Egypt is not black. I'm not, I'm not conceding anything on that, but Egypt is a contested culture. We don't contest the Congo (laughter). We don't contest Zulu culture. We don't really contest Yoruba culture. So it was important for us to ground ourselves in uncontested African culture, and then make a commitment to the whole of the continent. Story_ID: 18374 Speaker 1: Now, as these ideas are emerging and gaining ground, you know, as you said, Kawaida was the core of the Congress of African People--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: The Black Arts Movement. Speaker 1: Movement, the Black Arts Movement. People are--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Black Studies. Speaker 1: --out in, at Antioch College [Yellow Spring, Ohio], the black students took over a dormitory and renamed it Umoja House, you know. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean, and you see this everywhere. It's ubiquitous. It's all over the place and--. Speaker 2: Yes, um-hum. Speaker 1: And then as we start to look for, you know, the source of this, then we find out that there's trouble and there's conflict between, you know, and the, the paper that we got the most from in college when I was coming along was the "[Black] Panther Paper"--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because it was widely published. And their take on you and Kawaida was in contradiction to the things we were seeing. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, and can you discuss the Panther, [The Organization] Us conflict and the COINTEL Program and all that? Speaker 2: Yes. First of all, you know, Us and the Panther Party worked together. In fact, the largest rally to free Huey [P. Newton], we pulled it together. And read Earl Anthony's book, 'Picking Up the Gun,' you'll see an account, even Anthony is, is hostile to us. He makes two points, one that we were a key to getting the rally because the way we voted and said, "That's the way of the Congress." The Panthers came to the Congress, which was the group we organized, the Black Congress, which had all the groups included, including the Panthers in it, and asked to help sponsor a Free Huey rally. I introduced the motion to do it. Earl said that was key to it because if I had opposed it, he knew it wouldn't work. Second is this, that not only that, he made a note that one of the reasons for our strength was not only our organizing ability, but we had the strongest paramilitary group, the Simba Wachunga. Now, this is very important because this is what the COINTEL Program is going to play on, all right. We had this rally for Huey, but at that rally is where we became divided. Eldridge Cleaver had come out of captivity. And he was more integrationist. He resented us as Nationalists, and he taught the Oakland Panthers, even though the back-east Panthers had a greater sense of Nationalism, he taught them to stress more integrationism because that's what he was in. He's the one that wrote the book, 'Soul on Ice,' which really was a homage, as you know in the front, to the white girl, Beverly Axelrod, and he praises her and say he feels sad when he called her "an itch with a B in front of it," but he rapes black women and call them "itches" without any feeling, practices on them so he could go cross the track. And the white liberals and leftist called that a great work and a definitive work of the '60s [1960s]. You know that, that's still pushed--. Speaker 1: That's a puzzle (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --by the white left and liberals as some kind of testament, the way they pushed 'Elaine Brown,' which is autobiography of her genitals. They pushed that like that's some great testimony, woman that goes down like a democratic drawbridge for everybody, and does it to everybody she says, including the Clorox bleach man for the party. They think that's a great testament because they can feel superior to that. I'm talking about the whites that support that, okay. Now, what happens is, in this rally, Eldridge comes in and he says, "You know what, we need to get the pigs out of the stadium," okay. He already, they're already challenging us. We're challenging each other for a lot of reasons, but it breaks here. Challenging each other, who is the most revolutionary? Who is the, who is the most militarily organized? Who is, who's the strongest group? You know, it's like a leadership struggle kind of thing. Who is the vanguard of the Movement? Okay. Well, you know, the Panthers actually suppressed a lot of other organizations. Now, I need to give you this because otherwise, you don't understand our reaction to them and why they act so violently against Us and murder-mouthed Us and character assassinated us so much because they couldn't do to Us what they did to other organizations. For example, the Black Panther Party of Northern California was formed before the Panther Party of Oakland was formed. In fact, all of us used to subscribe to building a Black Panther Party on the model of the Lowndes County Freedom Movement, okay, with John Hulett, okay. Speaker 1: Lowndes County, Alabama. Speaker 2: Lowndes County, Alabama. And everybody said that that would be a new black party cause everybody said in the Black Power, you need a party to do power, to seize power, you need a party. And so we said, "Let's emulate the Alabama party," okay, the Lowndes County Freedom Organization under John Hulett. Let's build a--and if you notice in our literature, we all say we're were gonna build a Black Panther Party. And, in fact, in our chronology--we had a chronology, the year of the lion, the year of the Vote, the year of the Simba Wachunga. And we grew to--'68 [1968] was the year of the Panther, not the Panther Party, but the year of the Black Panther, National Black Panther Party, you see, on the model of Lowndes County, for the whole Black Power Movement. Well, some of the people in the north built the party. Huey and them threatened them and made them give up the party, came with the same thing with Southern Panther Party. They used to compel people to toe their line. Story_ID: 18375 Speaker 1: I'll tell another thing, we, we argued too over their bringing white people back in the Movement. You see, all the groups, except the unalterably integrationist groups, like NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and Urban League had moved away from white people and told white people they would do better to work in their own community. We argued that they need to form civil--I made this position in, in '68 [1968] at, at Yale [University, New Haven Connecticut], and I told the people that they need to form civilizing committees and go to the community where the races were. Don't take me out to lunch and think you've solved the problem. You know, the problem is where your mother and father are. They're the ones who're talking cause they're the ones who hold power. So SNCC [Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee] told the whites that, CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] told the whites that. So they were effectively out. In fact, at a, at a faculty retreat at Stanford [University, Stanford, California], I asked one of the liberals there--and leftist really that used to support the [Black] Panthers, why y'all support the Panthers against us? You didn't even talk, you didn't even try to talk to us, and you know the Panthers are lumping and they weren't really Marxist. He said, "Well, we know that, but they let us back in the Movement. You opposed that." So I understood that, but it still created problems, and if you read Inter-Panther literature, you'll see that dialogue where some of the more Nationalist Panthers didn't want that integrationist link with the Peace and Freedom Party. Once the Panthers got involved with the Peace and Freedom Party, they found it necessary to suppress criticism of their dear little white people. And they did it ruthlessly. But when it came to us, they couldn't do that. They could--they couldn't tell us anything, you see? And so what did they do? They pretend we're agents, and they say we're working with the police. But actually, the opposite is true. It's two things that show you--three things. One, if you read the church support, the Church Committee report on the COINTEL Program, you'll find that the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] had more operatives in the Panther Party than any other group besides the Communist Party. Second thing, even the Panthers admit they had agents in their party. That's why they kept having purges. And third, when there was a shoot-out at UCLA [University of California Los Angeles], the Panthers worked with the police to arrest us and to harass us, so much so, we had to go underground. We had to change our name. We took what we called, you know, they call war names or veto names or noms de guerre, you know, we always did that to change and keep the police out. But the Panthers gave them our address, our phone number because we used to work with the Panthers, and they knew a lot of us. And some of the brothers and sisters of, of [The Organization] Us would have Panther mates. So, it wasn't like we were strangers. All this, revisionist of history where we were always against them and they--that's not so. That's post-facto argumentation. And they're hiding their own practice of working with the police to suppress us. We were the ones that were suppressed by them. We never did that to them, okay. Now, but the COINTEL Program is the central thing. People say, "Why y'all fight?" Well, first, organization and leadership fight, okay, ideological struggles, okay. We believed in cultural revolution as a precedent, as, as something that has to precede and make possible the political revolution. We said the battle we're, we are fighting now is the battle to win the hearts and minds of our people. If we lose that battle, we can't hope to win another. We says, we have the gun, you don't--tell, telling me what (unclear) said, "pick up the gun," is importing revolution without dealing with specific content. I said, as for guns, we can find them anywhere, including on the body of the enemy. What is important is that the people decide the revolution is both necessary and possible, and then they will discover both the method and the means. That's what we have to do. And you don't want to do the work among the people so you do this PR [public relations] revolution, you get on television and talk about, you're gonna take down the man, and you can't handle a police raid. So let's be, let's be honest. We criticized them severely for taking [Colonel George] Custer stands. A Custer stand is a losing stand. It's already predetermined that they're gonna get you. See, we said, look, y'all talking about the Red Book, and you read the Red--you know, the Red Book is better read, you understand. Read the Red Book. The Red Book says you never fight a stationary war if you're a guerilla movement, and you're outnumbered. What you supposed to do is make a noise in the east and strike in the west. When the enemy advance, you retreat. When he retreats, you advance. When he tries to harass you, you harass, when he tries to arrest, you arrest him. But you never fight a stationary war. I say, how you dig a tunnel that ain't going nowhere, let yourself get locked up in a building. We don't do that. So they said, ah, well, you, they must be for (unclear). But they raided our place too. In fact, many of our archives are gone today from police raids, you understand. Some of our people are still out of the country exile, harassed by the police, okay. They come back in exile, and the white man finds a way to rehabilitate them. But the reality is they still on us, still murder-mouthing us, put us in jail in cap--in captivity, on trumped up charges, and, and character assassination, viciously. In fact, I haven't seen any group more viciously character assassinated than Us organization, with the exception maybe of [Marcus] Garvey at his height, and then sometimes, early, the Muslims. If you read the early, what do you call--early newspapers articles in 'Jet' and, and 'The Sentinel' and 'Ebony' and all of them against the Muslims, it's vicious. I mean it's some vicious stuff, and the preachers be talking about them in vicious ways. But, you know, they did that with Us, but, you know, here were are. We're not--we didn't just survive; we developed. We're as strong as we ever were, and we still--out of all the things that happened in the '60s [1960s]--again, pardon if it seems immodesty, the things that are left are from Culture Nationalism, in spite of what people say. Black Studies are a Culture Nationalist project. Story_ID: 18376 Speaker 1: In fact, the [Black] Panthers, that's another argument we had, on the value and validity of Black Studies. If you read Dave, David Hilliard's article, "On Black Studies" in 'The [Black] Panthers Speak,' by Philip Foner, he says, "F" Black Studies and black students. We need some Marxist studies, some class studies, you understand? Oh, you got to read it, people don't read this because they don't want to see that image. Speaker 2: And David Hilliard was the Secretary of--? Speaker 1: I don't even know. Speaker 2: --Minister of Defense of the Panther Party. Speaker 1: Something like that. I can't remember. Speaker 2: I'm just trying to give the audience--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: See, and even those kind of names. See, if we had names like that, people say, we're flowery. Minister of what--hey, please! Let's be honest, okay. Huey [P. Newton] can sit in a big fan-back chair and pretend kingship and nobody says nothing. Then they want to make like I'm too arrogant or something like that, but, hey, I understand that. Hey, this is part of being a public figure, but at the same time, I, I reject lies and character assassination about who I--but I need to just, just for the record, just sum up the kind of arguments I have made. First, we argued over the normal things, who is the vanguard of the Movement? Which road to revolution? What role will whites play? Several other critical issues--does pre--cul, culture take precedent over politics, and things like that. We argued that the key battle to win the hearts and minds of our people--that's the key battle. The key battle is to win the hearts and minds of our people. We lose that, we can't hope to win any of it. That was our thing. We also argued that white people should be organizing in their own community. That's where the problem was, okay, and that white--the Panthers should not bring them back in the Movement and have them make themselves dependent on them. The Panthers got more money from white people than any other group in such a short period of time, and they got more publicity than any black group in history in such a short time. Rescue me if I'm wrong. And yet, if you ask what institution did they leave, what philosophy did they leave, that you could build on or borrow from, you might have trouble finding it, you understand? And that is because a lot of it was external. Now, I need to say this because sometimes people--sometimes people think I'm kind of harsh on it, but I'm not harsh as them because we never called them names. We never questioned their commitment to the people and never said they were agents in the same way they did us, but at the same time, we need a criticism of that movement because people keep lying about it. For example, I want you to know there was good Panthers, that were people who were dedicated to the Movement. There were Panthers who were Nationalist. But they're mistaken about [The Organization] Us. And we have given the Movement solid institutions, solid philosophy, solid practices that has sustained it. And you can't deny that either, okay. And what I want us to do is to go back, as I said, to that February '68 [1968] meeting in which Eldridge Cleaver is trying to provoke a argument with me about what he called "pigs in the sports arena". We held the [Free] Huey rally in the L.A. [Los Angeles] sports arena. And Reverend [Thomas] Kilgore, a strong activist preacher, put up the money for us. We didn't even have the money. I mean it cost about $10,000, something to just reserve it. And certainly, we didn't have no money like them. And so we got the thing, pulled everybody together. We invited a lot of the people, Reies [Lpez] Tijerina from the Latino Movement, Tom, Thomas Banyaka from the Hopi Nation, major black leaders, all of them were there. Free Huey, we--all were united around it. Then the sports arena required that you have guards. I mean that's normal. If you rent a big hall, you're gonna have to pay for guards. I mean, Eldridge said those were police, and he called them pigs. And I said, well, Eldridge, sit down, comrade, you know, we're not talking about police. We're talking about door shakers. Story_ID: 18377 Speaker 1: So we're at the Huey Rally, Free Huey Rally, and we're, we're all in unity then. I mean it was a good unity, but Eldridge Cleaver divided us. Now, he's arguing with me about moving the policemen or the, they were called security guards, out of the sports arena. So I said, "Sit down Eldridge, I mean don't be posturing," cause he's used to talking to people wrong. I said, "Man, you know what? You and me, you couldn't do it if we even agreed to it. Your people don't have bullets. They're asking us for shells, and, you know, they don't, they don't, they don't know how to do maneuvers and y'all keep taking these [Colonel George] Custer stands. Don't ask us to do this. And if we want to, we can go and tell the security guard, stand out in the hall. We don't want him in the major assembly room. And I bet they'll do it, you understand?" Plus, you know, we used to have to good intelligence from downtown, from lawyers, both in the D.A.'s [district attorney] office as well as lawyers who had friends who were in the D.A. And they told us, they're mobilizing National Guard. They had cut off polices' release for that day. They expected a struggle and a shoot-out. Well, we said, we don't do that. If you wanted to meet, let's meet at night. You think you're, if you want to do guerilla warfare, that's one thing. If you want to do these Custer stands, that's something else. So we took a little consensus. And, I, I tell, I told Kwame Ture [Stokely Carmichael] about this now be--cause we always laughed about this. He sided with Eldridge, but [H.] Rap [Brown] sided with me because they were there too, SNCC [Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee] was there, and Tommy Jacquette, who's head of Watts Summer Festival and also SLANT [Self Leadership for All Nationalities Today], a local organization here. And what happened is, of course, I told--so Eldridge, once we wouldn't do that, we wouldn't go along with their little Custer stand, then he began to talk bad about us, and say we were agents and call us names and all that because he couldn't threaten us, you see, and because we wouldn't let our self be used in a Custer stand, just for polit--publicity. We're not gonna do that. Now, why I say we joke with Kwame Ture about that, because right after that, remember they drafted him for the party. And then he, in short time, broke right out of that and condemned them and criticized them for the very same thing I did, the imposition, the threatening, okay, the doctrinaire attitude, okay. They're calling people agents. They called him a agent, um-hum. So I think it's very important for us to realize that just didn't happen to [The Organization] Us, they did that to a lot of people. And they--honestly, and I, I got a list, I just don't want to make this part of my presentation, but there's a list and, but they were not always who they said they were. And I think it's very important for us to know that. And at one point, the [Black Power] Movement is gonna have to come to terms with that, okay. Now, we were--that's the take off when we started dividing. So in addition to them, the argue--ideological arguments, we had the leadership struggles we had, which would have gone on. You know, we could just do that, I mean Baptists argue with Methodists. People argue all the time. What made it violent? Well, two or three things. Number one, we possessed the gun. And the gun was seen as a kind of political gun with which you solve problems. Now, the problem is, the [Black] Panthers were never really trained. You know that--I mean, honestly, you can't lose every encounter with the police and keep saying that you're training. You, you can't do that. And then second is this, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] intervened, shot at us, said it was the Panthers; shot at Panthers and said it was us. So when we met finally on UCLA [University of California Los Angeles] campus, there was a shoot-out. Now, the Panthers shot too, they shot first. And Geronimo Pratt, in '[The] Source' magazine, '97 [1997], February, and in his autobiography, points out that the Panthers shot first. The Us people, as he said, "were simply defending themselves." You will never read that anywhere, okay. But you must know that. And Geronimo, his best friend was [Alprentice] Bunchy Carter. So he has no reason to lie about this, okay. But he said he had to face it, and even at a rally here, he told a brother, "Brother, you gonna have to face this, you know." I had to face it. And we need to quit all this character assassination in the movement and face what happened to us. The police manipulated the struggle. They sent poison pen letters. They did cartoons. They threatened people. They used to call Us and threatening Us, pretend they was the Panthers, talk about contracts on--all that. They did--and I'm sure they did the same thing to the Panthers. So we were on edge. But what I want to do is stress, the shoot-out at UCLA was just that. It was a shoot-out, and what happened is Elaine Brown provoked the shoot-out. She was dealing with John [Huggins] and with Bunchy, and she was talking to a brother, from Us, and she started cussing him, then hit him. And he struck her, from what I understand, or at least called her a name too, and she called John, and, and Bunchy over, John Huggins and Bunchy Carter over. They came, pulled their pieces and started shooting, but they weren't trained. And so they didn't--they got one shot off. They got, I mean they got one hit. They hit Larry Stiner Watani. The bullet's still in his back. They shot him in the back cause he had turned to move away. And then the other brother shot them both. And so it was a shoot-out. It was an unfortunate thing, and people have to admit this. This is a very tragic thing. It should not have happened, but this is the context in which it happened. The seeds of the struggle was already there, ideologically. The possession of pieces, the kind of commitment to them--you know, we used to say, people were saying in the movement, "Arm yourself or harm yourself; you don't have a piece, you won't get no peace". And, you know, so being a trained--and people saw that as a way to solve. So when they came, and they pulled, then the brother responded accordingly. One brother, we're talking one brother. We're not talking about a whole lot of people. And so what happens here is that the Panthers then take that as a way to continue to character assassinate us and to dishonor our name all over the world, wherever they could publicize so that people who don't even know us, hate us, never know the good work we've done, never know the social service organizations we created, the political organizations we created, the culture institutions we created, none of that, and the constant struggle we engage in to free black people and to create a just and good society in a good and sustainable world. So that's, that's something that goes on. And I, I'm--I really felt bad about all that because I thought the Movement had a very good chance to make great strides after the Civil Rights Movement because it always dealt with the legal problem. The question was, how to build community? And what happened is when you had this struggle over integration over Black Power, that got out of hand, and we had this rivalry with two major groups, you see. In spite of their trying to deny Us status, and say, well, just Ron Karenga's group--that's how they talk about, like that, Karenga's group over here. The reality is that the Us organization was and is a national organization. And we had chapters across the country, and we still have chapters in the form of NAKO [National Association of Kawaida Organizations] or formations across the country. And, and we had influence beyond our size, not just nationally, but internationally, and not just where somebody named themselves after--there are groups that don't even belong to our organization, and yet use our philosophy to structure and conduct their projects. Speaker 2: And that's been true for years. Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 18378 Speaker 1: Okay, can--the next, I guess, and these are all crisis points, at the time when the philosophy is being embraced by people all over the, the states. And here we got another crisis, and this is your incarceration. Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Well, part of the COINTEL Project was to--it's real serious intention, which was formulated in the late '60s [1960s] was to identify, discredit, disrupt and destroy and otherwise neutralize all real and potential leadership. And from that came, of course, the government suppression of black leaders, the discrediting of them, the disinformation out on them, and the--putting them in captivity on trumped-up charges, and I suffered all of that, okay. And what the government charged me with was ordering one of our members to be beaten, and they put me in captivity [San Luis Obispo Prison, California] on this trumped-up charge. I served four years on this, and I was in isolation a whole year by myself. While I was in there, of course, I, I studied, I read. I never accepted their right to judge me or to try me. It's just their force and violence that put me in a position where they did that. And so I always saw it as a political captivity. I'm innocent of what they charged me with. I never accepted, I never accepted their right to rule, and I will always struggle against them. So I mean that's clear for me. And struggle makes us stronger, and so that's how that came about. I, I cut through that like a diamond in a sack of glass. One of the things I did notice though about all this is that so many other people that were put in captivity, they came out, they're broken or changed. It's amazing if you look at them. They weren't able to sustain themselves. They lose their favor, they lose their confidence. They feel that somehow they might have been wrong or they might have taken another turn. I don't feel that. I feel I have to struggle. I feel it's my life blood. That's how I understand myself. That's what my middle name [Ndabezitha] is, "constant concern to the enemy." That's a struggle name. That's a battle name. I'm also a teacher. I'm also a keeper of the culture. But at the heart of it, centered between teacher and keeper of the tradition, is this man of struggle. And that's what I, I try, I try to always do, to be a constant soldier for the people. And I need to be that, and I'm just, I'm sorry that the COINTEL Programs frightened so many people and destroyed so many lives. You can't imagine the havoc it wreaked on our organization and then to have people try to character assassinate us, in spite of all we suffered. You know, that, that really was a heavy burden for me. And it was certainly was for other people, but, you know, I have large shoulders, and I, I'm supposed to be strong. You know, one of the things I got from my mother [Addie Melton Everett] is the capacity to endure, the capacity to wait and to work while I wait. So the waiting is not so terrible, and to build, even in the midst of chaos. And that's what I had to do when I was in captivity. I mean I, I wrote. I, I--you had time to write, to study, to learn new languages. I did a lot of things so--I taught people. I helped them with their mail. I helped solve problems, resolve conflict. I did a lot of things. I--it was like I was out. You know, I was, I was organizing, you know. And I worked in the library. So, even though it bothered me to be away from my wife [Tiamoya Karenga] and my children and to be, you know, called so many names and to be blamed and charged falsely. Nevertheless, I had to deal with. I mean that's part of it. I mean, and I'm thinking about [Marcus] Garvey over there by himself alone, in London [England], you know, and not able to get to his people and, you know, dying without seeing his dream. But I feel blessed, and this is the time for me to say this. I think about Malcolm [X], I think about Garvey, I think about Fannie Lou Hamer, Ida B. Wells, these people never were blessed to see the fruition of their work. And I was blessed and am blessed to see my work flourish in my own time. That's something, to travel around the world, and just see your work, to see other people embrace and to speak it and to teach it and to share it as a legacy with their children. That's a very important thing, and to see millions do it, that's good. And I wish that for everyone else, and I wish it for my ancestors who really laid the basis for me to do it. Story_ID: 18379 Speaker 1: Well, while you were in captivity [San Luis Obispo Prison, California], several changes were happening in the country and [Richard Milhous] Nixon Watergate thing and the people were very critical of the way J. Edgar Hoover's FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigaion]--when Hoover died and people were free to criticize the activities of FBI--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Renault Robinson in Chicago [Illinois] with the African American Patrolman's League, he uncovered the Red Squad in Chicago and kind of break that, all that underground spy stuff up, you know, with their lawsuit against the federal government. And against the city of Chicago's Red Squad. So--? Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to say this also about the COINTEL Program, one of the things I think that really helped fuel the [Black] Panthers' struggle is the, those leftists who are so vicious against Nationalism. And they're the duplicate of the leftists that helped form the African [Blood] Brotherhood against [Marcus] Garvey. So this is a duplication. I mean this is throughout history. So they began to use the Panthers the way the other leftists used the African Brotherhood to co-opt the program and to destroy a nationalist project. But I'm glad to say, they did not do that to [The Organization] Us. I mean they certainly caused us some pain and grief, and they certainly caused us to be discredited in certain circles. But for the whole, black people have not embraced that, and I'm, I'm glad of that. And I want to show you how dishonest they are. All the books on the COINTEL Program never mentioned any group in detail except the Panthers. So it's like we didn't suffer, the RNA [Republic of New Afrika] didn't suffer RAM [Revolutionary Action Movement] didn't suffer, the nation didn't suffer, just the Panthers. I mean that doesn't make sense. These people read the same documents that have all our names in. I'm on the same list that Huey [P. Newton] and Bobby [Seale] are on, the black radical extremist group list. I'm considered a number one security threat. This is in the FBI papers, the documents. These people read this when they're doing research on the Panthers, but they don't do it. The FBI has me on the list, even while I'm in captivity, and they follow me even up until '76 [1976]. Can you imagine that? I mean from '66 [1966] to '76. I, I read--I, I had forgotten some of my lectures. They got all my lectures there, okay. They got where I met, who I met. And, of course, they, they got their agents scratched out cause we had agents too in the, in the organization, that were people disrupting us and reporting on us, just like everybody else. And they got agents in church, and they certainly had agents in Martin Luther King's movement. There's not a--there wasn't a movement that was doing anything, that didn't have an agent, okay. And if they have somebody watching someone as gentle as [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], you know they would have somebody watching us. So these people read the same material, and in order to stay in line with their myth, they pretend they don't see what the FBI said about me. And don't you ever believe it if they saw one, even suggestion, that the FBI had hired me or used me in any way, they'd have it in paper. Speaker 1: It would published. Speaker 2: It would be published. But what is published, and they don't reveal is that we're on the same list. And they watched us, I believe, longer than the Panthers. I just need to, I need to check out the dates on when they stopped on the Panthers and when they stopped on Us. But they followed us all the way to '76 [1976], and they got Us, they've got Us back on the list. So I think it's very important for us to realize those things. Story_ID: 18380 Speaker 1: You came out of captivity [San Luis Obispo Prison, California] in '76 [1976] or seven [1977]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Seventy-six. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, and you immediately--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 1: Seventy-five. Speaker 2: And I went to a meeting on the way home. I would not be stopped. I'm sorry, you know, we have to face that. And I want to say for the people that are listening to this, why do we say captivity? We don't believe that the established order has the moral authority--the right or the moral--right or the moral authority to, in fact, indict anybody. Plus, it's a trumped-up charge. It's a political imprisonment, and therefore, it's captivity. That's why we say captivity. Speaker 1: So in--I know almost immediately you started, you know, to organize again, to get involved again--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: One of the key things you were involved in--events that you were involved in was the FESTAC '77 [the Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, 1977]. Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. I did two things in '77, I went to FESTAC. I was invited first. Hoyt Fuller was going to be our del, delegation head, but he arrived late. So we had an election and people chose me, which really was a good testament because if they believed all that propaganda, certainly, they wouldn't have embraced me in that same way. So I, I led the delegation, and it was real funny because we built a radical caucus of black people, Cubans, Ethiopians, Eritreans--not Eritreans, I'm sorry, Cubans, Ethiopians, Somali, that's Somali, West Indians and African Americans, and even the Australians. That was the first time they had come to a Black Conference. And I tried to go to Australia, they invited me to Australia, but the Australian government--even the Prime Minister got involved and wouldn't let me come to the country. Speaker 1: FESTAC '77 was an international festival of Black Art and Culture-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It was held Lagos, Nigeria. Speaker 2: Yes, the Second African World, African Festival of Arts and Culture--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: It was the second festival (simultaneous). Speaker 2: In Lagos, Nigeria. It was in Lagos, Nigeria, and so we all organized a Black Caucus, this radical caucus, and for the first time, people in the diaspora was put on the plenary session. Before, they weren't. You see, I don't--I told the continentals, "Look, I'm no junior brother, you know what I mean. We're all African, you know. I'm a African in diaspora, you're African on the continent, but we are all African, you know what I mean. So we, we need representation." We organized, and we got representation, full representation on the plenary session. It was a very good conference. I really enjoyed that conference. Then I left from there and I was asked to join a delegation, headed by Kalamu ya Salaam and to be a spokesman for the Black Educators tour for China. And that was a very good project. I went there, I lectured there, and represented black people. That was also a good experience, international experience for [The Organization] Us, for our organization and for me and Tiamoya [Karenga], my wife, who went with me, and, you know, accompanies me on all these trips. Story_ID: 18381 Speaker 1: And in the late '70s [1970s], you, if I skip over something--(simultaneous) (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Please, no, go on. Speaker 1: --a highlight, just let me know. You began to explore the Ancient African history and culture in earnest-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --and began to make contact with Dr. [Jacob H.] Carruthers--(simultaneous)--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois] and some others, and, which resulted in the forming of ASCAC--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The Association for the Study of Classical African Civilization, which was formed here in 1984. Speaker 2: Eighty-four. Speaker 1: And just talk, tell us something about that? Speaker 2: February '84. Yes, in the late '70s, I began to write a book called 'The Introduction to Black Studies,' which has become the standard text, introductory text for Black Studies, used in over 250 universities as required text, and the most widely-used text. And while I was doing my research, I'd come across the studies of Cheikh, Cheikh Anta Diop. And I read him, and I believe that he's right, that, until we rescue and reconstruct ancient Egyptian history and make it again a part of African history, we'll always look like debtors to the world, rather than the world being indebted to us. And also he said, we use it--not just in a negative way, we use it for the positive. He says, if you--if we recover Egypt, it will play the same role in our culture that the Greco-Roman culture plays in European culture, Greco-Roman civilization plays in European culture. Story_ID: 18382 Speaker 1: Let me just interject this, is that the popular culture, the popular culture's perception of ancient Egypt is so gross and negative that--did you feel that by reconstructing that culture--I mean trying to rescue that culture, you'd be bringing to life something that most people would not even imagine existed based on the popular culture perception of Egypt, you know, the mummy and all these other things you read about? Speaker 2: Well, that wasn't as difficult as the religious conception of Egypt as a land of bondage. I'll talk about that in a minute. That's a myth, of course, but it was real serious because it had spiritual implications for black people. So [Cheikh Anta] Diop said if we, we cover ancient Egyptian culture, it will have three basic functions. One, it would allow us to renew, to--pardon me, to reconcile, first, to reconcile African and human history because human history is incorrect as long as it misrepresents African history. Second, it would give us the basis for building new human sciences. And third, it would give us the base for renewing African culture. And I wanted to do that. So than what I did, I had a meeting with our executive circle in [The Organization] Us, and we talked about how could we take this information and turn it into a practical program. You know, since I began my intellectual life and, and did it as an African, I'm always aware of the African concept that knowledge is never knowledge for knowledge's sake simply. Knowledge is always knowledge for human sake. And the question is, if you know, how can you use that knowledge to improve the human condition and enhance the human future? And so what we have here is the chance for us to take this knowledge and use it as a practical program for education and change. So what we said, the first thing you need to do is to organize a conference. And what we wanted to do is teach people the text because here I began to study the text, and again, I do independent study. I, I don't have a class. I do independent study. And I see that one of the most important aspects of the text that people had not talked about is the ethics. And I said that one of the ways to rehabilitate Egypt's image in the world, and one of the ways to, in fact, reaffirm the interiority of African ethics and spirituality is to recover these texts and teach them in their most beautiful and meaningful form. So I began to collect these texts, translate them and put them in a text called 'The Husia.' I'm doing this before we even get to the conference, okay. At this time, I'm at University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] as a distinguished visiting professor. And I'm coming back regular to meet with the organization on this, but I do this work, and I have it ready for the conference. Now, I need people to be at the conference. I need lay people and I need scholars. So I ask Tulivu [Jadi] who is my co-vice chair with [Seba] Chimbuko Tembo who is also--it's a male and female, vice chair--co-vice chair, I asked Tulivu if he knows anyone in Chicago [Illinois] that knows the language because I think--I really believe--as a scholar, I believe that you got to know the language of the culture. I mean it's just so important to know the language of the culture. So he says there's one man, Dr. [Jacob H.] Jake Carruthers. And I say, okay, I'm gonna call him. And I, I told--I called Jake and I said to him that I wanted to do this conference, and I would like for him to co-sponsor it, that he wouldn't have to do anything, that, in fact, I would do it, but I need him to talk to the old timers, the elderly scholars, like Dr. John [Henrik] Clarke, Dr. [Yosef A.A.] ben-Jochannan, and Dr. Chancellor [James] Williams. Other people that I don't know, I don't want them to think I'm--as a new guy on the block, and, you know, they don't know what I'm doing, you see what I mean? And so he said, "Okay, I'll do that." So we got John Jack--Dr. John [G.] Jackson, Dr. Chan--Dr. Chancellor really couldn't go, but we gave him an award to--we sent an award by Dr. [Leonard] Len Jeffries, that we--from our Organization Us and from the conference. John Jackson came, Dr. Wade [W.] Nobles, Dr. Na' im Akbar, Professor Rekhety, What's Rekhety's old name? Speaker 1: Rekhety, well, it's, was Rekhety [Deidre] Wimby (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Rekhety Wimby. Speaker 1: Jones, now. Speaker 2: Rekhety [Wimby] Jones, yeah, Professor Rekhety Jones, thank you, cause I said, Rekhety, I'd be in for some--and then, okay, and then I said, that we needed to make sure that an organization came from it. See our organizations are always entering the practical. What would come out of this? What kind of practical effect would this have? And so we talked to Jake about it. Then Jake had a book that, a manuscript, and I said, "Jake, why don't you let [University of] Sankore Press, it's our organizational press, print this." And he said, okay. And so we printed that. We also began to produce other literature. And we called a meeting--do I stop? Speaker 1: No, continue. Speaker 2: We called a meeting, and we said-- Speaker 1: My arm was in the way. Go ahead. Speaker 2: Oh, we called a meeting (laughter). He's saying we have to stop. Speaker 1: It is almost time--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Okay, we called a meeting we said, let's have an organization come out of this. Jake said, "I think that's good when we get there." I suggested the name, the Association for the Study of Classical African Civilization [ASCAC], got our artists in the organization to develop the symbol of man, woman balance, and I produced the literature, the Husia, that I thought it would be a kind of focus for us. And people liked it and everybody liked it. In fact, people who were not--who were Christians and Muslims, liked the book because they see themselves in it, you see. And they see the beauty of the text itself. Story_ID: 18383 Speaker 1: We were talking about ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilization], the development of ASCAC-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so we produced a literature with ASCAC and a symbol, and helped set up this structure, and published a textbook. And we began to stress the importance of standardizing approach. And we argued that the most important aspect of ancient Egyptian culture was its ethics. See, you know, even though people take maat now as the central way to understand ancient Egypt, that wasn't so before. You know that, don't you? And people talked Egyptian spirituality in very mystical ways a lot of times. And they also talked about Egyptian sciences as if it was mystical, levitation, all that, of culture. We came and said, the key issue is ethics, okay; that what we want to do is demonstrate to the world, what the world owes Egypt in terms of the ethical development of humankind. And so when I translated the text--even though I translated theology, at the core of it, was ethics. At that same time, in '86 [1986], I decided to go back to school and get my second doctorate in ethics. I had a doctorate I got in '76 [1976] when I--after I came home, I finished my work on my doctorate and got it in political science at USIU [United States International University] in San Diego [California]. And then I came to USC [University of Southern California] here in L.A. [Los Angeles] and enrolled to get a second doctorate in social ethics because I argued that ethics is the most fundamental and important discourse we can engage in to deal with the critical issues of our time. If we look at all the disciplines, they have a, a ethical dimension to it, whether we talk about our medical ethics, business ethics, computer ethics, journalistic ethics, political ethics, just go down. And I said, "What better people to engage in this ethical discourse than the people that introduced it from the very beginning? We're the oldest text on ethics." And so I decided to do my dissertation called, on, on ancient Egyptian ethics, and I titled it 'Maat: the Moral Ideal in Ancient Egypt.' Speaker 1: Can you spell maat for me? Speaker 2: Maat, M-A-A-T. 'The Moral Ideal in Ancient Egypt: A Study in Classical African Ethics.' It was a 800-page dissertation. When it was published, it was the most widely sought-after dissertation in the 50,000 that were released that year. And that was from the dissertation service of UMI [University Microfilms Incorporated] that put that on the computer to advertise dissertations. And so that was a very important step for us in the Movement. And then people began to engage in Egypt in a very strong way as a result of the work of ASCAC, certainly [The Organization] Us in ASCAC, but Us also independent of ASCAC, and we built for that. So that was a very important period too. We had, we withdrew from ASCAC, as you know, for a lot of reasons. But the main reason was we could not get the body to see that the trips were not as important as the study. We went to Egypt and took a thousand people, 800 and 200 met us there; largest trip Egypt had ever seen, okay. This was the basis of a movement. We saw this as a movement that we take the ethics and use them to address critical issues of our day. A lot of the people, they wanted to do tours. And they wanted to talk about the glories of ancient Egypt, without bringing forth this discussion and engaging in modern moral reflection and this discourse. That's what I wanted to do. And they were not doing that. And so, you know, a lot of people--there was a lot of jealousy and stuff. I mean people were doing so many kinds of strange things. So we said, "We're gonna do this anyhow." We had already trained Seba Maat, which is "Seba" means moral--Seba Maats and moral teachers in the ancient Egyptian tradition. We started that in '84 [1984], and we've had a very good history with that. We organized this teaching around five basic disciplines; one, to be a good person in the world, two, to be a constant--pardon me, one, to be a good person in the world, two, to be a consistent servant of the people, third, to be a constant soldier in the struggle, fourth, to be a continuous student of the teachings, and five, to be a tireless teacher of the good, the right and the possible. So our, our teachings, our, our, our studies are organized around these five disciplines and the realization of these aspirations. We've also continued to publish books on ancient Egypt, to hold seminars, and we're going to begin a larger, national teaching of Seba for different cities shortly. That's essentially what we're doing with that. Story_ID: 18384 Speaker 1: Can you give me an example of Kemetic widsom--the Husia is widely used and everyone who deals with this, who deals with the writings and sayings of ancient Egyptians, used in African American community, are using those scripts. Speaker 2: Right, well, the ancient Egyptians were the first to put forth ethical and spiritual text that represents a treasury of moral and spiritual reflection. And the Husia, which I put together as a collection of text, are divided--the Husia is divided into seven basic parts. First is the book of knowing the creation. Okay, in this, we have the origin of the world and how it started and the ancient Egyptian conception of God creating the world through creative intelligence, conceiving it in his heart and mind, speaking it with his mouth and calling it into being. The name for God in this case is Ra. But God has many names because he has many manifestations. And then the second one, more narrative, like the Book of Khnemu, which teaches narratives in order to instruct how to live and understand our lives. And the known narrative of Khnemu is the oldest social justice text in the world. This is very important text. It poses maat as the central element in creating a just and good society and a good and sustainable world. Speaker 1: Well, can you explain to us what maat--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Maat means many things, but essentially, it means "rightness" and rightness in three basic senses, in the realm of the divine, the natural and the social. So when we talk about maatian practice, we're talking about right relationship with the divine or God, right relationship with nature and right relationship with others, okay. So that's what maat is, rightness. And it expresses itself, as we have said in [The Organization] Us organization and in Kawaida philosophy, and best in seven, according to virtues; truth, the word for truth is maat. Justice, the word for justice is maat; propriety, harmony, balance, reciprocity and order. And it's really funny because sometimes people say these things, and they don't even think where they came from. They think it was always existed, but actually, we created this framework, just like we did for the seven principles, to create a discourse around the ethics of maat. Another narrative in terms of the book of narratives is the narrative of Teta. And this is one of the most important ethical developments in human history. And this is where you have a reaffirmation of the inherent dignity and divinity of the human person. Now, in the Books of Wise Instruction, which is one of the seven sections of the Husia, in the Book of Kheti, we have the first clear conception that humans are created in the image of God. This is the first time this is done before Jew or Gentile, we, we say this. This is as early as 2140 BCE. It says, we're in the image of God, came from his--humans are in the image of God, came from his very person. This is reaffirmed in the, in the Narrative of Teta. Teta is at the Court of King Khufu, and King Khufu tells Teta, how's that, "Teta, I hear you can reconnect the separated head." Teta is a sage. And he also has other skills, so the assumption is he can put this head back together. So Teta said, "Well, I can, your Majesty." The king says, "Then bring the pri--a prisoner and let's test." Teta said, "No, this is not permitted, my sovereign. We do not do these things to the noble flock of God or the noble images of God." Now, this a very important narrative, and this shows ethical wisdom and depth. When Teta says he cannot do this, and that it is not permitted, he's speaking truth to power. And he's challenging the pharaoh, who could wipe him out. But because he and the pharaoh belong to the same ethical system called maat, he knows he is right, and he speaks this truth to pharaoh. He said, "We cannot do this to the noble images of God," okay. Now, the importance of this is, number one, is that he's speaking it to power. He's appealing to a common ethical system. And second, he's doing it for a nameless person. When he uses the word [sheppers unclear?], which means noble, august, worthy of respect, and highly esteemed, he's using the word for dignity, human dignity. He's saying that this prisoner has dignity, even though he has a degraded status. And the importance of the narrative also is that the prisoner has no name. So it says that, no matter how degraded you are, and no matter how discredited you are--(simultaneous). Speaker 1: Or who it is. Speaker 2: Or who it is, what class it is, what race, it doesn't matter. You are a noble image of God, and your life is sacred. This also then speaks to the sacredness of human life and teaches the world that every life is sacred and that you can neither kill or experiment on humans without violating that sacredness. That's a very important teaching, an early teaching that we're facing now in biomedical ethics. What is the right or warrant for experimenting on other humans? You see. Even before we come to Nazi experiments on African, Egyptians, Jews and other people, we had these, this text that says "It is morally wrong to experiment on the noble images of God." It's an experiment because Teta can put the head back, but he won't do it, even though he can. They bring a chick, a goose, and he does it, but he will not do it for another human being, even though he can do it, okay, because you cannot experiment on another human being. That's beautiful to do that, to see that. And then, of course, there are other ones, the Seba (unclear), the books on declarations of virtue, the books of rising, like Ra, the books of contemplation, the seven basic functions, sections of this book. And that's what we've taught. And, again, I want to say that I think one of our strengths as an organization is to create constantly a discourse that enhances human life, that gives an enhanced understanding of human life, gives an enhanced way of encountering and dealing with human life. That's what I think, one of our great strengths is. Story_ID: 18385 Speaker 1: Moving from this period, we move into the early '90s [1990s], and we began to move into the Million Person Marches. Now, we move in the Million Man March, Day of Absence. But before that, I should say, we start building the National Black United Front [NBUF]. We actually are one of the founders of the National Black United Front, Dr. Khalid [Abdul] Muhammad and Dr. Reverend Herbert Daughtry, and myself as well as a couple of other people met in the Howard Inn [sic, Hotel], which was called Harambee House then and began to formulate the black, National Black United Front. The National Black United Front based its constitution on the Black Congress' constitution because I helped write it, and it had these seven principles in it and certainly was another Kawaida document, okay. The Black United Front, however, never got beyond the organizational aspect, that is to say--Could we hold on? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So we began to develop the Black United Front, but the Black United Front never got beyond the Brooklyn [New York] stage. And so it became, instead of an organization of an organization, it became the organization itself. And we continued to support it, even up to now, we support it, but it needs to be reorganized so that it can be an organization of an organization. Well, that didn't happen. So we formed the African Leadership Summit as a black united front--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: National African American Leadership Summit, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you. So after the Black, National Black United Front, we formed the National African American Leadership Summit, and we tried to build that. And then that led as a kind of precursor to the Million Man March, Day of Absence. Story_ID: 18386 Speaker 1: Now, the Million Man March was, of course, the brainchild of the Honorable Louis Farrakhan, and Minister Farrakhan believed that it was a good time to call black men to task. And we said, certainly it is. Now, there were some problems, however, because at that point the established order was trying to demonize him and to block him. And so whatever he said, they tried to take and twist, and one of the things he said was that men should go to Washington and women should stay home and, you know, do other things for that. Well, they seized on that to say this is sexist. Well, actually, you know, it's really stretching it because honestly, what he was trying to do is deal with the question as we said at the meeting, that all the major problems that people identify in the black community are somehow associated with black men. If you talk about crime, talk about violence, if you talk about gangs, if you talk about unemployment, whatever you--teenage pregnancy, it didn't, so it looks to us then that we should focus on them and try to get them to accept a level of responsibility that will help rebuild and reconstruct the community. And so that was it. But we understood that the message is important, how you phrase it. And so what happened is, our Organization Us, as I said earlier, called this meeting--called, had an executive circle meeting and decided that we should try to intervene and to put forth a public policy document that showed how important this project was and to try to--as best we can, contribute to rescuing this good project from the kind of demonization that was going on in the media and by some elements of our own community. And so we knew that Haki [Madhubuti] had direct access to Minister Farrakhan, even though each of us could call him. I mean certainly I could have called him, but I knew Haki had a very good relationship. And so I asked Haki what he thought about calling the meeting where we, as Nationalists, could do input into the Million Man March. And first Haki and Conrad [W. Worrill] and the other people were saying, well, maybe he wouldn't listen. I said, well, yes he would because I think he has respect for us, and we represent constituencies and I think, above all, he wants this to work because it is a good project and it deserves to succeed. And I, I, I believe he will respond positively. So Haki called him. He said, yes, he would. We suggested that it be at Haki's place, and Haki, myself, Tiamoya Karenga, Conrad, Ron Daniels, Bob Law, Imari Obadele, I forgot--I think, I can't remember the rest of the people right off, but those were some of the people that were there. We all met and we decided that--I had suggested and Minister Farrakhan took it well that we needed to structure a new presentation and a message. And we were--all of us agreed to that and people chose me to write a Mission Statement. I wrote the Mission Statement, and the Mission Statement became a serious public policy document. It was divided into three basic parts, atonement, reconciliation and responsibility. The atonement was Muslim idea. The reconciliation was, you know, classically Christian. And responsibility was the Nationalists, okay. That's how we put them together. So I wrote--if you look at the document, I start off by talking about how we see this as a critical juncture in our life, and how we're concerned with how the country is deteriorating, how there's been a revising and re-rising of racism, and how the environment is being destroyed, how the neighborhoods are being destroyed and how people are suffering needlessly, and that we, as black men, have a historical responsibility to honor, above all, our social justice tradition, which at a minimum, requires respect for the rights and dignity of the human person, respect for the culture integrity of a people, economic justice, meaningful political participation and constant struggle against all those forces who would deny or block this, okay. And so we put down certain policy statements for the government and for corporations and then obligations for ourselves. And among those things that we talked about was, of course, the need for the United States to accept its awesome responsibility in the holocaust of enslavement and the need for reparations. We talked about a full employment bill. We talked about the prison industrial complex and the need for us to struggle against police brutality; the need for us to support African countries and other peoples of color in their just and rightful struggles to push their lives forward, to harness their material and human resources and to participate in a full and meaningful way in their lives and in the politics of the world. We talked about renewing the Movement. We talked about building a black united fund. We talked about an independent politic. We talked about struggling against negative media in the industry. We talked about doing the public policy support for renewing our schools and supporting for--support for independent schools. And we talked about challenging our religious institutions to renew their spirit and to get actively in the struggle for a just and good society. And finally we committed ourselves to honoring the seven principles, Nguzo Saba, as our basic value system. And I closed with a paragraph that says, we meet in Washington [D.C] as a key city and that we must commit ourselves to always struggle and work in such a way that we always know ourselves as and introduce ourselves to history and humanity as a people who speak truth and do justice, who honor our elders and our ancestors, who cherish and challenge our children, who care for the vulnerable among us, who have a rightful relationship with the environment, who constantly struggle against evil and always raise up and praise the good. And we also helped give advice for the Million Woman March. And, and one of our people in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was very instrumental in helping to organize that. And we--one of our groups, and women in the group, and then who also advised for the Million Man March, the women in New York with Minister Khalid [Abdul] Muhammad. So. Speaker 2: Million Youth March. Speaker 1: Million Youth, I'm sorry, Million Youth March. We also helped advise with regard to the Million Youth March in New York as headed by Minister Khalid Muhammad. Story_ID: 18387 Speaker 1: I think maybe one of the tragedies of the Million Man--well, is, and certainly a misstep there somewhere, your statement had a uneven distribution and there was not a lot of attention paid to it at the march, which was incredible to me that, you know, that a lot of speeches, you know, speeches were made all day and the amount of attention that was paid to the document was so scant. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, it seemed to be a shame. I don't know how you feel about it, but (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah, well, talked to Minister [Louis] Farrakhan about that since that, and I, I still think that was a great mistake. And I still think, though, however, it can be revived and reaffirmed because actually, it represents the best of Nationalists' thinking, okay. And it undermines all those liberal, leftist claims that Nationalists have no public policy agenda. It's clear there. The whole stress on protection of the, the worker, labor union, full employment, just housing policy, it's all there, non-sexist, non-discriminatory environment in the work place. All that is there. I mean it's a very ex--it's an excellent document and represent the best of Nationalist thought. But you have a problem here. You pull together a loose coalition. The dominant group in there is the Nation of Islam, and the Nation of Islam has historically not been able to work on an equal basis in the [National] Black United Front [NBUF]. And so I recognized that. They recognized that, and so we had to make adjustments, you know. And so, in the end, they end up, one bringing in the petty bourgeoisie, I mean from the civil rights groups that had criticized them before, but trying to reconcile, trying to build alliances, okay, for whatever purposes they were doing that. And so I think it was a miscalculation on their part to do that. And also I think that they're used to talking their own message, okay. And so when we talked this larger public policy agenda, it's not as comfortable to the minister and to the other people around him. So that was the problem, but I think that all was not lost because people on the local level, the local organizing committees, in order to do this--I think you know this, we built hundreds of local organizing committees in various cities, okay, over 300 of them to put this march together. And the majority of the people there were not Muslims, okay. And what we did was to demonstrate the capacity to organize around an excellent idea. And, as you know, there was good effect of the Movement because, what happened? You had a greater sense of sisterhood and brotherhood, a greater sense of community. People began to adopt better and to mentor more and more programs. Also, people increased their voting. And for that moment in history, there was this surge. But that needed to be followed up. Some of the local organizing committees still exist, but the majority of them dissipated as the years went by. I think in the tenth year anniversary, that we should try to recapture that moment, not to go back to Washington [D.C], but to actually build on it by organizing again, the local organizing committees and committing ourselves, and recommitting our selves to that Mission Statement. Story_ID: 18388 Speaker 1: Now, I, I should say something about my work today with a very important national organization, and you have interviewed a lot of our members for over seventeen years now I've belonged the African American Leadership Retreat family. And the major leaders in the country, only Jesse [Jackson] and Minister [Louis] Farrakhan among a few others, have not come to this, but people like Dr. Dorothy Height and Maya Angelou or Dick Gregory--our leader is Barbara Skinner, Dr. Barbara Skinner. She and her husband Tom Skinner pulled this together. Arthur Ashe called and invited me. Arthur Ashe, the great tennis player who passed, and peace be upon him, he and I had gone to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles] together. And in his first autobiography, he credits me with giving him national conscious--Nationalist consciousness or black consciousness, okay. And so he remembered me and called me and asked me to be in--what we're trying to do is to meet--we've been meeting for years, around reinforcing each other, giving each other the kind of support we need to do the project we're working on. And now, we're working on a common public policy project called 'The Ethics of Sharing', and I would just like for the record to talk a few minutes about this. Story_ID: 18389 Speaker 1: So I was saying that one of the most exciting, one of the most inspiring and reaffirming projects I'm involved in is the African American Leadership Retreat Family. And some of the major African leaders in the country, political leaders, religious leaders, business leaders, educators, are all in this organization. And what we're doing now is trying to organize and put forth a public policy initiative called 'The Ethics of Sharing.' And it's based on the fundamental assumption in African ethics that all real goods are shared. All real good is shared good. In other words, the greatest goods we know have to be shared in order for them to be real. Freedom must be a shared good; justice, a shared good. Any attempt to have these just for one people or one person doesn't work out. Dignity, a shared good, friendship, a shared good, marriage, a shared good, brotherhood, sisterhood, all shared goods. So the greatest goods are shared goods, the fundamental African principle. And what we want to argue is that an ethics of sharing as a public policy would not only provide public policy for the nation and have international implications, but rebuild the collective vocation that we once had in the '60s [1960s]. See one of the things that is happening with African people is that they don't have the collective vocation and vision that they had in the '60s. In the '60s regardless of what you were, Muslim, Christian, Black Nationalist, integrationist, had a common vision you shared. The struggle was for freedom, justice and equality, brought in Black Power, and then it became freedom, justice, equality and power. Now, if you ask people what do you want? What do you stand for? You will get several different answers, but no collective overarching and scene. And what we want to do is put forth certain concepts to create national discourse about a public policy, that at the same time, becomes a collective vocation for African people. I, I have argued, and I continued to argue, that Africans are a central, moral vanguard in this country. We have launched, fought and won struggles with our allies that not only benefited us, but benefited others, expanded the realm of freedom and became a model for others around the world in terms of the human liberation struggle. That's why people here and in this country, in this country, in this country and around the world, borrowed our moral vocabulary and our moral vision, sang our songs and posed our struggle as a model to emulate in--and among Native Americans, Latinos, Asians, women, senior citizens, disabled people, gays, people around the world in Africa, South America, the Philippines, China's democratic struggle, Eastern European democratic struggle, Palestine and the Peace Movement and Liberation and Peace Movement, they sang our songs, borrowed our moral vocabulary and our moral vision, posed our struggle as a model to emulate. So the question is how do we step back on the stage of human history and offer another vision of human possibility? And we believe it's good, not only for us as a people, but for this country and for the world. That ethics of sharing argues that the most important thing we can do in the world today is share the good of the world today. And that sharing has to take place on seven basic levels. One, shared status, that's the beginning. No inferior or superior people. Everyone is equally a bearer of dignity and divinity and each people and person has both the right and responsibility to speak their own special culture truth to the world, make their own unique contribution to the forward flow of human history, and enjoy the respect of everybody else in the world. Second, shared knowledge. Knowledge is central to what it means to be a human. The ancient Egyptians called human beings reiki, knowing beings. That indicates not only how important knowledge is to us understanding our humanity, but also realizing our humanity. Education then must be a human right, not a social privilege. Without certain education and without the access to the highest level of technical and other knowledge, our future is not good. And so we argue, humans have a right to education. One of the ways that Europe has been able to monopolize power is to monopolize knowledge. It's only by sharing that knowledge with the rest of the world can they, in fact, take control of their destiny and daily lives, push their lives forward and live a good and meaningful life. Third, shared space, shared neighborhoods, shared country and shared environment. We have to live together. We share the planet together. We share this country together. We share the environment together, and especially, this shared environment is a critical issues. Corporations have no right privatize, to plunder and deplete and pollute the world and we not say anything. We must, in fact, challenge their attempt to privatize nature. We must, in fact, protect the world from depletion, pollution and plunder. Shared wealth and shared power. When we say shared wealth, we mean shared resources. People have a right to share in the goods of the country, in the wealth of the country. There's something wrong with ten percent of the people control eighty percent of the wealth. And when we brag about having so many billionaires and forty-one people go to bed hungry or homeless every night, we have to talk about that. We have to talk about unemployment. We have to talk about healthcare, how 41 million people don't have healthcare. We have to talk about that. We have to correct that, okay. So shared wealth has to do with that. Shared wealth also has to do with the right of people to organize into unions and to have a right to a decent life. You can't have a life of dignity if you don't have a life of decency. So we have to lead a life of dignity with a life of decency. And people have a right to a decent life, to have food and clothing and shelter, education, recreation, healthcare, they must have that. And again, workers have a right to just treatment on the job and in separation. Shared power: People have a right to control their destiny and daily life. They have a right to control the space they occupy. They have a right to participate in every decision that affect their destiny and daily lives. Shared interests. Four interests that stand as pillars in ancient African ethics. We can have these shared interests, respect for the rights and dignity of the human person, the well being and flourishing of family and community, the integrity and inherent value of the environment and the reciprocal solidarity of humanity and its cooperation for mutual benefit. Those are the four principles around which we can share interests and development others. And finally, after shared status, shared knowledge, shared space, shared wealth, shared power and shared interests, we share responsibility for building the world we want and deserve to live in. In the final analysis, practice proves to make possible everything. And so we must engage in sustained and profound moral reflection about our lives, envision a new world and struggle to bring it into being. Story_ID: 18390 Speaker 1: What projects are you working on now? Speaker 2: That's the first and most important one, that one, okay. Also, we work regular on the struggle for living wage. We also work with the unions in terms of education and leadership, training new leaders. We work with student groups to train new leaders into organizing, being active in defining and developing and promoting African interests. Those--we also support other third-world people in their struggles, the Palestinians, their right for a struggle for liberation and for a viable state, the Cuban people against unjust boycotts, the Iraqi against the senseless and vengeful war by the [George W.] Bush administration. We've very active in the major issues of our day, and we support the move to reaffirm and secure the peace in the world, and to use the monies that people propose to bomb and kill Iraqi women, children and men and to educate people and to give aid to people that we have colonized or imperialistically treated in the past. I think it's very important for America to be a force for good in the world, rather than the imperialistic aggression. So we're around--we struggle around all those issues. We also, as you know, maintain a culture center. And the culture center is to protect and preserve and promote African culture, both its continental form and its diasporian forms. We have regular forums here at the [African American Cultural] Center and we also maintain--and those forums, by the way, are local, national and international guests. Recently, we sponsored a poet from Zimbabwe, an organizer and educator from Sierra Leone. We've had speakers from other parts of Africa. We've had ambassadors and people from high level industry personnel, from the Cuban Mission. Speaker 1: Even local politicians. Speaker 2: And we've had local politicians and national politicians, culture leaders and artists, educators, okay. So our primary function is educational and organizational. We say organize--well, first of all, we say, educate, mobilize, organize. We're still into, into that. We also serve as a reference and resource center for people who need things in the community. We hook people up with resources for health or legal aid, for jobs and counseling, etc. We also advise other people on organizational practices, how to strengthen their organization. And we involve ourselves in cooperative projects with other people. But our first and foremost is this educational task of recovery and reconstruction of African culture and using that culture to answer and contribute to discourse on questions of enduring concern for our community and for humanity. And, again, I repeat, read dialogue with African culture, asking questions and seeking from it, answers to the fundamental concerns of human kind. We believe that is our fundamental function. Another thing we do is, we operate an independent school, the Kawaida School of African American Culture [Kawaida Institute of Pan African Studies, Los Angeles, California], which we've had, of course, since the '60s [1960s]. And we teach young people culture, the best of African culture, ground them in their values and teach them how to be African men and women in the world. We also have rites of passage programs. We've put twenty-one rites of passage programs in different churches around the L.A. region, okay. If we had more resources, we'd put even more about there, but that is what we've done ourselves. We've done political education and registration for electoral politics. We've helped organize unions and we've helped educate union leaders. So, those are some of the things that we do. Story_ID: 18391 Speaker 1: Now, we didn't mention the Odo Ifa. Speaker 2: Yes, in this structure of stressing the ethical and spiritual aspect of African culture, and focusing on the importance of educ-ethics in modern moral reflection and discourse, again, I turn to Africa and ask, what does Africa have to say about these issues? And I decided to translate the Yoruba sacred text, the Odu Ifa. Usually, the Odu Ifa is seen as a divination text. It was not seen before [The Organization] Us organization embraced it as such, as an ethical source. In fact, people were shocked when we finally translated it and made it available. But that, again, is our strength. We create a discourse, a framework for a discourse in which people can understand and assert themselves as African people in the world. And so what I did was I translated the Odu Ifa from an ethical perspective. I skipped the divination aspect of it, and I actually extracted the ethics of it. Odu Ifa is again, the sacred text of ancient Yoruba land. It has 256 chapters, which are called Odu. Odu Ifa is--means baskets of sacred wisdom of Ifa. It comes from theological narrative in Ifa, which is the religious tradition. It says that when God created the world, Olodumare, he gave Orisa and humans baskets of sacred wisdom to make the world good. And these Odu, these chapters of ethical and spiritual wisdom are the Odu, are the baskets of wisdom that he gave us to make the world good. And one of the most beautiful chapters in there is Chapter 78, Verse One, which says, let's do things with joy for surely, humans have been chosen to bring good into the world. And it teaches that this bringing of good into the world and not letting any good be lost is the fundamental mission and meaning of human life. Now, it's very important for us to see this concept that we are chosen to bring good into the world. And the importance of this, that this is a chosen concept that's different from all other religious chosen concepts I've ever read. And that's what my second doctorate is, religion and ethics. And in this book, the Odu Ifa, it says, "All humans are chosen." It doesn't say one ethnic group. Maybe Yoruba could say they were chosen, but they don't. They say all humans are divinely chosen to be--bring good in the world. Now, the importance of this is that it does not matter what your status is, your race, your agenda, your class, you're all chosen to bring into the world. In fact, the Yoruba word for chosen one--for human being, is "eniyan," which means "chosen one." So when you talk about humans, you talk about chosen ones. And so here's this chosen, it means people are chosen, not over and against anybody like other traditions, but they're chosen with everybody for one central task, to bring good into the world and not let any good be lost. So whether you're a judge or a janitor, lawyer, doctor, farmer, pharmacist, preacher, priest, seba, it doesn't--or social worker, you're all chosen to bring good into the world and not let any good be lost. It's worth being African to talk this lesson--to have taught this lesson. Story_ID: 18392 Speaker 1: I want to go back to the beginning almost. Did your parents get a chance to see your work and--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, they were proud of me. I was just getting into the [Black Power] Movement when my parents [Levi and Addie Melton Everett] passed, '68 [1968] and '69 [1969]. And they were glad to see me doing this and I hope I've done honor. May they always smile down on me and reconfirm me in what I'm doing. I always think about them and always think that I must honor their memory by practicing the best of what they taught me, speak truth, do justice, to honor elders and ancestors, to cherish and challenge our children, to especially care for the vulnerable among us, to have a rightful relationship with the environment, to constantly struggle against evil. And as mom used to teach always, always raise up and pursue the good. Story_ID: 18393 Speaker 1: And what do you see--well, you've covered a lot of it, what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I appreciate what you said, if I understand correctly, I hope that it's still unfolding. And I would like to think that whatever I've done, I always give thanks to my mother [Addie Melton Everett] and father [Levi Everett] who brought me into being, my other members of my family who sustained me and supported me and my wife, Tiamoya [Karenga], who's been my companion in loving struggle and in all things good and beautiful, our Organization Us that provided me with the intellectual and political support and context in which I could grow and be challenged and challenge, and, of course, my ancestors who gave me this wonderful, ancient and rich culture out of which to weave a vision of the world and to engage in a practice that could enhance and enrich our lives as a people and share good wisdom with the rest of the world. And I think that my legacy is this work that I've tried to do. I've tried to, as [Amilcar] Cabral said, "do my duty in the context of my time." I've tried to struggle for the people who needed support and deserved a good life. I've organized my life around and my struggle around the fact that in spite, in spite of people's argument that all the major struggles are over, that still, the oppressed want freedom, the wrong and injured want justice, the people want power over their destiny and daily lives and the world wants peace. And my legacy is to, in fact, struggle to contribute to those ongoing struggles that are the motive force of history. It's hard for me to say one particular thing is my legacy. It's the wholeness of my life, including the support others have given me that is my legacy. My legacy is Us; my legacy is Kwanzaa. My legacy is the Husia, the Odu [Ifa]. My legacy is the practices of struggle, the model I offer, hope of human possibility and achievement. My legacy is Kawaida. I think that, if, if someone would say to, how you wanted to be remembered, I would say, "Remember me by my name." My name is, is, is my legacy and an indication of my work, which is my legacy. I'm always Maulana, a master teacher. I love teaching. I've always loved taught--teaching, even when I was a small child, I would lecture and teach other children around me. And I enjoy teaching now, and, Ndabezitha, I'm a man of struggle. I'm a constant soldier. I want to be a constant soldier. But I'm also--and this is how people understand me as a Culture Nationalist, I'm a keeper of our tradition. I'm always committed to bringing forth the best of what it means to be African and human and to speaking that special culture truth and to using it as a foundation and framework to make our own unique contribution to the forward flow of human history. And I suppose I would close it, in summing up all the, by saying I have tried as my philosophy, Kawaida teaches me in the Seba tradition and to moral teaching tradition of Egypt, which said, we must strive always--and this is what I've tried to do, to be a good person in the world, to be a consistent servant of the people, to be a constant soldier in the struggle, to be a continuous teacher of, of--to be a continuous student of the teacher. I've always tried--I'm sorry. I've always tried to be a good person in the world, to be a consistent servant of the people, to be a constant soldier in the struggle, to be a continuous student of the teachings and to be a tireless teacher of the good, the right and the possible...