 Story_ID: 131190 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is the loquacious Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Barrietta Killiebrew. You spell it B-A-R-R-I-E-T-T-A, Killiebrew is K-I-L-L-I-E-B-R-E-W. Speaker 1: All right, now, is there a story behind your name? That's--that's a--do you have any relatives named Barrietta or did they--is there a story behind it? Speaker 2: There is a story behind my name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Funny you should ask. I am the first grandchild of Barry Killiebrew and for whatever reason, they assumed that my mother was going to have a boy and when it was a girl, because she was going to name her son after her father, they put that on, and I became Barrietta Killiebrew. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And there's a story behind Killiebrew, too, I believe? In fact, you know, someone said there's a different spelling of? Speaker 2: Yes. What happened, Killiebrew is really spelled K-I-L-L-E-B-R-E-W. The "I" came because of a midwife's misinterpretation on how to spell the name correctly. And she changed a generation of prior Killebrews into Killiebrew with an "I." Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nine, twenty-three, sixty [September 23, 1960], Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: All right. And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: What is my occupation, that's a good question? Let's see, the first occupation is a Contract Specialist for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and that's with the federal government. Secondly, I'm a real estate agent for Coldwell Banker. And thirdly, I'm an entrepreneur for Wildwood Plantation and Vice President. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: October the 18th, 2007 [October 18, 2007]. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Presently we're at Wildwood Plantation, 40 Dames Court, Ferguson, Missouri 63135. Speaker 1: And this is a historic residence, I just wanted to point that out too, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 131191 Speaker 1: Now, we're going to talk about that at length at some point but before we get into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as a warm-up and they only require a short answer. First one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, what is it? Speaker 2: Let's see, seafood. Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hawaii. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying? Something I always say, "Ain't God good?" Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 131192 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We'll start with your--start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Carol Austin. Her maiden name is Killiebrew. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August the 15th, '44 [August 15, 1944]. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: I've been actually on Internet and, well, let's see, I was narrowing some collection of data and I can trace my grandfather's grandfather back to Kentucky. Speaker 1: That's your great-great-grandfather, right? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Back to Kentucky. What part of Kentucky? Speaker 2: I'm not sure which part of Kentucky because on the census it just gives you the state. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. This census is from where? From St. Louis or-- Speaker 2: Ancestry.com is where I'm getting my documentation. So, what is your question? Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So he was in Kentucky but it doesn't give the county or anything? Speaker 2: It probably does. I've been printing out sheets and just going back and forth trying to make sure this is the correct one because a lot of times they have the same names but because Killiebrew is a--a unique name, there were several Killiebrews that could have actually been my great-great-grand because they actually used their names over from one generation to another even though you didn't see J.R.--John Killiebrew had John Killiebrew maybe twice in the family line of sons and you didn't know one from the other and that's the middle name was changed and I thought that was ironic. Speaker 1: Okay. So this great-great-grandfather, when did he live? Speaker 2: He lived basically back in the early 1800s. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, are there any stories about any of your ancestors in Kentucky or-- Speaker 2: We did not even realize the meeting--the people here locally that we actually had people from Kentucky until I started doing some of the documentation of our family tree. We were under the understanding that most of the--my ancestors came from Mississippi and that was not so. Speaker 1: Hum, okay. Speaker 2: And even with my great-great-grandfather being born in Kentucky, it shows that his wife was actually from Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 131193 Speaker 1: Yeah, now where does the story pick up where you actually have a story where you know where they're living and not just-- Speaker 2: Mississippi. Speaker 1: Mississippi, okay, all right. What part? Speaker 2: My mother [Carol Killiebrew Austin] would have that information. I don't know which part but locally, I mean, from one generation to another, we just mention states and not so much township but in Mississippi my grandfather's father was African American and half-Italian and in that region he--his mother was from Africa and she was totally into speaking English and still having some of her native tongue and that was not shared from one generation to another. My grandfather only spoke that she could speak two languages. Speaker 1: So this is your grand-- Speaker 2: --father's mother. Speaker 1: Okay, so your great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, was from--your paternal great-grandmother, I guess, would be from Africa? Was an African-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was a very tall woman from what he said and very very dark in complexion. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To have married his father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I do have documentation on that that I could share with you and you can send the information on. Speaker 1: Well, I'm more interested in the stories. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think the stories about her are passed down and you can remember, what did she do that was African? That people thought was African? Did--did-- Speaker 2: Speaking two languages. Speaker 1: So she could speak an African language? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Anything else? Speaker 2: Other than that, because I didn't get to physically meet her or anything, no, that's all I can recall him sharing information on his parents. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did your ancestors do, I mean, on that side? Were they mostly--agriculture work as farmers or did they do anything else? Speaker 2: That's basically what they did. Speaker 1: Okay, so in Mississippi and--and is there a story about how they, you know, ancestors on your mother side got to St. Louis [Missouri]? Speaker 2: She would know that story. I mean, when I tell you that it's just like in passing, when a lot of us was born in St. Louis and we would hear anything about Mississippi, and sharing the stories how they had to be on the farm, picking cotton or had to work in the fields, it was just like a roundabout way of bringing it up, nothing that they really elaborated. So, and if they never even mentioned that there were relatives in Mississippi, we would have, in this generation, and the generation behind me thought that we all came from Missouri, St. Louis, but I think that history holds that my grandfather's relative was in Missouri and he came up for work, him and my grandmother, that's why they came to St. Louis, Missouri. Story_ID: 131194 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Carol Killiebrew Austin] talk about growing up in St. Louis [Missouri]? Did she have any stories about growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, she has many stories about living in St. Louis. Speaker 1: Now, did she grow up in The Ville or one of the other neighborhoods here that you can name? Speaker 2: She grew up, basically, the downtown area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And before she came to St. Louis, at the age of two, she was sent to Mississippi until she was about twelve and she stayed with my grandfather's sister. So she knew very well both of--both of her worlds of living in the South and then coming up North. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now--now did your mother go to high school here in St. Louis? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it was Soldan [High School]. Speaker 1: So--I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Soldan High School. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: S-O-L-A-N-E, Solane [sic]. Speaker 1: S-O-L-D-A-N? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, did she have any stories about high school or-- Speaker 2: We never really talked about her stories in high school other than how it was to be raised in St. Louis and the desegregation and things of that nature she would talk about but as far as her high school days and even elementary days, we didn't really discuss. Speaker 1: Okay, so, what did she say about the--the racial climate in St. Louis? Speaker 2: That it was very segregated and racist and that never feel like I was a second class citizen, that I was a somebody and to stay strong and not let it affect you. Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother, I take it, at one time lived in Chicago [Illinois] since you were born there? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, what--well tell us about that. Speaker 2: Okay, that trip was made because my grandfather's other sister, who's in Chicago, wanted to adopt me and my mother was in disagreement with it but she went to Chicago anyway and after I was born, she told his sister, which is her aunt, that she wasn't going to allow the adoption to go through. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now I take it that your mother was not married to your father, right? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay so that was part of the tension? Speaker 2: And that was one of the reasons to say, okay, so you guys not going to get married, this baby should possibly be raised by, my aunt at the time was married, by a married couple and she was open arms for it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Now--now, what did your mother do for a living? Or what does she do for a living? Speaker 1: Now she's retired. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But prior to that, she worked at a factory. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's what she retired from. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Lincoln Engineering [Lincoln Industrial Corporation, St. Louis]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 131195 Speaker 1: All right, now, okay. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: James Boyce, B-O-Y-C-E. Speaker 1: And do you know his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He did not come in my life other than maybe two or three times throughout that I can remember. Their relationship mandated that. You know, we just wouldn't keep in contact with each other for whatever reason and I guess he honored it. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a Chicago [Illinois], no, a St. Louis [Missouri] person? Speaker 2: No, he's a St. Louis person. Speaker 1: He's from St. Louis, okay, okay. Do you know anything about his people or his background? Speaker 2: Yes, my auntie went to school with him, and my mother [Carol Killiebrew Austin], of course, at the same time but she would tell me bits and pieces like you're more like your father. You look like him, you know. Sometimes you're very intelligent like him and bits and pieces but other than that, no. Speaker 1: Okay, did he have a chance to finish high school too and-- Speaker 2: I'm sure he did. Speaker 1: Okay, he was at Soldan High School [St. Louis, Missouri] too or do you know? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know what he did for a living? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And encountered him at the age five and I think another time at seven and maybe nine. He seemed to be doing something compared to the way he was dressed and the question he was asking. What are you doing in school? You know, stay in school and give me that tidbit of information but I was very, not really receiving him because I guess I was angry he wasn't around and he didn't understand it and I didn't understand it and in between it, I guess he figured that I was feeling like my mother that he shouldn't come around. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you said that people that knew him said that you were smart like he was. So was he--was he-- Speaker 2: Academically they--he scored good grades. Speaker 1: Now did he go to college? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're not sure what he did? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, is there a story about how--how your parents met that you're-- Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother met him in school and my auntie was saying that he was like a lady's man because, I guess, he was attractive or a handsome per se and that's how she met him. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, when you--from what you know of your father's personality and, of course, you know your mother's personality, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Probably my father. Speaker 1: Okay, why? Speaker 2: Because, say when you ask the question, did he go to college? I was the first one in my family tree to go to college and finish and it wasn't like no one said, go to college, I just knew that I was going and I did all the necessary things to get in college even though I did not worry about, where are you going to get the money from? I found out how you're going to get the money, by researching, talking to counselors, financial aid packages. I mean, it all was so normal for me that I, in my own ideology, thinking back, well this is my father's side because I'm pursuing something that no one else on my other family tree is actually saying to do or want to do. So I just give that back to maybe in his genes this is where I got that notion from and my mother is outspoken, not that I'm not, but I always see things in a different light than what she does and, again, if you have two parents, you say which one you are like. If you're not like one, you have to be like the other or a mixture of both. So, I assume that I'm more like him. Speaker 1: Okay, so do you think that genetics determine more of what you're going to be like than-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --training? Speaker 2: I truly do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not even just from my own experience but having two sons, I see where genetic has definitely played a part. Story_ID: 131196 Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Of, what category? Speaker 1: Just an earliest. What is the first thing that you remember? Do you have--can--is there-- Speaker 2: The first thing? Speaker 1: --a memory that you know is the first memory that you've stored in your head that you can say, well-- Speaker 2: I think at almost the age of fifteen months to eighteen months, I can recall being on the floor, being told, "walk." You can do it 'cause I was only one and for whatever reason, I was so--and here's the side that possibly like my father [James Boyce], more stubborn than most. I knew I could walk, I wouldn't walk because people were asking me to walk and I can remember them saying, "She's just too old, she needs to get up and walk." "Come on, she can walk." And I wouldn't walk for them because I had it in my mind that I'm going to walk when I get ready. And I could remember that and, you know, growing up, and I'm thinking, back then, "Oh, it took me a while to walk." It's because I didn't want to walk. So the earliest that I can remember is that era in my life when I was almost spanked to walk. I wouldn't walk. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 131197 Speaker 1: Now you grew up in St. Louis [Missouri], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And did you grow up in the same neighborhood that your mother [Carol Killiebrew Austin] grew up in or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We actually moved, possibly a year later, like gypsies. My mother always strived to move in areas where there was good upkeep and she liked the finer things of life so when things that she saw people weren't keeping their property up or if there was something in the neighborhood she didn't agree with, we were always moving. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your--who did your--do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, how many and where do you--you're the oldest, I guess, right? Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And we're--siblings--it's actually four girls and four boys. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, let's see. So your family consisted of you and your siblings, your mother. Now did a grandmother live with you or any other relative when you were growing up? Speaker 2: No, and my stepfather. Speaker 1: Okay, stepfather, okay, all right. Now what was--well, you moved around a lot you said but was it in different neighborhoods around the city? Speaker 2: All of them, from the West to the South to the North to the East (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And sometimes the same school district. It was strange. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 131198 Speaker 1: Now do you--what were some of the--after all these--and all these different places, what's the general sense that you have of what--I mean what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The sights and the smells were very different than what they are now. People to me, back then, when I was growing up, it was more a family orientated. If someone saw your child down the street and knew that they should be in front of their house, you knew your mother would know or they would say, "Go home, you know you're not supposed to be around here." It was more of a protective environment that I can say than what it is now. People were more nosier, of course, and--and fun was--didn't have to have anything tangible. You can go outside and just play and, you know, we didn't have the television, the videogames. We actually got enough exercise and enough energy to burn and the discovery of being a child to me was more open than what it is now. I mean, I could not phantom [sic], back then, growing up that it was not even safe to sit out on your own front without worrying that someone may snatch you, not that it didn't go on, but it was not a plentiness like it is now. So I would say back then, the environment was safer, the people were more kinder and the kids were more, what I want to say, free, free to express themselves without being tied into the house, in front of a computer or a game. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: More sociable. Speaker 1: Yeah, any other sights and sounds and smells? Speaker 2: Different buildings and architect I can remember that we moved from and to, that I would always notice the difference. I would always notice the difference in neighbors. We moved in one area on Pershing [Avenue], which is considered the central west end in St. Louis [Missouri] and it was more what I want to call New York-type [New York City, New York] environment where all nationalities and make of life was and it was no certain color or creed, just--and everybody wasn't just segregated. Everybody lived in the same area and you may walk down the street and hear a Hispanic talking and you may go up the street and hear another nationality talking and even as a child I would look at them and go, "Wow, these people are talking some other languages. Don't they know they're in America now, that they can talk English so I can understand what they're saying." Things of that nature. I can recall that. Story_ID: 131199 Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little girl? What did you like to do? Speaker 2: I was more of a tomboy. I liked being the boss. I guess being the first child of many would constitute that and I liked to draw and talk to--my mother said I used to talk to ghosts but I would be on the room, by myself, just having a conversation and she would walk in there and say, "Who you talking to?" And I would say, this is my friend, whomever and she's like "okay, I think she's normal here." But it was me and my imaginary world to create whatever I wanted. So I was very visionary, shall I say, as a child. Speaker 1: Did you do that even--even after your brothers and sisters came along? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So do you remember any of the names of your imaginary friends or did you make up any specific ones? Speaker 2: No, I think that I was just in a dream world because I can recall that it would never be in this time zone. Like say, I grew up as a '60s [1960s] child, I wouldn't be thinking back in the '60s, I would always be thinking I'm in another time zone, another area that I created in my mind to do but I think it was just a form of being a loner and possibly being lonely to not have who I wanted around me at the time. My sisters and brothers are younger than me but not too much younger but when it came to time, to my quiet time, I'd just--I would just go into my own world. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your brothers come first or your sisters? Speaker 2: Sisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 131200 Speaker 1: All right. So, now can you tell us about--was--when you said, TV wasn't a big deal, when you're growing up, right? Speaker 2: No, but we had televisions but-- Speaker 1: Okay. What about music? Was music-- Speaker 2: Yes, music. I loved when we'd have the top line of music that was actually being played. My mother kept up with the music world and she shared those values with us and we would listen and I can remember when we used to live in, I think, the North side [St. Louis, Missouri], we would all get together, the kids, and just have our stereo system blasting from the inside to open up the doors and we would sing, dance and that right there, the music was a big deal in our family. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did you have a favorite station here in St. Louis Speaker 2: I used to. Our St. Louis radio stations have changed, so that-- Speaker 1: Well, what was it then? That's what-- Speaker 2: There was jazz. Speaker 1: You used to listen to jazz when you were a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --kid coming up? Speaker 2: No, R and B [rhythm and blues]-- Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: I was thinking-- Speaker 1: --that's what I'm asking about, yeah, what you were listening to then. Speaker 2: Oh, as a child, yeah, R and B, Motown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Did you have a favorite--was there a black station in St. Louis that you listened to? Speaker 2: Yes, I think 16 [KATZ 1600 AM]. That was the hundred of the radio station. Speaker 1: Oh, 1600, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Do you know the call letters or anything? Speaker 2: No, I don't recall-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I remember 16 was the station we put it on and you'd hear the latest and greatest, Gladys Knight, Stevie Wonder, Diana Ross, you know the Michael Jacksons, the Jackson Five, things of that category. It wasn't until I got older that I started falling in love with jazz. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now were you involved in any--any--in church coming up? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, what church did you-- Speaker 2: We went from Pentecostal to Baptist to non-denominations so church was very much a part of our lives. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you play any special role in church? In the youth choir? Speaker 2: They had us in--not the youth choir, the drama class we would do that, put on plays, but mostly just hearing the sermons and somewhat understanding some and not understanding most, growing up. You were just antsy to get out of there. Speaker 1: Okay, now were you in any--were you in the Girl Scouts or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, I didn't do Girl Scouts. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 131201 Speaker 1: Now what was your first school that you attended? Can you remember? Speaker 2: Langston [Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] is a school I can remember. We're talking maybe first, second and third grade there. Speaker 1: Okay, and well, did you like school? Speaker 2: Yes, I loved school. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any favorite teachers or subjects in school? Speaker 2: The teacher that really impressed me on my mind, she was at Blewitt [Elementary] School. I guess I was in my--we're talking fourth, fifth and sixth grade, Blewitt. Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: Blewitt. Speaker 1: Blewitt. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And her name was Ms. Thompson. Speaker 1: Okay. What made her special? Speaker 2: She would push all her students to read at various levels. Like if she was working with the students that could not pronounciate [sic] or read properly, she'd make the other students get involved in other projects or other study habits or even lay down and take a nap or a rest and she would have these handful of students that she would actually literally teach back their alphabets. I mean, when you're talking new grades there, you would think everybody know their alphabets but not so much as just to know their alphabets but how to sound off on different letters to make them be able to--be able to read. And I can remember one time, it was getting on my nerve, and I was just tossing and turnin', and she took--called me up to her desk and she was like, why are you not, you know, resting. I said, I can't take it anymore. I said, I'm tired. You got us down too long, you know, to work with these slow kids. And when I said that, you know, she--she called me outside the classroom. She said, I'm going to tell you something. She said nobody's slow in here. People--you're going to find out in life, learn in different degrees and levels. Just because you are where you are now, you know, educationally, there's somebody else that can run a circle around you and call you slow but you're not really slow, you're just going at your own pace. She said so, since you think they're so slow, you're gonna start being with me and you're going to sound out the letters and help them read. And I can remember that that really had an impact on me 'cause she brought me into tears 'cause she told me--she made me feel this small and I was like, I didn't mean to, you know, make them feel bad. She said, but you did, 'cause you said it and you said it out loud 'cause you're angry 'cause I told you to go in there and lay down--lay your head down on the desk. So, I got to the point that I was looking forward to helping them instead of feeling like, we're being punished 'cause they don't know. Story_ID: 131202 Speaker 1: All right, so you got a chance to help Ms. Thompson teach some of the other children? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a good experience. Did--so how old were you then? Speaker 2: Let's see, probably eight or nine. Speaker 1: Okay, eight or nine, okay. You were eight or nine I guess is when--if I'm guessing right, it's about the time-- Speaker 2: About fourth grade. Speaker 1: --that Michael Jackson came out with 'I Want You Back' and all that? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: You know, about--The Jackson Five were big? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And did you have favorite musicians then and songs? Speaker 2: Probably then Michael Jackson. I was like everybody else, the latest and greatest. Speaker 1: Okay, now you were in a school--you were in a school at the time when people were starting to teach some black history, culture, in the textbooks and such? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you get much in school? Speaker 2: Yes, but it is the--[Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], Harriet Tubman. It's not the people like in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], they were always, other than Martin Luther King, somebody that was way back when and when I say that, they were not respecting, way back then, but it was a lot of things going on with learning about African Americans that we were not privy to that as I got older and grown, and I found out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Later, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So there was an effort but it wasn't--it wasn't enough really? Speaker 2: Right, it was not enough. Speaker 1: It didn't make--it makes us look--much of an impact on us. Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: Okay. So, let's see here. So--were you a good student? Did you get pretty good grades? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you went to Blewitt Elementary School [St. Louis, Missouri], then what was your next school? Was it--or did you finish up at Blewitt? Speaker 2: I finished up at Blewitt in the eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then we moved to the county [St. Louis County] where I went to McClure [High School], which is in Ferguson [Missouri] where we're living now but in a different location. Speaker 1: You went to McClure High School? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: That's M-C-C-L-U-R-E? Speaker 2: No, M-C-M-U-L-R-E, McMulre [sic]. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I'm-- Speaker 2: No, you're right. Speaker 1: M-C-C-L-U-R-E. Speaker 2: M-C-C--that's it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. McClure High School, okay. It's out in the--you say out in the county, that's what people will say around here when they mean it's not in the St. Louis proper right now? Speaker 2: Right, you're either a county brownie or a city. Speaker 1: County, brownie or a city? Explain those--explain those designations to us. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Oh, because I had the both--what I want to say are both worlds, early in life, living in the city, you know, you're from the city, which is more, you're more cool, you're more knowledgeable, street sense of life, so when someone said that they lived out in like the suburbs or the county, they were a county brownie, somewhat green, knew a little bit of economic--not economic, academically, but street sense and common sense, a lot of the county brownies, as we called them, they lacked according to city factors and determination of who you were as a person. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a city kid that became a county-- Speaker 2: Brownie. Speaker 1: But you were never really a county brownie though you were out in the county? Speaker 2: I became a county brownie in the eighth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: 'Cause I left Blewitt in the seventh grade. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, did you go right to McClure High School in the eighth grade? Speaker 2: There's a Ferguson School that I went to. Speaker 1: Ferguson Elementary School? Speaker 2: Junior--Junior High. Speaker 1: Oh, Ferguson Junior High School [Ferguson, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Then it was McClure. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 131203 Speaker 1: How could I forget Ferguson Junior High [School, Ferguson, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Okay, now what happened? Was that a--was it a culture shock to come out into the county here? Speaker 1: It was very much a culture shock because when they found out you were coming from the city, and I had a three point eight GPA in the highest classes, and when I came to Ferguson, I was in the office and they were like, we're not--we're going to put her in a different type of math class and I was like, I can do that math and they was like, no, 'cause you're coming from the city, you're going to understand that when you come in this school, and they was like, "in this school," that I was told that we teach differently, you know. We read, write, add, supply, divide, multiply differently. That's how I was feeling it and I was kind of angry at first and I said, okay, well that's fine. And if you do well, then we'll put you in this category of classes. So, coming from the city to the county, I was already experiencing like there was a big difference in--really wasn't a difference to me as a child but I started understanding that, okay, when you get in the school, there is a difference. And coming from an all-black school to a 70 percent to 30 percent mix, meaning 70 percent Caucasian and 30 percent African Americans, you--that's a culture shock because things that I took for--as the norm, wasn't the norm all of a sudden. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I adapt pretty well though--because I didn't let that bother me. And being a loner, even growing up, I was able to adapt. Speaker 2: Okay, so when you describe yourself as a loner, I mean, why did you-- Speaker 1: I mean, I would have friends but I could be off on my own and not have to deal with them. I wouldn't--I didn't have to have friends around me at all times. And being in a school environment, when you're with a set of girls one day and the next day you sittin' by yourself and don't want to be around them, I would have to explain, I'm not mad, I just don't want any company. And that was considered weird but what's wrong with you? Nothing's wrong, I just don't want to hear all the chirping (laughter) and I would tell them and the bickering between you guys, I just want to be alone, you know, and respect it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then the next day, I'll come around and everything is happy-go-lucky and they saw that, she just wants her own space, I guess, so-- Story_ID: 131204 Speaker 1: Now was--was Ferguson, I mean McClure High School [Ferguson, Missouri] like a mixed high school or was it all black? Speaker 2: Yes, McClure High School was getting to be more 45 percent African Americans to 55 percent Caucasian because I saw the difference in, oh, it's more black. It's more blacks in this area than I thought when I went to the high school. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now did you get involved with any high school clubs or-- Speaker 2: No I didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't get involved in any--more or less after I left school, I would get involved in my own club. We had a group of kids that would come over to the house and, you know, we would talk about life and deal with our own set, not necessarily what was going on at the school. We would attend some of the football games, things of that nature, but nothing that was like dealing with other school outside activities. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you take a college prep course in school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. What did you take, business or general? Speaker 2: Data processing. I think then they were doing basic programming and keyboards. Speaker 1: So, was this the business course in high school? Speaker 2: I guess you would call it that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Usually they let you chose the business course or general course or the college prep course. Speaker 2: Yeah, if you had a guidance counselor that steered you. And that's another thing I noticed that in McClure, which is a high school at the time, that certain students were geared, or steered, or told, you know, go into this class and that class and this class and other students were told, go into this class and that class and this class and most of your business classes and classes were college prep 'cause they did have college prep classes but a lot of the African Americans were not privy to it or even told to even go to those classes. Speaker 1: So would you-- Speaker 2: I knew they exists by talking to other students like what's on your schedule? This is on my schedule and I knew there was a difference then and I was thinking, we've got the same guidance counselor and they didn't even bring it up, so. Speaker 1: Okay, so the counselors basically steered black students away from college prep? Speaker 2: I can just say that they didn't steer them-- Speaker 1: Towards it? Speaker 2: Exactly. I can say that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because if they steered you any way, any direction, it was good. Speaker 1: Okay. Any other stories about high school? Do you have any favorite teachers in high school? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Now I graduated early from high school. I can recall that. Speaker 1: Well what happened that you came out early? Speaker 2: Because I was so anxious to get in college that when I found out that I had enough credits, I didn't graduate with my class in May. In January through May, I was at Florissant Valley College [St. Louis Community College - Florissant Valley, Ferguson, Missouri], which is a community college, before I went to Lindenwood College [later Lindenwood University, St. Charles, Missouri]. Speaker 1: So it's called Flo-- Speaker 2: Flo Valley. Speaker 1: Flo Valley, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum, College. It's a junior college. Speaker 1: Is that like short for--I saw a sign--Flo-- Speaker 2: Florissant. Speaker 1: Florissant Academy. Speaker 2: Valley, yeah. Speaker 1: Valley, okay. So they just call it Flo Valley College but it's Florissant Valley College? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And it's a junior college. Speaker 1: So you were there for, you said a year, before you actually graduated? Speaker 2: About, like maybe that semester. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I came back and graduated with my class. It's just that I left early 'cause I had enough college credit--I mean high school credits to graduate. Speaker 1: Okay, so, second semester of your senior year, you went to-- Speaker 2: I went to Flo Valley-- Speaker 1: --Flo Valley, okay. Speaker 2: --Community College. Speaker 1: Okay, and then you--we're now at the--the next year, like, what college did you go to? Speaker 2: Well I stayed there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --about two and a half years because I didn't take full-time courses, I was working and going to college. Story_ID: 131205 Speaker 1: Where were you working? Speaker 2: I was working at Flo Valley College [St. Louis Community College - Florissant Valley, Ferguson, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was working for the government, part-time. Speaker 1: Now, what did you do for the government? Speaker 2: Secretarial work. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So after two years, what--did you earn your associate's degree or something like that? Speaker 2: Yes, I earned an associate's degree in Data Processing. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, then did you continue onto a four-year college? Speaker 2: Lindenwood College [later Lindenwood University]-- Speaker 1: Lindenwood, okay. Speaker 2: --is my next college in St. Charles [Missouri]. Speaker 1: Lindenwood College in historic St. Charles, okay. Saint, okay. All right, now how did you like--now did you have any special teachers at Flo Valley that you can think of? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --other than, I guess then, at the time I wasn't--I was just going to school to make the grade, not so much inspired by teachers 'cause then at that particular timeframe, at eighteen I was married, I had my first child and I was in between Flo Valley and Lindenwood, living a whole different life than I had anticipated on living. For whatever reason I didn't think I would be married at eighteen and-- Speaker 1: Well, what happened? Speaker 2: Life, that's what happened (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You fall in love, you do the norm of what is expected of you or not expected of you. Speaker 1: So you felt that you didn't have any choice, I mean, (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I always had a choice. It's a choice that I wanted but in the time that I was in high school, let's just say go back to even Ferguson, I just envisioned doing something completely different. Then, when life took it's turn, I was doing something completely different than I had thought that I would be doing. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I mean it wasn't like it was nothing wrong with it, it was just a different process that I had not imagined. Speaker 1: So did you meet your husband at Flo Valley? Speaker 2: I met him at Ferguson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: During that time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. So you're married and you're trying to go to school and you go off--were you still married when you went off to Lindenwood? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did you stay on campus in St.--did you move to St. Charles or-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. So you commuted to St. Charles? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well I don't know how far it is so-- Speaker 2: Yes, it's about maybe thirty-five, forty minutes away. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Highway. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 131206 Speaker 1: All right. Now how did you like Lindenwood [College, St. Charles, Missouri]? Speaker 2: It was good. Good experience. Speaker 1: And what did you major in there? Speaker 2: I majored in telecommunications. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I made my first commercial there-- Speaker 1: Now what do you mean-- Speaker 2: --that aired. Speaker 1: Made--now were you the talent on a commercial or did you direct a commercial or how--what happened? Speaker 2: I did all. Speaker 1: All, okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause in that particular curriculum they let you do each phase of television and video production and I did my intern at Channel Two [KTVI-TV Channel 2, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: You did an internship at Channel Two, where? Speaker 2: Here in St. Louis. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So I'm not from St. Louis that's why-- Speaker 2: That's okay. Speaker 1: And the people watching this aren't either, so when you say, like-- Speaker 2: That's fine. Speaker 1: --Channel Two, people don't know. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Where's Channel Two? Speaker 2: Fox, Channel Two in St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: 'Cause they got a Channel Two in their hometown too. So everyone knows, yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, okay, Channel Two, Fox, here, all right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, internship. So your internship, did it focus on--what part of television did it focus on? Reporting or editing or, I don't know? Speaker 2: A little of that, but mostly the public service. Speaker 1: I worked with a reporter by the name of Bonita Cornute and she did a lot of public service programs like the 'Turn About' program. I'm not sure you're familiar with that but it was a program that actually did what--similar to what you're doing, documentaries or interviews with people and places and things that were going on in the city of St. Louis. Speaker 2: Okay. Now did you learn a lot there? Speaker 1: Yeah, I learned that I wouldn't be doing video and television production. Speaker 2: Okay, why not? Why? Speaker 1: Well, at the time that I was actually at Channel Two, there was a union dispute where there was a strike and I saw both sides of management and people that worked the cameras and reporters and how a lot of the reporters did not hold their end of the bargain, that they would, you know, go out with the people that worked the cameras and people that were in the field, other than a couple, Susan Kidd, I don't know if you know who she is but she's a well-known reporter, and she's in the Washington [D.C.] area now but she's the only one that walked the picket line and it was things in Channel Two that made me understand that it's a lot of politics that you would have to play and fit in and do, that I was just not, in my mind at that time, going to do. Speaker 2: Hum, okay, okay. Now, so about what year is this? Speaker 1: Let's see, '79 [1979], '80 [1980], probably '86 [1986], 1986. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 131207 Speaker 1: It's 1986, okay. So, where did you go from there? I mean what direction did your career take after that? So you weren't going-- Speaker 2: The government. Speaker 1: Government, okay. So how did that come about? Speaker 2: Well I was already working part-time for 'em and they had some seasonal positions open with the Internal Revenue Service [IRS] which allowed me to continue to teach. I substitute teached [sic] at the Normandy School District [Normandy, Missouri]. So I was able to do that and plus work for the government. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now, how did you come full-time with the government now? Speaker 2: Well, the first position was an Internal Revenue Service-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --taxpayer service then. My data processing skills allowed me to apply for a computer operator job even though I was really aiming for computer programmer but it was almost unheard because there were no one African American computer programmers in the area that I was working at and that not only it'd be a woman but I finally did what I call the "glass ceiling breakthrough" to become a computer programmer in that agency, which I don't want to mention their name but nonetheless it was very hard and I went up under a lot of discrimination as a black person and a woman and dealing with that it brought me to know that I want to get into another field, working with the government, of course, but I found data processing is very boring, even though I could do the work, even though I can handle the deadlines, I was really bored out of my mind with just working with computers and datasheets. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And fixing errors in the computers and hearing the complaints of things that are not in my control. Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do next? Speaker 2: The next job I went into was contracts, administration, for the government, and I've been with them about twenty-one years. Speaker 1: Okay, now you're still with them? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you're officially now, a contract--a-- Speaker 2: A contract specialist. Speaker 1: A contract specialist. Story_ID: 131208 Speaker 1: You're a contract specialist with--with what agency? Speaker 2: Right now, it's the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, in between the twenty-one years, I did cross--several agencies but doing the same work and working for the federal governments. So it was kind of like transparent to say, you know, you did twenty-one years with the government. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what--what were some of the highlights of your service with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers? Speaker 2: Highlights, actually, administering and advertising thirty-five-million-dollar contract, that was a big deal. When you're talking about highlights, different things as far as workloads. Speaker 1: Now what was--can you give us more detail about it? Speaker 2: Not too much more-- Speaker 1: Whose contract were you-- Speaker 2: --detail can I give you about it. Speaker 1: Or you can't really? Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Other than general. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And mandate that we don't talk too much about anything. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Other than what can actually be researched that we let outline but like I said, this other agencies that I crossed in that particular job field in contracts, we also--not we, but I also had an opportunity to save the government "X" amount of dollars pertaining to government ways and analyzing where we can actually save the taxpayers some money and I got an award for that and that was a big deal to me. So-- Speaker 1: Okay, now, who--what was the title of the award and what year was it given in? Speaker 2: I have that but I can't really recollect actually without looking in my box, pulling out the award box of "me, myself and I" box so--I keep all that stuff in a box. I don't really hang it up. Speaker 1: Do you know what year it was? Speaker 2: Ah, let's see, let me go back. Let's see, probably 1996. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 131209 Speaker 1: Well, so you're still doing that [government contract management] and that's what--that's part of what you do-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but you branched off in some other things too? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, what are those other things? Speaker 2: When I found out that my paycheck was not enough to cover my means, I started looking at other avenues, being an entrepreneur and creating some more capital or funding to my project, than just working for the government. And that's when I went into real estate. Speaker 1: Okay, about what year was that? Speaker 2: The year was 1998. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now was it difficult really studying for a real estate license and all that while you were working and-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was very difficult but I was up for the- Speaker 1: The--what do I want to say-- Speaker 2: Challenge, I guess. Speaker 1: Not, yeah, the challenge, the opportunity and in keeping up with this is what brought me to Wildwood Plantation [Ferguson, Missouri] also because with having my license I was able to really go through trying to search for a place to call a bed and breakfast and it ended up being Wildwood Plantation. So that gave me the avenue and the energy to do it through as a real estate agent versus calling a real estate, saying could you take me here, could you take me there. I was in a position to open up the doors on my lock key and reap what was being available on the market as soon as it hit. Speaker 2: All right, okay, so, well how did you first find out about Wildwood Plantation? You're living in it first, right, still? Speaker 1: Yes. Never heard about it when I was a living in Ferguson [Missouri]. A lot of people have been here for years, haven't heard about it either. Again, when I first pursued the project, I was looking for a bed and breakfast so me and my mother [Carol Killiebrew Austin] could open up one. And we didn't know about Wildwood. We searched a bunch of homes and went into the--the criteria was let it be a hundred years old or more and have the space that was needed to accommodate two or three rooms. So then I came across this particular building and it was a home and I didn't know it was a plantation and they didn't really list it as a plantation until you got here and you found more and more information on it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But when my mother and I came here, we thought, oh yeah, this would be nice, you know, even though it was in severe construction needing a lot done to it both outside and inside. We saw the vision on what could be created. Speaker 2: Okay, so what year was it that you discovered Wildwood? Speaker 1: Ah, let's see, I think that was 1998. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 131210 Speaker 1: Now had this property [Wildwood Plantation, Ferguson, Missouri] been--now this property was owned by--you're the first African American to own this property, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the--let's talk about what's unique about it that--it goes back to 1856 you say? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and who owned this building and who had it constructed? Speaker 2: Okay, who actually owned it was Joseph LaMotte and he was Lt. Major in the Mexican War [1846 - 1847] and his wife was Ellen Chambers. Chambers is a big name in St. Louis because her grandfather was the first millionaire in Missouri, St. Louis, Missouri, and his name was John Lapham [sic, John Mullanphy] but when we actually saw this, the difference with this particular house that has the features, it's a huge, well let me put it like this, tall--the tallest house on the block. So it sets the tone to some of the characteristics of the house and the fact that when we got here we didn't know that slaves actually built it so that was another plus to sink in, like, oh, this could definitely be the ideal place. Speaker 1: So it kind of rises up in the neighborhood as a--as different architecture? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It's white, right? Speaker 2: Right, and it's actually--it's built correctly. Everything else is built incorrect around it so the back of the house (laughter)-- Speaker 1: What do you mean it's incorrect--the rest of the stuff is incorrect? Now you're-- Speaker 2: It has to be because it's 18-- Speaker 1: Your back door faces the street, right? Speaker 2: Exactly which is-- Speaker 1: And in the old days, of course, the front would actually be the front and-- Speaker 2: Of most of my neighbors back. Speaker 1: And who would be in the back where your neighbors are right now? Who would live there? Or was anybody living there? Speaker 2: When it was first constructed? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, no, no one was living there. The house had first came up with 220 acres and then in some books and the Missouri Historical Society, more land was added and so--so there were no neighbors for miles and miles and miles. Speaker 1: Okay, now on it, did he have slaves living on the plantation? Speaker 2: Yes, he had slaves living on the plantation and also quarters for the slaves. Speaker 1: And where were those located? Speaker 2: Somewhere within the two hundred and some acres. There is a map that they have but I don't have it but I know I can get it that has the layout on how it was when it was first built and then how it was when another owner owned it. I'm the seventh--my mother [Carol Killiebrew Austin] and I are the seventh owners of the plantation. Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did the initial family own it? Do you know? Speaker 2: The initial family owned it probably for about fifty to sixty years. Speaker 1: These are the LaMottes, right? Speaker 2: These are the LaMottes. Speaker 1: Okay, now you told me when I got here that this family moved here from North Carolina, right? Speaker 2: Well, Joseph LaMotte, which is the owner, the male owner, he actually lived in North Carolina-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and because he was in the Missouri--not the Missouri but he was a Lieutenant in the Mexican War, he was stationed at Jefferson Barracks and that's how he met Ellen who is the granddaughter of John LaMotte [sic, John Mullanphy], the first millionaire in St. Louis, Missouri. Story_ID: 131211 Speaker 1: All right. So, now tell us a little bit more now--now, [Joseph] LaMotte, who served in the Mexican War [1846 - 1847], his--his father was from-- Speaker 2: His father-- Speaker 1: --from Haiti, right? Speaker 2: --from Haiti. Speaker 1: And he was a refugee from the Haitian Revolution of 1791? Speaker 2: Yes he was and he took a lot of slaves with him to North Carolina where he married his wife, which was a Henry and in that particular area in North Berm, [North] Carolina, there are properties that they owned, still existing, and one is called "North Berm House," which is the house that Joseph LaMotte was born and raised in. Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell North Berm? Speaker 2: B-E-R-M, North, and then Berm. Speaker 1: Oh, B-U-R-N? Speaker 2: B-E-R-M. Speaker 1: E-R, okay. E-R-M, so it's North Berm? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, North Carolina. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: All right, okay, all right. So he brought a readymade plantation with him from Haiti? Speaker 2: He certainly did. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and the house is called, you said, North Berm-- Speaker 2: House. Speaker 1: --House, okay. Speaker 2: And it's on the Internet as a bed and breakfast now. Speaker 1: Hum. And you were saying that this house here-- Speaker 2: Is a replica of that house because when I started doing my research work and I went to the Internet to gather information, they show you a picture of the North Berm House and it's a replica of this house. Speaker 1: Now, could the North Berm House be a replica of the house he lived in in Haiti? Speaker 2: I'm not sure because I could not track anything other than a couple of news clippings that stated where Frank, is his father's first name, came from. It would list that he came from Haiti but his mother was definitely from North Carolina and that's where he had, see, twelve other brothers and sisters. It was a family of thirteen. Speaker 1: So, yeah, put in a historical perspective, again, he served--LaMotte who built this building, Wildwood, he was--served in the Mexican War, the same war that Ulysses S. Grant served in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --same war that Robert E. Lee served in, that whole generation of Civil War Generals, basically, served in. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now before the Civil War started all those guys were young guys out of West Point when they started the Mexican War. Speaker 2: Now he does have a significance that he built up under his establishment as a Lieutenant Commander, Fort Clark, which is located in Texas. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was the Commander of Fort Clark, you say, or he-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Whoever he was commanding at the time, actually built Fort Clark-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the significance of that is that it is the home of the Sycamore [sic] Negro Scouts--Indian Scouts that is, and it is also the fort where the Buffalo Soldiers at various times were stationed. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Seminole--you mean the Seminole Indian Scouts, right? Speaker 2: The Seminole. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Are you familiar with them? Speaker 1: Yeah, Seminole Indian Scouts from, yeah. They were, yeah, they were sort of a leftover from the Seminole and Creek Wars fought by Andrew Jackson around the same time in Florida. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: There was a negro, what they call the Negro Fort and anybody watching this video in the future that hears this can look it up on the Internet. There's a lot of--probably be more information in the future about it but there was a--escaped slaves during the time of the Spanish occupation built something called the Negro Fort [St. Augustine, Florida]. Andrew Jackson and others, like, attacked it and--'cause they had an independent nation going there for a while in Florida-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and there was a big battle and they--the ship that was--it was a U.S. Naval vessel, fired one cannonball into the fort and it was the luckiest shot on earth. It hit the powder magazine in the fort and blew the whole fort up. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: One shot did. It was one of the luckiest things. In fact, the people on the ship couldn't believe it that they had been that lucky they hit the gunpowder magazine in the fort. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And so the black nation was over with pretty much and--but they scattered around and there was a guerilla war for many years and some of the people down there went over to the U.S. side and they formed the basis for the Seminole Indian Scouts that actually came out West now-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --with the U.S. Army. It's a long story and complicated and-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --tricky but it is--it is written about. It's a very interesting story, you know. Speaker 2: Well the fort that he built is where they resided at and, again, at various times the Buffalo Soldiers were stationed there, Ninth [9th Cavalry Regiment] and Tenth [10th Cavalry Regiment]-- Speaker 1: Yes ma'am, exactly. Speaker 2: --Unit Cavalry. Speaker 1: Exactly, okay. So, you know, so he's well, he's significant in a lot of black history, I guess, even though-- Speaker 2: Somewhat. Speaker 1: --yes, somewhat, yeah. Story_ID: 131212 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about what went on at this plantation [Wildwood Plantation, Ferguson, Missouri]? Was there ever a revolt here or anything or-- Speaker 2: There was a revolt but I think it was--well I can't even say what it actually was or was not because it's all rumors. This house is over 150 years old and it's-- Speaker 1: Built in 18-- Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1856]. Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1856], okay. Speaker 2: And here we are in 2007 and it has a birthday of 151. A hundred and fifty-one years old but drew, I guess, throughout its construction of 151 years, 60 years of vacancy. Speaker 1: Oh, it was vacant for 60 years? Speaker 2: Yes, at various times. Speaker 1: Oh, at various times, okay. Speaker 2: Twenty-five years with the LaMotte family being owners and it was said that something very, I don't want to say terrible, but something happened here at this house that caused 25 years of vacancies. Speaker 1: Now this, was it--was it vacant for 25 years after the LaMottes passed? Speaker 2: During. Speaker 1: During the time that they owned it? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But, okay. Speaker 2: Now you're talking about the original but when I said the LaMotte family, I mean they had children. Speaker 1: You're talking about their descendants and-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --and such. So, this time period where it was vacant was--what was it in? When was it at? Speaker 2: I'm not sure as what year but I have documentation of '20-- Speaker 1: Wasn't it 1920s or earlier? Speaker 2: No, it was probably earlier than that. Speaker 1: Uh-hum, well-- Speaker 2: Maybe around that time, I'm not sure but there was a twenty-five years in their ownership that there was a vacancy. Speaker 1: Twenty-five straight years of vacancy? Speaker 2: Vacancy. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what's the rumor about what happened? Is there-- Speaker 2: There was a family dispute and downstairs in the basement you can actually see where the slaves used the pail rope that's from one side of the basement to the other that they would put a pail on some rope and wheeled it over to the other side of the basement. That's still left there. Speaker 1: So you suppose they were doing laundry down there or something? Speaker 2: I don't know what they were doing down there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have on earth-- Speaker 1: Just to transport water, I suppose from one side to the next. Speaker 2: Yeah, or even building a construction but I have, on earth, dirt downstairs in the basement and I have--well, when I bought it, it was concreted in, the unearthed dirt of the basement and then they put like a black silicone paper on top of the dirt and the prior owner told me it was to keep the spirts down for whatever that meant but she gave me a manuscript that's like fifty-six pages of the history. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is this manuscript available in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --one of the libraries around here? Speaker 2: Not necessarily the libraries-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I do have it. It is where a city, I mean a student in one of the universities, started doing the history of the LaMotte family and Wildwood Plantation and he actually researched and talked to some of the family members that were alive at the time when he was doing his paper about this particular house due to the fact of a number of his vacancies. And then when the second and third and fourth owners, there were periods of ten years, fifteen years here, ten years, the people I bought it from, they actually had twelve-year vacancy in this house from the time they moved out from the time they actually sold it. Speaker 1: Now when did--how--what period of time did they live here do you know? Speaker 2: They lived here-- Speaker 1: When did they buy it and when did they live here? Speaker 2: What year? I have all that documented as actuals but right off the top of my head, I can't tell you. I can only tell you that I've been here since 1998 and prior and you take twelve years back from that, I think they stayed in the house ten years so that will put them somewhere between the '70s [1970s], 1970-- Speaker 1: So they bought it in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: And--but for twelve of those years, they didn't live here? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Was it--did they have a reason why? Did they tell you? Speaker 2: Well I asked the wife. What was the real reason why you didn't live here? I mean, you kept the house all those years and she said that when they were living here that her children would always get sick and she didn't know and they--when she started telling the doctor what type of house that she was actually living in, and he was saying, why don't you move into another house and, again, when she--meaning that one of the owners, their last name was Love, L-O-V-E, gave me the manuscript, she also told me that, you know, downstairs in the basement you would notice that the unearthed dirt is partitioned with concrete blocks and there's black laminated paper on top and then that's when she exposed to me, or told me, that they were keeping the spirits down. And I think somewhere in between, her child being sick and her actually getting up out of here, was her reason why she left because if anybody's believing in spirits and how to keep them down, that might be a good reason why she left the house. Story_ID: 131213 Speaker 1: Now are there--I know I'm probably missing something here but are there any stories that you know of associated with the house [Wildwood Plantation, Ferguson, Missouri]? Speaker 2: As in what? Speaker 1: Well, stories, rumors, stories, tales? Speaker 2: There are things I could tell you that's happened with the house since I've been here. Speaker 1: So you didn't hear about any such, other than the fact that the lady's children got sick and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: There are no other stories that you know of? Speaker 2: There are stories in the manuscript about certain owners that lived in this house and certain things that went on. It's those stories but they're very vague. Like there was a radio personality in the city of St. Louis that once lived in this house and when he lived in this house, he stayed here I think for like maybe seven or eight years, and the house was vacant ten, in his ownership, and then there was an owner that lived in the house for like fifteen years and the house was vacant twelve years. He actually tore a fourth of the house down. He tore down four bedrooms and another room of the house. Speaker 1: Are they restored now or are they still--I mean-- Speaker 2: No, they're down. He actually tore them off of the house. There is a story that there was a fire here in the manuscript pertaining to slaves who actually were by a fire place and they were cooking and a fourth of the house was burnt down. We're talking slavery time versus probably in your '40s [1940s], your '30s [1930s] and '50 [1950] of the other prior owners that I just mentioned to you. When you come up to the house, there is a well where we have a fountain at, the house extended past there because they had what they call, indoor plumbing, where the well was dug inside of the house. So the house really expanded and from where it is now, I think, it's probably maybe a little over two-thirds in what it once was. And I'm not just talking about the slave quarters-- Speaker 1: Okay, so the addition-- Speaker 2: --or other pieces of building of the house. Speaker 1: Okay, so the actual main house was bigger-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, seventeen rooms. Speaker 1: I mean, in what direction? Going which way? In the back-- Speaker 2: Both ways-- Speaker 1: Front and back? Speaker 2: --going from the back into the side and to the front. Speaker 1: Okay, well, I guess what I'm asking, is this the original front that's right behind us right now? Speaker 2: I don't think that it is. I think that--this is the original front but the porch I've replaced it once and I'm not sure if they actually replaced it because when I moved here, although it was painted up nicely, it was painted on rotten wood and the history that I wanted to kind of like share with you is like what happened when I tried to pursue purchasing the house, what happened after I bought the house on things that transpired but history-wise, I was just sharing with you what had happened prior to me getting the house-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --on things that I do know of. Story_ID: 131214 Speaker 1: Okay, well let me get into your story, now. What happened when you tried to acquire it? Speaker 2: Okay. When I acquired the house, again, I was a real estate agent and with the last name Killiebrew, you can't know if I'm African American or Caucasian and they accepted my fax and I sent them the--the check. I--first we faxed a copy of the check and then we actually sent the check, endorsed to the particular real estate office. So, I came back with my mom [Carol Killiebrew Austin] and--to look at the house for a second time, even after we have already given them the contract and it was accepted and the owner was here, on the properties, and when I was coming up to the door, he was saying, "It's sold, you don't have to look at it." And then I told him, "Sir, I know it's sold." And before I could even explain to him as to why and how I knew it was sold, he was like, "Get off my property." I knew then I was going to have a problem here. So I proceeded to say, "I am Barietta Killiebrew, like do that ring a bell with you because I know that you signed the contract." And he was like, "You're Barietta Killiebrew?" And that set the tone to what was going to actually-- Speaker 1: Well, that--that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, what was going to actually happen. Speaker 1: One of life's most embarrassing moments for him, I suppose, I guess, I don't know. Speaker 2: I guess, but he was upset and he left and the next day I got a call from his agent to me because I was my own agent, I didn't need any one to actually write the contract up for me because I was the agent and he said, "Well, you know what, we're going to make you a backup." Speaker 1: What did he say? Speaker 2: I said, "What do you mean, a backup?" He said, "Because we already have a contract with someone prior to you." And I was like, "But you didn't say that." I said, "I asked you specifically, did you have a contract on the house, you said no." He said, "But he's going to--" He was going to knock them out. There is a contingency on contracts where a person is living in their home and they haven't sold it yet but they want to buy your house, so they'll put a contingency until I sell my house or you get another contract where we can finalize. You have like a seventy-two-hour window period to do this, to get your own financing and really confirm the contract. Well, he called--instead of calling his contract office seventy-two hours, which he had anticipated on doing until he found out who I was and what color I was, he actually thought in his mind, "You know what, I'm going to hold their contract, that's what we're going to do." And so, I was like, "He can't do that. I mean, legally he can't do that." He said, "Oh, yeah, he can do it and you can ask your manager, your broker, they can do whatever they want to do, it's their house." So, I was like thinking to myself out loud, that okay, you know what do I do? Do I back away from this? Do I keep searching? But then I get away from backing away. Do I keep certain to angry because now I know why you were doing it because of what I experienced at the house with the owner. So what I did do was actually call the agent back the next day and said, "You know what, go ahead and make me a backup then." And you know, it was like silence on the phone. Silence of the lamb. And then he was like, "Are you serious?" I said, "Yes, I'm serious. Go ahead. He still has seventy-two hours." 'Cause I talked to my broker that he has to get what they call a confirmed financing and make it a permanent contract whether he sells his house or not, he's going to buy this one. So that took their contingency to have to be something more permanent. Well, seventy-two hours passed and then another six or seven days passed and I got to call because I didn't get a call from them. I thought maybe, you know, I missed his call or something. And he was like, "Well you know, he's going to extend it past the seventy-two hours, he can do that, it's his house." And I was like, "There's no way he can do that." "Yeah, he can do that. He can do that." And I said okay. He said, "Do you want to get out of the contract?" I said, "No, I'm going to be the backup." And then he said, "Well, you know what that means--" that you--if you're in the backup of a contract and you see something that you want, you're not just going to be let out of this contract because you're the backup and if that other guy doesn't come through, you'll be buying two homes. And it can get like that if you're not watching dates, confirmation and doing mutual releases out of a contract. And being an agent I knew that but I wasn't going to look anywhere else, I was just that determined. My mother and I, after we talked about it, that we're going to stand strong. Then, at last, about another four to five months, okay, and I was told, okay, we're--they're going to close now. He actually gave them five months and seventy-two hours prior to just giving them seventy-two hours to get out of the contract to get financing. So I think what he actually did, meaning the prior owner, gave him time to sell his house and to get the funds and everything to purchase this one. Well, on closing day, they even had their furniture and everything to move in here 'cause I heard that they even had the moving trucks in the driveway. They couldn't close on the day that they were supposed to close. And I was watching that date very closely and I was telling the other agent, "You tell your owner that if he doesn't close and I'm watching this date, then I'm primary and I will not be a backup any longer." And sure enough, as if I knew that I didn't know, you know that instinct that you have like something's got to give, they did not close on the date that they were supposed to close because of financing. And he gave me a call and he said, "Well, you know they didn't close so it's time that you be primary. I guess you're it." Story_ID: 131215 Speaker 1: And that's how we left the conversation. He hung up. But even after being it, I just knew that there was--this is still going to be a fight and sure enough it was. As I went on to get the financing of the house [Wildwood Plantation, Ferguson, Missouri], I got a call from my loan officer and he said, "What house are you trying to buy?" And I said, "40 Dames [Court]." He said, "Well, that's what I thought." He said, "I got a call from the owner." I said, "What do you mean you got a call from the owner?" He said, "The owner said that you need--" 'cause I was getting FHA [Federal Housing Administration] financing, that you need a roof certification and there is no roof certification 'cause it's a metal roof and that the roof had been on the house "X" amount of years. And then I asked my loan officer, "Is there going to be a problem?" He said, "I don't know, let me check with someone." He said, "First of all, before I do this, do you really want this house? It's like that the owner doesn't want you to buy the house. Are you sure you want to buy a house that the owner doesn't want you to buy a house?" And I was like, "Yeah, I am." I said, "Why do you keep asking me that?" He said, "Because they're making it hard for you to actually get it to even call on me and I don't appreciate"--you know he was mad--"that they're calling me to destroy this." So what he actually did, he got off the phone, made a call to a roofer that came up and certified the roof at time so we could actually close. So when that came back, we were doing our building inspection where you--which you actually start doing in between a window of fourteen days when you're getting your financing and you're going to get ready to close and I'm getting to be primary on the contract. There was a host of things that were wrong with this house and, of course, I knew that going in but some of the things I did not know that was discovered and I asked the sellers, "Could you fix this, could you fix that?" Long story short, they came back, "We're not fixing nothing for you." And then that's when I think I really--I really got angry. And I was like, "You know what, fine, don't fix anything." And so I was called by their agent. He said, did you want to get your money out of the house? I said, "No way." He said, "They're not going to fix anything." I said, "I know." And they also called my loan officer. I said, "They're doing everything in their power to make a difference that I don't get this house and I'm at the point I'm fed up and when I get fed up, we're talking you being sued and them being sued." I said, "You already know in this game of real estate, you cannot play against the fence. And are they worth losing your license? You better tell them that at this point right now, they're going to see another side of me and it was strictly business." And, you know, I hung up 'cause I was still upset with him but he called back the next day. He said, "You know, I thought about what you said. No, they're not worth me losing my license because you have endured more than most"--you know and he was just offline, you know. "When you have a client of such that I have, you're walking a thin line trying to please everybody and I'm not going to lose my license for it. So I just told them, they're going to have to sell the house to you." So, that's when the--we came in the house, we closed. We came in the house and saw that, I don't know if you--when you came through the door you saw this antique stove dated early 1900s, probably 1901, 1905, they took it. They took it out of the house and was it included, yes, it was included in the contract. So that's when I got a hold of him to call them and the wife answered the phone and I said, "Ms. Love, is there a problem, where's the stove at?" "Oh, we took it. We took it. We figured that you wanted the house so bad you didn't need the stove. You talked to me like that." And I was like, I said, "Okay, let me tell you this, you got twenty-four hours before I fill out a police report and report it stolen and who stole it?" "You can't--you can't do that." I said, "Oh yeah I can do that because contractually, you're going to bring the stove back or you're going to get hit with being a thief." I said, "I've had it so much with you two I cannot--I could scream but I won't scream. Have that stove back." And sure enough they came back with the stove and two days later, to tell you how God is good, 'cause two days later I guess she felt so bad after everything that they had taken me through, and my mother [Carol Austin], that she said, "I've got a manuscript for you. I want you to come to my house." And she doesn't stay too far from here and she said, "I'm sorry, a lot of things were going on, you know, about my children, about me and things of that nature." And she tried to cover it up and I just let her, you know. I said, "Okay." I said, "You had something for me?" And then that's when she gave me the manuscript, fifty-plus pages manuscript on the history of the house and then she warned me about the spirits in the house in a nonchalant way and that was it. So then we became the owners of Wildwood Plantation. Story_ID: 131216 Speaker 1: Now, this--now are there any particular responsibilities that are associated with having a house that's on historical--now this is on a historical register? I mean, how does that work? Speaker 2: Yes, but I'm on the--well, my mother [Carol Killiebrew Austin] and I, we're on the National Historical Registry [National Register of Historic Places] based as an owner, not as a historical societies. When you get into societies and associations, there are rules and regulations and by-laws you must, you know, keep up but as an owner, I make the rules and by-laws and that's--I wouldn't do anything different than that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you could--you could alter anything you wanted to or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --do anything you want to do? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, but is there any disadvantage to that that you know of? Speaker 2: Not really because I wouldn't want to destroy its historical--historical landmark features. And if I was someone who wanted to come in here and turn it inside out and make it more modern, it would take away from the value. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So--well, can you describe the house for us, I guess? You know, some ways, I mean these ceilings are really high. I mean, there's a lot of things about it that are probably different from other places. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sixteen-feet ceilings. There's a lot of woodwork that's inside the house. Speaker 1: How many rooms was it originally? Speaker 2: Seventeen. Speaker 1: Okay, and how many now? Speaker 2: Now, it's about nine. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nine rooms, about half of what it once was, just about. Speaker 1: Okay. How much land is associated with it now? Speaker 2: A half an acre. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It sits on a half-acre. Speaker 1: Okay, and in the previous years it was what? Speaker 2: Two hundred and twenty acres to store it and then they built on the other acres as they expanded. Speaker 1: Okay, so we're talking about almost three hundred acres of land around here before? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now as we sit here, there's like a development--there are other houses, you know, circa, I guess, the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], I guess? Speaker 2: Yes, and probably about four or five blocks over, there are other hundred-year-old and plus houses so not quite as old as this. This particular house is older than Ferguson [Missouri] and this is the--municipality that it resides in now is Ferguson. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 131217 Speaker 1: So the house [Wildwood Plantation, Ferguson, Missouri] predates the incorporation of the town [Ferguson, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which is strange and funny. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which is another piece of the information what happened after I bought the house. After I bought the house, my mother [Carol Killiebrew Austin] and I restored, renovating downstairs all the floors, refurnished and re-stained before we even moved in but in lieu of that, the municipalities, the building inspectors from Ferguson, who was supposed to do an inspection prior to us actually buying it to approve for the sellers to buy because there was like an inspection you do before you sell a house or anybody can buy it. They gave them a different approval than what they came on the property and gave us. They came around the back and said, "You know what, this porch"--which the double-deck porch that is residing now similar to 'Gone With The Wind' effect--"needs to be replaced and, you know, it was painted well but it's rotten wood and we didn't really realize that." So I had to go to court for it. So I get in the courtroom, they call my name up and the judge goes, "Yeah, you're on that 40 Dames [Court] property." I said, "Yes sir." He said, "Yeah, I understand that that porch, that double-deck porch needs to be replaced." And I said, "But sir, I just bought the house and the people that owned it prior didn't get a citation." And well he said, "That that's them, they just sold you a house that needed a citation." So I was quiet, you know, 'cause you didn't want to get the judge all riled and let him say his speech. So I'm thinking, okay, they're going to give me some more time to get the porch and stuff together and he goes, "I'll tell you what, you're going to get that porch together and we're going to fine you a thousand dollar a day." I thought I was hearing things. I was like, "Sir, did you--" "Yeah, that's what I said, a thousand dollars a day. We're going to fine you a thousand dollars a day until you get that porch right." I was so enraged. It's like--it's like I was living in another time zone and someone had not only insulted me but asked me to do the unspeakable, the most impossible to fine me like that. Story_ID: 131218 Speaker 1: Okay, we're in court, the judge says a thousand dollar fine a day-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --unless you fix the back porch, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So what in the world happened? Speaker 2: And he went and so I said, "So you mean to repair the back porch?" 'Cause I'm thinking maybe a week, but not certainly a thousand dollars a day. He goes, "No, I mean, replace the back porch." And so that's when I kind of lost it in court and said, "But why didn't you do the original owners prior to me like that? Why are you hitting me with this fine?" And he said, "Because they sold you something that you should have known, it's not my problem. And like I said, a thousand dollars a day." So I took what he said and--and I guess the expression in my face and people that were there, which was probably about a hundred plus, at the time, in court waiting. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, so, now wait a minute now. Speaker 2: We're in--we're in a municipality court for fines. Speaker 1: This is in Ferguson [Missouri]? Speaker 2: Ferguson. Speaker 1: All right now, are you saying that the people were in court 'cause they had cases coming up? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Or were they in court because they wanted to see your case? Speaker 2: They had cases coming up. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Okay, on one fine to another. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or whatever fine but the point was, they were even like, "What?" You know, like, ain't no way. He got to be kidding. I mean they were talking out loud what I was thinking and he hit his hammer and said that he would not hear another word or he was going to charge someone in contempt. Speaker 1: Now was this an old judge or a new judge? Speaker 2: He was probably about forty-nine, fifty, I mean he wasn't too old and he wasn't too young but he was a racist mind you, nonetheless, because of what he did and how he did. Speaker 1: Now does his name come down to us now in the annals of--does he have a name that you can say? Speaker 2: He does have a name and I have documentation to back his name up in this story but we won't mention his name on tape. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe in the book and a forthcoming movie-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --'cause this should be well documented on the things that they can pull when they want to but the irony of the story is this, because I left out in such dread and almost in tears 'cause I could not believe what I had experienced and what he was telling me and how he was talking to me, he said a couple other things and he was talking down to me and I was just asking mere questions as to how do you think I'm going to--"Do you fine anybody else a thousand dollars a day?" "Be concerned that I fined you a thousand dollars a day," he said. "Don't worry about anyone else." So, and I was thinking, if I keep this conversation up, me and him are going to get in a shouting match and I'll probably be taken up out of here. So common sense said, just leave. So I started exiting out of the courtroom with tears, literally, because I was in shock 'cause I was still thinking, how did I get a thousand dollars a day? Even if someone fixed it in three days, that's three grand in compared to how much they're going to charge. Then he says, still in my mind I'm batting the norm, not repair, replace. And I was thinking to myself, he's crazy and I'm going to get me an attorney. I know what I'm going to do, I'm going to sue them, that's what I'm going to do, this is outrageous. I've been hit through the storm even dealing with this project and this I won't accept or take. But as I started going down the steps to exit out of the court building, the secretary that was there grabbed me and she said, "I know you're upset." She said, "And I've never, ever seen him do that." She said, "What they're doing to you is God awfully wrong." And she said, "I'm going to get you some help." She said, "You give me that paperwork. I'm not going to even--I'm not going to even put this in finalization that they can hit you like this." She says, "There's no way they're going to get away with it anyway." I said, "Right, 'cause I'm getting me an attorney and I'm going to sue and I--" She's like, you know, "Be quiet, calm down." She said, "Mel Carnahan's office"--which was the governor at the time--"You need to get in contact with this person." She writes down this person's name and number. "And tell them what happened so when you come back to court, and I'm going to give you a date to come back to court, you can challenge this." Story_ID: 131219 Speaker 1: So, when I talked to [Missouri governor] Mel Carnahan's office, by the time I did, she had already made a phone call. They sent me a letter stating, "Give this person six months to reconcile this with no fees, no fines." So I went back to court, just like she said, and when he--meaning the same judge, got the piece of paper, he stated, "They'll help anybody, won't they." Now, that's when it confirmed to me that what I said, he was a racist and I said, "Who are you talking to? 'Cause right now I got the power to stop you and secondly, all that little outburst, you had me almost in tears, to myself in the prior court session is not going down today. Who you call--who you talking to?" He said, "I'm talking to you." And before I could even think about to respond to him, I just got quiet 'cause I knew then, yeah, both of us (laughter) will be going to jail today so I was quiet. And he said, "I'll tell you what, we're going to wait until December--it's in June then, the end of December, we're going to see what you do. And let me tell you, if you don't do what I tell you to do, like replace that porch, we're going back to a thousand dollars a day fine." And then he gave me my letter. So I left out of there optimistically like, you know, all white people aren't bad. If it wasn't for this lady saving my tail, I'll be hit with a thousand dollar fine and I'm getting ready to regroup and I'm going to tear that porch off and I'm going to rebuild. And that's exactly what I did. I got a loan. I got contractors to give me bids. I selected my contractor and I got a letter stating, "We want to see who you're going to use as a contractor," from the courts and what the building plans are. And I told the gentleman, "If you don't mind coming to court with me." He was like, "What?" I said, "Yeah, they want to see." He said, "You--normally, you get a permit, you turn in all your paperwork with the permit, they look over it and, why do you have to go to court?" I said, "The man said he wanted to see me in court again, so let's do it." So we go to court, again, they look over the paperwork, the design, and they bless it because it's to their liking as it once was and we were using the same design, just new wood, and then he said, "Well, I'm not satisfied yet. I want to know--I want to know how you're financing this." And so I said, "Do you have grant money? Do you have any money out of the city [Ferguson, Missouri] that you're going to give me or something? That you want to have the audacity--" and that's when, you know, I went like, "the audacity to ask me about what I'm gonna fine. Do you ever question anybody else that come in here with some business design that you bless or how they're going to finance it?" I said, "I am so upset with this courtroom and everything about you that I can't take this anymore." And he said, "I'm going to ask you again, and you will give me the answer and not go back and forth with me on the question." And I was like, I can't believe it 'cause I'm thinking, okay, we're in 2000 then, that's probably 2001 or 2000, this man's actually talking to me like this. And I go, "You know what, from such a such a bank, for such and such an amount." He said, "That's all I asked you. Well good." He said, "And we'll be out there to inspect after you finish to give you your full blessing and release of this court, in between that and then, we'll probably be coming up on your property looking at everything being done." Sure enough, they paid visits when they felt like it, unannounced, in the construction of this porch. So, I got through that hurdle with the city and I was really kind of like, not feeling good about the city, the municipality, the politics and everything involved. And then I went out for the National Historical Registry [National Register of Historic Places]. And somehow the municipality, the mayor goes to some landmark meeting and it's been brought up that, "Oh, we're going to nominate, you know, Barietta Killiebrew and her mother [Carol Killiebrew Austin], for 40 Dames Court being on the National Historical Home Registry." So, I get a call from the mayor's office and then they followed up with a letter. You know, "We are so proud that," you know, "the City of Ferguson is going to get a 'That a Boy' award and you're going to be recognized." But by then, you know, my--my bitter tasteness because of what I had endured through court systems with them is like, it's really none of your business and I ain't trying to have you come to the table and get you a bow either. And then, they had another person call me and was like, "Well you was kind of non-responsive to us and we don't understand what the problem was." And the power of politics, you know, you serve a term and there's new people come in, and that's exactly what had happened. After I talked to them and told them what I experienced with the court system, with the judge, and City Hall, they had changed places and faces and people and they were going to make it up to me. And then they really did. They started calling around making sure I got in the papers and being in the papers I got interviews with Channel Two. I was on Channel Nine and other newspapers recorded the story about it being placed on the National Historical Registry. So there you have it. Story_ID: 131220 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When people give you lemon, make lemonade. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So what could have been a horrible thing turned out for the best. Speaker 2: Yeah, but you would have to go through the process and I think it's your reaction going through things that you don't--you don't let the circumstance change the person that you are and the person that I am basically is a negotiator who wants a win-win even when people are giving you a loss, you just don't accept it, you know, you don't let it affect you but it was--it did cross over and start affecting me about how I looked at things and I'm thinking not so much as the victim but the victim that was fed up. Speaker 1: Now, you sponsor tours of the house [Wildwood Plantation, Ferguson, Missouri], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, well--well, tell me what happened on the day that it was inducted into the National Register [of Historic Places]? Was there a ceremony here? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a ceremony here with the mayor and the powers that be and the city, the aldermens [sic] and people in the Missouri Registry that came and they gave me a landmark plaque and, you know, we all smiled and said how wonderful things were. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And are. Speaker 1: And that was when? Speaker 2: That was in 2006, April the 15th [April 15, 2006]. It's on the website as the actual day and also in the literature that I gave you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When we actually finally got approved. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now we're talking they put in for it in 2000 so it took almost six years. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, there are tours that come through, right? And, so-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --and, okay, so are they regularly scheduled tours? Speaker 2: They are scheduled tours, meaning approved tours, ten or more, that's my criteria and a lot of people call and they can't come because it's only two of them and I won't allow it. Ten or more is the group that I'm seeking and we had our first wedding here, this year. Speaker 1: Okay, so a wedding was here, okay. Speaker 2: The first wedding, African Americans getting married in a plantation that's owned by the descendants of slaves and it was a remarkable day because they were supposed to have 100 to maybe 110 people and 250 people showed up. And I politely turned people away and it was really chaotic but that's rules of the game that now people will be on a list. If your name is not on a list, you're not coming in because it was most unfortunate that it blew up like that but other people-- Speaker 1: Were there rules about how many you can have in the house, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, not only that but still, if I--I don't care if I could have 250 people, if you tell me that there's 125, anywhere else you go, you have to pay more if people are coming into the house. So it's just a matter of business sense and safety-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --is a factor. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So it was a lesson learned. Speaker 1: So do you provide catering for people too when they have that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No, I always--I'm going to make that a--like how I handled the wedding, you cater your own, you bring in your own caterer. Story_ID: 131221 Speaker 1: Now the furnishings in this place [Wildwood Plantation, Ferguson, Missouri] some-- Speaker 2: Everything was gone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Everything downstairs was gone. Everything was open. Speaker 1: Okay, what about upstairs? Speaker 2: No, upstairs what I provide upstairs is dressing rooms only. So the ceremony will have to be held downstairs. Speaker 1: Okay, but you live here, right? Do you live here? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so you live upstairs in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but the furnishings are in the house--now how did you decide on how it was going to be furnished? Was there some kind of a process where you consulted with the historians or people-- Speaker 2: Are you talking about the house is furnished now? Speaker 1: Yes ma'am. Speaker 2: As for--okay I thought you were just talking about for the wedding, I'm sorry, 'cause that's the subject I was on. The furnishing that you see is my mother [Carol Austin] period of time collecting what I call antiques or even replicas of the antiques. Growing up under her as a parent even early on, she always had antiques in the house and it's no--I want to say surprise that I'm in a historical house with a bunch of antiques because in any house I've ever been with my mother as the parent, there was always antiques in the house. For whatever reason she was always drawn to take antiques and place them around the house. So she just had her field day in here and plus I traveled a lot at one time and I would pick up different things. Speaker 1: Are there any--can you discuss a couple items for us and let us know what's here? I know the stove that was here was an antique, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's an antique. Speaker 1: That's an original. Speaker 2: In the great room, to tell you how things come a full circle in the house, and I'll name about two or three pieces. The first piece is the living room set. When I was in Versailles [France], I went to Marie Antoinette's, her castle, and inside of it was the same furniture that you see in there is a replica, identical to it but when I was there I was really amazed that the woodmanship and everything pertaining to that powers that was actually done. So that was like maybe ten years, twelve years prior that I would be in the plantation. Marie Antoinette is also the queen that had her head cut off. Well what's ironic about me being there and coming here and my mother and I actually selecting replica of the furniture from the Marie Antoinette castle, is that the LaMotte woman [Jeanne de Valois-Saint-Remy, Comtesse de la Motte] who actually posed as a Marie Antoinette, but she's really a prostitute who stole the jewels from her and there's a theory on why Marie Antoinette got her head cut off. The LaMotte family is in history tied to Marie Antoinette so that was a twist to see that this house will have furniture-- Speaker 1: Now what--we're try--walk us through that again. Well, what did the LaMotte's do? Speaker 2: Marie Antoinette, you know about her? Speaker 1: Okay, yes, that's right. She was the Queen of France, right. Speaker 2: LaMotte is the woman that was instrumental on Marie Antoinette getting her head cut off from the scandal or the rumor that she bought those jewels. Speaker 1: Oh, with the public money, yeah okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was not what it was. That lady posed as Marie Antoinette. Her name was LaMotte because she had it out for Marie Antoinette. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Now the LaMotte family is from that same tree. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was what I'm saying a full circle on how things tied back to the house and how things tied back to history. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we have the replica furniture of Marie Antoinette. We have the LaMotte family tied back to the death of Marie Antoinette. We have a picture in there of the Buffalo Soldiers which is a black artist that actually did that painting and I bought it. Well, I did not know until years later that the man who actually built this house, Joseph LaMotte, was actually the person that did Fort Clark, established it and that the Buffalo Soldiers tied back into Fort Clark. Again, a circle of life how things touch each other. There is a grand piano in the great room. When we bought the piano, we had to keep it shut down because we were doing a lot of restoration in the house. So the day that we actually, which was probably two or three years later, that we actually opened that piano up, it said 1848, I think on it. No, I'm sorry, 1852 and the house was built in 1856. We had no idea that that period, of that piano, fits in the house. So it was just things of that nature that coincides that, you know, we're talking about antiques. Story_ID: 131222 Speaker 1: All right, now, what's your experience been like to live in here [Wildwood Plantation, Ferguson, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Been a comfortable house or-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's a comfortable house. It has its stories, though. I'll share a few of them with you if you're not afraid (laughter). Speaker 1: It depends on what you tell me. Speaker 2: Okay, well, we'll hope you're not afraid. When I--when we first moved in this house, we had a television in the kitchen, a little black and white television and at certain times when I'm alone in the house, I heard the television come on. Actually it's come on and I heard people talking downstairs so I'm thinking, okay, who could be in this house. So I'll come all the way from downstairs, 'cause my bedroom is upstairs, and this television is on. So I cut the TV off, go back upstairs. The television come on again on a different channel. And I said, then I'm scared 'cause I'm like, wait a minute, I know what channel I left it on. So I, chicken little, I took the television out of the kitchen because I was figuring whatever was channeling the TV in the kitchen, it's getting ready to be removed because I did not want to unplug the television and come back down and hear that that television on, I would have had to move out of here (laughter). So that was my experience in the house that there is something ironic in this house of energy that is different. When we moved in this house in October of 1998, let's say 1999, July or August, it was like a freezer in this house. This house does not have air conditioning. So my mother would call me one day at work, she said, you know what, it's so cold in here I've got a coat on and it is not a good chill, it's freezing chill and I don't like this kind of chill. So she said, I'm going to cut the heat on and I'm going to pray. We had the house, by the way, blessed several times for various reasons of keeping it safe and, you know, keeping spirits at rest like the lady told me when I bought the house and didn't reveal that until after she closed. But anyway, my mother cut the heat on and finally when I got into the house, when she had cut the heat off, there was, whatever what was in here, after she prayed and cut the heat on, the chill factor, and it was chilly, it was colder than air condition in here, was gone and that's a tidbit of living in the house what we had experienced. I have a nephew, he's about, I guess eight at the time, he was taking a bath upstairs, in the upstairs bathroom. So my mother heard this scream. I mean he's screaming like--like something is killing him. So she goes in there, in the bathroom, and she asks him, "Why are you screaming?" And then he tells her, "can you see him?" "This little boy is in this bathtub with me, tell him to get out." And he described a black child, with big eyes, you know, and just skinny and he's in this water and he won't get out of this water. And I'm getting up out of here. And now he's like thirteen now, do not go upstairs by himself. He always wants someone to accommodate him to go upstairs by himself. So I really do feel like he experienced something. The other thing of experience of living in this house, it is good, it is great, I love sharing the history of the house, of people around the area that often leave with the house, love coming by and looking at us do certain things to the house on the outside or the inside. And it's more over been a blessing but there are times when I had contractors to come in the house and work, say downstairs in the basement where that--the earth is unearthed, you know, there's layers of some type of black paper over it but two different times with two different painters, they were painting downstairs for me, they felt that somebody was there with them and they could feel movement and, you know, I get that kind of feedback. People that do tours in the house, they don't have any, what do I want to say, feelings that something's there or being afraid but they always ask, and I think it's so funny, "Are there ghosts in this house?" And I always say, "no, only the spirit of man is in this house." So I figure we draw to what we are but other than that, it's been a blessing in the house. Story_ID: 131223 Speaker 1: Now does this--does the house [Wildwood Plantation, Ferguson, Missouri] have a history of--since [Joseph] LaMotte was a dignitary at the time [1850s] and the first settler around here, is there--is there a list of people that--was [Abraham] Lincoln ever here or any of the big politicians in Missouri? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. He has these letters, again, that's at the Missouri History Society, when I was reading, it documents who was in and out of this house but I haven't went through all of them but they--back then, when they wrote letters, they talked more detail than I've ever seen. There was one letter that Ellen [LaMotte] was telling him about the Quakers were in the area talking to the slaves and she was telling her husband, look, you know, I don't like these people. I think they're stirring up the slaves. They think they want to be free and you need to come home. And then she talked about one slave that had gotten sick and she prayed over--a girl slave, but as far as dignitaries, I'm almost sure there possibly was because of who her father--grandfather was [John Mullanphy], you know, the first millionaire in St. Louis, Missouri, that's a big deal, and it's history. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, so dignitaries to--to them was probably just normal people, dignitaries to us, because of the status of the wealth that they held, you know, when you're in a circle of a certain income, the dignitaries are just like neighbors-- Speaker 1: Now are there-- Speaker 2: --from us. Speaker 1: Has there been any discussion or any overture from historians, white or black, to do any archeological digging here or to, you know, for artifacts, that sort of thing? They dig plantation sites up quite a bit these days trying to find out some clues as to-- Speaker 2: There were two gentlemen since I've been here, come up to me and said, you know, can we dig around in your yard and I was totally against it 'cause one, you ask me to dig up in my yard and then my question is okay, and you find something, then what? Then we'll talk about sharing it. Oh yeah, well you know, you better get ready to not talk to me anymore and another gentleman that came and he was like, you know, you can get involved in the school and he's like a fast talker and I wasn't hearing it either but I'm sure that I would be open to what I want to call, the real sincere people that are willing and wanting to do some digging and some finding and it's tied to something legit other than people that don't even know anything about me, presenting themselves to just dig. Other than that-- Speaker 1: So none of the institutions around here--none of the universities have approached you? Speaker 2: No, but there is something on record with Mr. Shaw--Botanical--Botanical Garden [Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis], I don't know if you're familiar with it, but it's a big deal in the City of St. Louis. He has a letter sent to this house to talk about Wildwood Plantation where they actually did some research work, certain insects, certain trees. They have this whole booklet on history that they have dug up and documented things pertaining to the Wildwood Plantation. So that has been done early on but nothing in--since probably the '30s [1930s] or the '20s [1920s] has been done to my--to my knowledge. Speaker 1: Now is this like one of the oldest homes in Missouri? Speaker 2: I'm sure no, because I came across a two-hundred-year-old home and although it was large, it had a lot of things going on in it. No, so I could honestly say, no. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sure--yeah there was-- Speaker 2: But in Ferguson [Missouri], I can say, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 131224 Speaker 1: Okay, what are your future plans and what are your future plans for Wildwood Plantation [Ferguson, Missouri]? Speaker 2: My future plans is to become the first black billionaire but as far as Wildwood Plantation, let's talk about that, well one, my mother and I will continue to pursue it being an icon, historical attraction for the state of Missouri and for the city of Ferguson. We would like to expand as far as--there is a garage out there that's over a hundred years old and it was moved three blocks away because it belonged to the property and they brought it on this property prior to me actually purchasing it. I'd like to turn it into a store, a gift store, and have more schools come in here and learn the history of Wildwood Plantation and also the--we would like to inspire the youth to preserve, older buildings, that's a plight within itself because a lot of times there are older buildings that are inherited and a lot of the youth, and even adults, (unclear) from it because it's in disarray and if they could hear our story how this was in disarray and we built it to what you see now, it would inspire them that when they do get property that is--has some type of history significance that they would preserve it. So, that--there's something in itself that we would like to have this particular project, Wildwood Plantation, to inspire. Speaker 1: Now--now in particular, I know I would be concerned that I don't know if you have plans--any plans or not or are things in the works about consulting with black historians in the city, people like Alice Wendelman or people that founded the black museum here-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --to somehow draw out the significance of the story of slavery in Missouri as it relates to this place and in general. It seems like it would be a place for school children to come and maybe--it could be exhibits and to talk about the resistance in slavery and what, you know, and this very fact that slave hands built this--this structure. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: That's the initial draw to this as a historical landmark but in--into drawing something, you want to expose something else, a desire to not just see what the slaves built because they're no longer here but to take what they have built and build somewhere and apply it in your life. What I'm seeing a lot of times like in the city, there are a lot of historical homes and they are actually inherited by African Americans who either leave their property in disarray or sell it off for as little as nothing and not know the value of actually rehabbing and taking room by room instead of looking at the whole project totally that is being done in certain areas but not by African Americans. That's--that's just the goal. I mean I want them to come here, the children, to see the history that slaves have built something that's still standing but the struggle on what it took to get this place. I want that told that they never give up on anything that they want to pursue, be it a piece of land, a property or even a dream, this is something that money can't buy unless stories like mine is being told and all over anybody telling their stories on struggles and how to deal with obstacles and getting around and then just keep believing in yourself and don't let anything stop you. If we could just send that message out within itself, the plantation is just a tip of the iceberg as to, yeah, come see it but come see the people also inside of it. Come hear the stories and be inspired. Story_ID: 131225 Speaker 1: One, that there is a sense of unity in the black community that seems to be separated by economics, ignorance and racism within its own people. I see too many times that black people, or African American, whichever name label you want to choose that you are, there is a division in, I want to call, mistrust and the loyalty. There are many times I try to hire African American contractors and when I did, I got the shaft on a lot of things that I felt that were so mediocre that I can't even give you the big project because you have showed me in the small project that you're not even capable of fulfilling and doing what I want you to do and I'm paying you good money. That slackness of the African American male not being in a lot of the African American homes and families need to be encouraged and revisit that we build strong families now. I see that we should not just sell the fact that, okay, if you're--it doesn't matter if you're married to me. In that sense that if you are part of bringing someone's life in this world that you be a part of their world, married or not, 'cause people do get divorced and people do grow apart but not being in your family life and someone as a child being able to turn to a mother or a father for some type of inner strength, I think has weakened us as a people and I think the crime that has accelerated is not just an African American problem, there's a lot of racism that is still here in the United States of America and Wildwood Plantation [Ferguson, Missouri] will just give that significance that it did exist then and it still exists now as reference but we can still overcome that. I just think that black people in general, including myself, needs to get more and more involved at the local level so we can get involved in the national level so we can get involved in the international and the global level. If we can't do it from within, there's no way the international community and the global community will take us serious as a nation of people. Speaker 2: Okay, now, when you look back at everything you've done at this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again? Speaker 1: I'd probably wouldn't drop every dime that I have in it (laughter). No, I'm just laughing. I don't think that I would because now that I know the magnitude now, if I had this much knowledge that I have now what it took to get it to here, I might have not done it and it's like, sometimes when we know things before they happen and we think back, will we repeat the same things, you may not repeat it and it may not turn out as good or maybe turn out better but it may not turn out as good and that's how I'm going to look at it because I sacrificed my mother [Carol Killiebrew Austin] and I a lot of our energy, time and money and we didn't realize that it was going to be like this but what we know now, we would probably have said, we wouldn't do all that. And if we wouldn't do all that, then it would not be into fruitation [sic] as to what it is now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So sometimes it's good to know and not know. Story_ID: 131226 Speaker 1: Likewise when you look at everything you've done to this point, and you're still very young compared to a lot of people that we've interviewed, what today would you say is your legacy? Speaker 2: My true legacy is to give back to my community and not just with Wildwood Plantation [Ferguson, Missouri]. I do a lot of volunteer work that I'm actually touching lives, students getting scholarships, four-year scholarships with a GPA of 2.5. I work with an organization called Gateway Classic [Sports Foundation], Earl Wilson [Jr. (1932 - 2010)] I gave as a person to get in contact with. I'm very committed to giving back and to that particular organization for the simple fact they have over--they've given away millions of dollars to students that would not even have been able to afford or even had an opportunity to go to a four-year college already paid up. Speaker 1: Okay, that--that's the Daniel Football Classic, Gateway Classic, is that the-- Speaker 2: The Gateway Classic of St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We give one every year. Speaker 1: Yes, that football--college, football game a fundraiser? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, right. Speaker 2: But there are other activities throughout the year that we work with the children of St. Louis and young adults of St. Louis to empower them to do more than just be a product of your neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, and I was with an organization called the Optimist Club [of St. Louis, Missouri] and we work with a lot of youths too. My legacy is to touch the youth and to do good in the world, that's my legacy. Story_ID: 131227 Speaker 1: Now, well tell me about your family. Now do you have children? Speaker 2: Yes, I have two sons. One was in the [U.S.] Navy and he's now out of the Navy, that's my older son, his name is Antoine and Danny, he's in the [U.S.] Air Force and they're both in Japan and they both want to make Japan their homes. I always taught them, when we traveled, you know, look past the United States, know that the world is global but never in a million years telling them that that I think that they would not only look that the world was global but want to live somewhere other than the United States. So that right there in itself gives me, be careful what you tell your children. Not that I want them to move next door, but I did not want them to move to another country. So, I'm getting passports ready so I can actually go visit them. Speaker 1: Okay, so you and your mother [Carol Killiebrew Austin] live here in the house and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 131228 Speaker 1: Now have--I forgot to ask this one earlier but have any--have you met any black people in Ferguson [Missouri] who are descendants of the slaves that lived here in Wildwood [Plantation, Ferguson, Missouri]? Speaker 2: No, I have not. Speaker 1: Do you think any of them are? Speaker 2: No, I do not. I picked up a slave registry from the St. Louis [Missouri] city library and because they list the slaves as property, not even by name, just age, male, female, it's so hard to even reconcile without getting into those letters because it was sad that they take the surname of their owners but I have went on Ancestry.com to see if there are any black LaMottes and there are no black LaMottes. We have LaMottes in England, North Carolina, all over the United States but according to the Census Bureau, they were not labeled, you know negro. So I'm not sure if I can find anyone that was a slave. I'm sure that more detail and analytical work from a historical person that does that type of work maybe they'd be able to find it but me in my capacity, because I'm working on so many projects, from what I've gathered already, it's going to be really like looking for a needle in a haystack but not that it can't be done. The letters that support this house that's located in the Missouri historical library, now in those letters, I'm sure, there can be some type of reference to the slaves but the letters I read only stated first names. Speaker 1: Okay, well it seems to me that it's probably a lot of work yet to be done by historians if they really want to get to the bottom of-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the history of this place. Speaker 2: And I'm open for that. I'm open for someone to write a book about Wildwood Plantation. I'm open to film the, you know, opportunities to share what's here at the plantation and what could be in the future but I don't think I'll be the one doing it but I am opened up to authors and historians that would like to have an opportunity to do it. Story_ID: 131229 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you that you think I need to ask before I ask you my last question? Speaker 2: Do I believe in God? Yes, I do (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, is that it? Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: Okay, well our last question is, similar to legacy but a little different-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person who--who gives more than what they take, as a person who is levelheaded and sound minded, who may be a little edgy at times but overall I'm a, what I want to call a decent person and you can't hope to be anything more or less than decent. Speaker 1: All right, well thank you so much for sharing with us. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: All right...