 Story_ID: 9602 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson. I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns in the videographer and Larry Crowe is observer. And I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. First, middle and last. Speaker 2: My name is Damon, D-A-M-O-N, J., Keith, K-E-I-T-H. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, July the 4th, 1922. Speaker 1: Independence Day. Speaker 2: And today's date sir? Speaker 1: Beg your pardon? Speaker 2: Today's date is August 21st. Speaker 1: August 21, 2002. Speaker 2: Okay. And our location? Speaker 1: In the [Theodore Levin] U.S. Courthouse in the city of Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: And your occupation? Speaker 1: I'm a judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. Story_ID: 9603 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is. Speaker 2: My favorite food? Black-eyed peas and stewed tomatoes and salmon, along with cornbread. Speaker 1: Oh that sounds good. I like salmon myself. Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Talk just a little louder. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Favorite color? Speaker 2: I think black. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well my wife [Rachel Boone Keith, M.D.] and I have a little farm down in-outside of Richmond, Virginia in Mechanicsville [Virginia] and we like to go down there three or four times a year. We have a few acres there and just relax and get away from everything. So I enjoy going there. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "He has shown the old man what is good. And what doeth the Lord require thee, but to do justly to love mercy and to walk humbly with thy God." It's from [the Book of] Micah. Story_ID: 9604 Speaker 1: I'd like to start out by asking about your parents. And I'd like to start with mother who was Anna-Annie Louise. And I'd like you to tell me what you know about her background and her growing up. Speaker 2: Well my mother Annie Louise Williams and later Keith was born in Atlanta, Georgia and she married my father Perry Alexander Keith when they were in Georgia. And my father was a businessman in Atlanta and things went bad for him. And he left Atlanta in the early '20s [1920s], to come to Detroit [Michigan] and work at the Ford Motor Company for five dollars a week. He left my mother and the children in Atlanta until he got started here. And then he--after he got a job at the Ford Motor Company in the factory he brought them back to Detroit. And then I was born here in Detroit. The only child of my mother and father's that was born in Detroit. The others were born in Georgia. Speaker 1: Did your--just back to your mother for a second. Did she ever talk about her family and growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, she did. I understand that my mother's mother (or maternal grandmother) was quite well off financially in terms of owning property and things like that. But during her life she had accumulated a lot of property in Georgia but through some surreptitious way, the money and property was all taken from her, especially after she died. I used to hear my mother talking about that, that something unethical took place. And my mother--my grandmother lost all of her property. Speaker 1: How would you describe you mother? What kind of person was she? Speaker 2: Just a lovely warm person who wanted to-her children to do well and very interested in me getting an education. She was a housewife and just took care of the family. But she was physically not well after my birth. And she--my dad had to do most of the cooking and taking care of the house along with my brothers and sisters. Speaker 1: And your father. What about his background and his growing up? Speaker 2: Well I think it's important to know that my grandfather on my mother's side and on my father's side were both slaves. And I remember just as a kid meeting my grandmother but I don't remember meeting my grandfather on my father's side. But--well, of course, they were both slaves. And I never heard my father speak of his father very much. But it was just the humiliating experience of being in the South and not being able to go to restrooms when you wanted to and the demeaning things that he, he experienced as a man. And he didn't like it at all. And told me that he wanted my life to be better. Speaker 1: Was he from Atlanta also? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know how your parents met? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. And you-your siblings. I know you're the youngest of six. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you give their names and birth order? Speaker 2: I--now I can't give the dates that they were born. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Not the dates. Speaker 2: Yeah. But my oldest brother was Luther Keith who was the son of my father's first marriage. His wife died. Then after Luther was my brother of the marriage between my mother and father, Perry Keith. And my next sibling was my sister Marie. And then my brother Napoleon, and then my sister Annie. And then I was next. Speaker 1: Now did any of your siblings ever talk about growing up in the South? Did they ever share any of that with you? Speaker 2: No. I don't think they--my dad did, talking about the humiliating experience. And I remember as a kid--and I was sharing this at the health facility the other day. I was on the treadmill with some of the older fellows who were down there talking about how the mothers used to pack their lunches, or not lunches, their bags to go down South in the trains. We used to go from the Michigan Central [Station, Detroit, Michigan] and I could see my mother having packed going down to see her mother in Georgia this brown bag was very greasy with fried chicken and biscuits and things like that because you couldn't eat on the train. They didn't have facilities for black people. And we were just sharing this, a group of black fellows on the treadmills, saying how that used to happen. You know, when you'd get to Cincinnati [Ohio], you had to go back in the back of the train. But, my mother I could see her now with this brown bag, with the grease coming out of it and with the hot biscuits and things like that. So she'd have something to eat on the train as she went to Georgia. Story_ID: 9605 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up here in Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Well, I was born on the West Side of Detroit at 3860 Hudson [Avenue]. And I was blessed with a very stable family. I went to three schools in Detroit, Columbian Elementary School [sic, Columbian Primary School, Detroit, Michigan]. I walked there to school. McMichael Intermediate School [Detroit, Michigan] and Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan]. So that was the stability in terms of my school life. And then I stayed in the same home that I was born in at 3860 Hudson until I finished law school [at Howard University Law School, Washington, DC] in 1949. So I had that stability of there. And then after I finished law school, my mother [Annie Louise Keith] sold the house on Virginia (correcting)--on Hudson. And we moved to Virginia Park [neighborhood, Detroit]. Speaker 1: Do--what was the neighborhood you grew up in? What was it like? Can you describe it? Speaker 2: It was a very close-knitted neighborhood. And I was telling-telling my daughters who live in the city [Detroit] about the fact that I ran into a numbers fellow at the Eastern Market [Detroit] that I grew up with years ago. He's quite well off. And we were--we were talking about the numbers. And I said, "In the neighborhood--when somebody in our neighborhood hit the numbers--." And my daughter said, "Well what's the numbers Daddy?" I said, "Well if you put a nickel down on a number, it's five, six, seven, and you hit it, it comes out, you get twenty-five dollars and things like that." And I ran into this fellow who--at the Eastern Market this past Saturday. And he's very well off. And he was talking about how he helped along with John White the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that time. Arthur Johnson was the executive secretary of the NAACP. And our offices were on Livernois [Avenue, Detroit] but the NAACP didn't have any money. But John White who owned the Gotham Hotel, was very civic minded. And he, every Friday, would come down to the NAACP office on Vernor Highway and give Dr. Johnson money to pay the secretary, to pay the phone bill and take care of the other expenses because the NAACP locally just didn't have any money. And John White that--who owned the Gotham Hotel was a very civic-minded man. And when you walked into that hotel, which I thought was the finest black hotel in America, you would see portraits of great black leaders of--you walked into the--when you walked into the hotel you saw pictures of Carter G. Woodson and Mary McLeod Bethune, and Channing Tobias and [W.E.B.] DuBois and Mordecai Johnson and, and just a wonderful array of blacks that you could establish some pride with. Speaker 1: Hmm. Now I wanna take yourself back to is it Hudson Avenue? Speaker 2: Hudson Avenue yeah. Speaker 1: Hudson Avenue. And I want you to tell me if you could take yourself back and just think of any, you know, favorite sights, sounds or smells remind you of growing up in Detroit at that time. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know. I, I always think about the various shifts that the blacks in our neighborhood--Most of 'em were working at Fords (Ford Motor Company). And you could see them going out in the morning, the men catching the Grand Belt streetcar going out to the Ford Motor Company. And then the afternoon shift, you could see the black men leaving the homes because the neighborhood was very small and the block was very small. And going to work and the wives hugging them, kissing them goodbye. And so you would see the happiness that they had a job. Story_ID: 9606 Speaker 1: One of the decisions I made when I was on the federal district court was finding Detroit Edison [Company, DTE] guilty of racial discrimination. And I fined them monetarily four million dollars. And I fined the union for cooperating and conspiring with Detroit Edison in keeping blacks in menial jobs. And that case held up. It's Stamps v. Detroit Edison. One--as a lawyer you would know this, one thing that did not hold up. I said that those blacks who wanted to apply for Detroit Edison but was discouraged not to, because they had been told that blacks were not hiring. The court of appeals said that was speculative, and it was. But at that time in our neighborhood we knew what companies were hiring. We would know through the churches or through playing baseball or walking in the neighborhood. They would say, "Detroit Edison is not hiring today." And when we'd say hiring, we were talking about cleaning floors or riding elevators or doing things like that. And I said, "Even though it's speculative, I knew it happened." That there's no point in going to Fords (Ford Motor Company) or Chrysler or General Motors or Crowley's or Kearns or the gas company or Detroit Edison because they're not hiring. Not hiring who? Not hiring blacks. Well you could see that was highly speculative. But it was a reality that happened in the black community. Story_ID: 9607 Speaker 1: Can you also describe what family life was like? 'Cause you're the youngest--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: --of, you know, of six. And did you spend a lot of time with your father [Perry Alexander Keith]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Well I spent a lot of time with my father, because I would say without any reservations, he's the finest man I've ever known. And he used to take me up to Olympia [Stadium, Detroit, Michigan] to see Joe Louis fight. And to Northwestern [High School] playground to see the black baseball, professional baseball teams come in. And every Saturday I would go with him down to the Western Market on Livernois [Avenue] and Warren [Avenue] to do the shopping. But the most telling experience I think I had of my father, and I've said it before, is the fact that he was dying we thought of pneumonia when I was just a youngster playing out on the street. My mother [Annie Louise Keith] called me in and said, "Your dad wants to talk to you." He was in bed. The doctors had given up on him. And he said, "Son I really wish that I could live to see you finish college because none of the children have gone, and I really wanted to see you go to college and make something out of yourself." And miraculously, God saved him. And he got well. And then I went on to college. And he came down to see me finish West Virginia State College [now West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], which was an all-black college at that time. And as we walked around the campus he said, "Well son, God kept his commitment to me to let me see you finish college." And he said, "I'm ready to die. I'm ready to go." I said, "Ah Dad, cut it out. You're in good health and doing well" and all of that. And it was during the war. And so I said--my father and my sister and my brother Luther left West Virginia State and came back home. And I wanted to stay around a few days because we were getting ready to go in the [U.S.] Army and things. So when I came back home a couple of days later, saw my dad and hugged him. And he died the next day, a day or two. So--and people say, "What drives you Damon?" I think this sort of drives me. The expectations the-that my father had. The hopes that his son could make a difference in terms of making life better for all people. Speaker 1: You know, it's not, it's not that often at-you know, in the black community you hear of this close relationship between father and son. Your father had this--but I wanna-I wanna understand. Your father was a real--he owned real estate too. Right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were there any things that you saw and observed in his, you know, in his dealings with real estate that effected you later? You know, in--? Speaker 2: No. I think I would say his fairness. I never saw my father do anything that was dishonest. He loved his church. His minister at Macedonia Church was Horatius H. Coleman. He was just very religious. But I can never in my life remember ever seeing my father do anything that was unkind, unmanly-like or mistreating anyone. He was the nicest and kindest man I'd ever known. And very protective of his family and very responsible. And my daughters [Cecile, Debbie, Gilda] now who are all up in age say, "Dad, there's one thing about you, you're very responsible. You're dependable. We can count on you." And if that is true, and I hope it is, I-my Dad taught me that by example. Story_ID: 9608 Speaker 1: When did he [father, Perry Alexander Keith] first start talking to you about wanting you to go on to college? Speaker 2: Well when I was in high school. He wanted to--see I went to--the schools I told you I went to, Columbian Elementary [sic, Columbian Primary School, Detroit, Michigan], McMichael Intermediate [School, Detroit, Michigan] and Northwestern High [School, Detroit, Michigan], I never had a black teacher during that entire time. And so my father was very much concerned about me getting an education. He said, "Now son, I don't want you to end up in the factory like I did." He worked at Ford [Motor Company]--in the Ford foundry. And so he said, "I want you to go to college." So in my own mind while I was in high school, I always wanted to go to college. But I didn't know where I was going. And it was by an act of faith that Mrs. John W. Davis who was the wife of President Davis at West Virginia State College [now West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] came with--and related--was related to my mother [Annie Louise Keith] as first cousin, came to visit her mother in Detroit and came by our house and said, "What is Damon gonna do?" I think that was in July or August. "What is Damon gonna do? Where is he going to college?" And they said, "We're trying to decide whether it--Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan] , U of D [University of Detroit, Detroit, Michigan] or [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. But he's going some place." And she says, "Why cousin Annie, cousin Perry why don't you send him down to West Virginia State College?" And that was the greatest thing ever happened to me because it took the cataracts off my eyes. I saw these great black leaders and educators that I'd never seen before and never knew of. Having gone all the way from the kindergarten through high school never having a black teacher. And it was that experience down there that really perpetuated my desire to do well. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that experience there? You know, and what was different about it? Because you--first of all your coming--you say you're coming from a primarily--even though you grew up in a black community, a white-influenced environment. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I grew up in a black community but all of my schooling and all of my teachers and all of my role models were white. The blacks in the community were either numbers men or--well there were no elected officials, black elected officials in Detroit at that time. So if you'd see a black on the fire department or a black police office or a black waiting--riding the street car or driving the street--that was the height of your ambition. And you see well--my dad would say, "Well these people get paid every other week. It's a steady job if they wanna take a family. But this is not what I want for you. I want you to go to college because things are gonna be very competitive when you become a man, son." And so when I went to West Virginia State it was just a wonderful experience. Seeing blacks who-black Ph.D.s. And Dr. John W. Davis who was the president of the college was one of the smartest and most eloquent speakers I've ever known. And he helped to motivate me too because I had three jobs when I was at West Virginia State. It was in the [Great] Depression. I waited tables, I drove the president and cleaned his car and cleaned the chapel after the show each Saturday. So I worked all the way through there. Story_ID: 9609 Speaker 1: I wanna just take you back to high school [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan] just a little bit. I'm wondering what were you like sort of as a youth? And what were you sort of dreaming to be, as we all sort of dream? And also, what type of child were you? Speaker 2: Well that's sort of self-serving. I don't know what type of child I was. I--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Were you rambunctious? Were you inquisitive? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well. Speaker 1: Were you talkative? Were you outgoing? Or--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I don't know. I never got in any trouble. I was a safety patrol. Well but I had my share of fights. I ran track at Northwestern High school. And one of the men who helped influence my life was a coach by the name of Sam Bishop, who saw something in me. And he says, "Damon, I think you're going places." And he taught me some--the rules of the game. And I had a very competitive spirit in experiencing track. And Sam Bishop was a great man. And he taught--I mean he was the coach of football, basketball and track and he showed a great deal of interest in me. And I was on the track team and won my letter in track, the three years I was in high school. Speaker 1: And what do you think track taught you, or sports about life? What do you think that taught you? Speaker 2: Well it taught me about the competitiveness. I play to win. And I know how to lose because I've lost quite a bit during my lifetime. And I think failure is not final. I remember a few years ago--and my wife [Rachel Boone Keith, M.D.] told me not to say this. But I delivered the commencement address at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and got an honorary degree. And they--as they placed the hood on me and gave me the honorary, they were saying all these wonderful things about me and all of that. And which I appreciated but when I got up to give the commencement address, I said, "You young graduates, I wanna let you know that I appreciate all the nice things that have been said about me, as the graduating speaker and getting this honor, but I wanna let you know also that I failed the bar examination the first time I took it." And I said, "You're gonna have failures in your life." And I said, "You've gotta know how to handle 'em. You may be down, but you don't have to stay down." And I said, "You can gain strength by your failures. And, because you have the ups and you have the downs. And how you handle the decline and when you're down will determine whether, where you will go." And I said, "Don't be afraid to admit that you've had problems." And I see people now who are in positions of power and prestige, who would have people believe they've always been there. And no one's ever helped 'em. They've never had the down side of life. And they're fooling themselves. I see people in positions of power and authority who I helped get there, who are ingrates and who won't lean back to help anyone. And I said, "It's a discouraging thing. They don't wanna let anyone know the problems that they had." Story_ID: 9610 Speaker 1: Sir, I wanna take you one more time back to like your high school [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan] years. And I--I'm wondering is there anyone else who influenced you at that time period, besides your coach? Is there anyone else who--maybe your coach, your father [Perry Alexander Keith]? Is there any other figure in the--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No. I cannot think of anyone from the kindergarten through high school, other than [Northwestern High School coach] Sam Bishop, that really had an impact on me. Now when I went to college [West Virginia State College, now West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], Dr. John W. Davis, Mrs. Davis and my experience there just helped me tremendously. And it taught me a lot too because I waited tables in the [college] president's house and I had never had the luxury of setting a table. I didn't know where the forks went, or where the spoons went, or the knife, or where the napkin went. And Mrs. Davis was--just knew all of the things of etiquette just taught me all those little things. So that was very important to me. And one time--the first time I was waiting tables some--the--some dignitary wanted second helpings of something. So Mrs. Davis had the little button and she pressed--pushed the button. And I came out with my white coat on to get the plate. And so what I did is took the knife and fork off the plate and put it on her linen napkin--tablecloth and then took the plate back in the kitchen. But, you know, she didn't embarrass me though. After they were gone she said, "Now Damon, don't do that any more. You just put the knife and fork on there, if you go back in. And--." But little things like that, that you--that--those experiences strengthen you. Speaker 1: And you--when you--do you remember the day you first arrived? Because this is the first time that you've been really out on your own? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh I remember. I was supposed to--Mrs. Davis--I caught a train from here [Detroit, Michigan] to Charleston, West Virginia. I was supposed to get off at Charleston but I got off at Institute [West Virginia]. Now I didn't have a bag or anything. I just--I don't know why my mother [Annie Louise Keith] and father [Perry Alexander Keith] let me get on the train. I guess maybe we--but--and so Mrs. Davis met me at Dunbar [West Virginia] or Institute [West Virginia] . And she--I should've gotten off at Charleston and that was a--and I didn't have anything but--it was warm here in Detroit [Michigan]. It was in August or September so I didn't have any sweater or anything on. And Mrs. Davis bought me a green sweater that night because I was freezing to death. And I went to--I had to deliver a speech at Charleston, West Virginia for the West Virginia State College in June of this year [2002]. And I went back to Institute and saw 314C in Prillerman Hall, where I stayed when I first went to West Virginia State College. Had a picture taken of it and I was telling my law clerk who drove me down there about some of the experiences I had there and it was just wonderful. Story_ID: 9611 Speaker 1: So it was like the Davises were--They took you in. Speaker 2: Oh they took me in. Speaker 1: In a big way. Speaker 2: Yeah they took me in. They just--they polished me up. They--and they motivated me. And it was--are you on, still now? And it was through [West Virginia State College President] Dr. [John W.] Davis after I went in the [U.S.] Army and then came back, I wanted to go to law school. And I was going to U of D [University of Detroit] here in Detroit [Michigan] or Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]. And he said, "No, son. I want you to go down to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]." God works in mysterious ways. His wonder is to behold. And that was the greatest thing that ever happened to me because then I had a chance to meet the giants in the legal profession who were black attorneys. They--Thurgood Marshall, [William] Bill Hastie, [James] Jim Nabrit [Jr.], Spottswood Robinson, Bob Ming, George Johnson. Just, just, just a wonderful array. [Charles] Charley Houston who were men committed to making this country of ours live up to its commitment of equal justice under law. And that was just motivating to me. And that's another reason I am driven so hard to use the judicial system and the law as a means of bringing about social change. Story_ID: 9612 Speaker 1: I'm gonna take you still back to West Virginia [State] College [now West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], just for a second. And what were you majoring in there? And what was--and, you know, you talk about--just as you were just now talking about Howard University Law School [Washington, D.C.] and how that was such a nurturing environment, you know for your legal career. I want you to, you know, talk a little bit more about what the role West Virginia State College played and how it formed you in many ways and how it opened up your eyes. Speaker 2: Well it was the environment. It was an all-black college at that time. And to see a black college president like John W. Davis who was a genius and one of--and a great orator. And to see how he handled himself and handled the faculty and handled dignitaries when they came to the college to speak to us. He would rotate periodically the great black leaders to come in. And Benjamin [Elijah] Mays--and I remember as the driver for the president, going to the--going to Charleston [West Virginia] and picking up Mordecai Johnson and Benjamin Mays and driving them back to the president's house. And hearing President Davis speak about Mary McLeod Bethune. And he says, "She physically may not look as attractive but once you see her and hear her talk, I call her Sweetheart Mary McLeod Bethune, because she's so beautiful." And I had never had that experience. And knowing that you--there were possibilities that a black person could make something out of themselves. And that--as I say, the cataracts were removed from my eyes. I had never heard of a black Ph.D. And black masters degrees and finishing these great universities and being in the classes with them. And, and, and the fact that the professors would try to motivate you and stimulate you and say that the opportunities are opening in life for you. Just make yourself--make something out yourself and not give up. Speaker 1: So there was great hope among this group. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: A great hope. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And were you thinking about law at that time? Speaker 2: No, no. Wasn't thinking about law. Story_ID: 9613 Speaker 1: Were you thinking that you were gonna teach? What were you thinking you wanted to do? Speaker 2: Well I--Mrs. Davis was a social worker. The president's [West Virginia State College President John W. Davis] wife. She had finished Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] and then had gone to Columbia [University, New York, New York] and had gotten her masters degree. And I was sort of interested in social work. And she said, "Well Damon if you are interested in social work, Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia, now Clark Atlanta University] is a great place to go. It has a great school of social work." And I had thought about that because I enjoy people and trying to make things better. But then I went into the [U.S.] Army. And a friend of mine Tom Newson, who had gone to the Detroit College of Law [Detroit, Michigan] and then was taken into the Army told me. He said, "Damon, I think there are great opportunities in the law for blacks and there will be in the future." And we had sat around in the barracks in Europe, excuse me, and other places talking about the law. And I said, "Well Tom, I might be interested in that." And I guess what really triggered this in my mind was when I came back to the [United] States after coming back from Germany--World War II--to see white German prisoners riding in the front of the buses and going into places down South for whites only and I couldn't go in. I said this cannot be right in a country that I have fought for, and fought against these same men. And they're enjoying all the benefits of life in the United States only because of their color and during the war they were our enemies! And I said, maybe I can do something in the law. This isn't justice. And so that sort of got me started. And wanting to know--and when I went to Howard [University Law School, Washington, DC], that was just what I needed. Speaker 1: Now until the Davises--you said the Davises--President Davis told you about Howard, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He's the one. But up until that point had you really known? Because your friend was going to--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Detroit College of Law. Speaker 1: Okay, Detroit--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I really didn't know anything about Howard Law School. I knew about Howard University, of course. Being at West Virginia State College [now West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] with some of the students from Howard transferring to West Virginia and some of the West Virginia students were going to Howard. But I'd never known about this nucleus of great lawyers at Howard University. Never knew about it. And when I got there, my class was full of men who had served in the United States Armed Forces. Story_ID: 9614 Speaker 1: Ironically, you would know this as a lawyer, you had--that was before '54 [1954] we had this separate but equal. And so lawyers from--I mean students who were out of the Army from Alabama, Mississippi or Georgia or Florida or any of the Southern states or Tennessee, the states would pay for their education at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. And I remember Paul Perkins who was my roommate was from Florida. And he says, "Damon, when I go--when we finish law school, I don't have to worry about a bar examination." I said, "Why, Paul?" He said, "Because if you finished University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida], you're automatically admitted to the bar. And since I have to go to Howard I'm entitled to the same treatment that they are." So Paul didn't have to take the bar exam. Now this is how far racism will get you. Not only did they pay you (laughing), you got the benefit of whatever a white graduate of Howard, of Florida Law School had. Speaker 2: Do you know how that policy was established? Why--do you--did the--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well I think--. Speaker 2: I mean I know that they didn't want them going in the state and practicing. But I'm--? Speaker 1: Well I think under the law at that time they said, "Well look. We're not gonna let you go to the University of Mississippi [Jackson, Mississippi] Medical School Dental School or Law School. But you select where you're going and we'll pay those expenses for you under the separate but equal doctrine. And so these Southern states did this rather than let blacks in. Now I--you know, we're talking fifty something years ago. You'd have to document this and check it. I'm trying to refresh my recollection. But I know it's actually (unclear) that this actually happened. Story_ID: 9615 Speaker 1: Now I want you also to comment about the Howard University Law School [Washington, D.C.] that you entered into because it was really in many ways at its sort of prime in terms of the people that were coming in. And I would just like you to be able to put that some in historical context. People often--you know, some of the people you mentioned were trained at, you know, even at northern law schools but came back because that's where they could practice and, you know, and have an occupation. And I'm just wondering 'cause there were some great legal minds, you know, such as [Thurgood] Marshall and [William] Hastie. And you mentioned all of them. And I'm just wondering, you know, if you can talk about that. Speaker 2: Well I think it's important because it shaped my life in the law. And as I look at the law today, in terms of my decisions and the cases that you're familiar with that I handled, it was shaped by using the law as an instrument for social change. Trying to make this country live up to its commitment in the [U.S.] Constitution, in the Declaration of Independence. And the blessing that we had when we were at Howard Law School was the fact that I had an opportunity prior to Thurgood [Marshall] and Bill Hastie and [Charles] Charley Houston and (James) Jim Nabrit arguing cases before the United States Supreme Court, they would have what we call a moot court, a dry session where Charley Houston and Thurgood and Bob Ming and Spottswood [Robinson] and Jim Nabrit and George E. C. Hays would be arguing the same cases before the student body that they would be arguing at the United States Supreme Court the next three or four weeks. And we saw them arguing these cases at Howard's Law School. And then we'd go to the United States Supreme Court and see them arguing their cases. So this was just a tremendous experience. Accelerating and here is a little guy from Detroit Michigan seeing history made. And I can hear Jim Nabrit who was a genius and taught me constitutional law say, "There's not a justice on that United States Supreme Court and knows as much about this case as I do. I don't care what he ask me. I can answer it." Story_ID: 9616 Speaker 1: Now who was your favorite of the people that mentioned? Speaker 2: I don't know. Thurgood [Marshall] and I became very close. And when he had his eightieth birthday party, there were four of us and our wives who hosted it. It was Bill Coleman and his wife, Vernon Jordan and his wife [Ann Dibble Cook] and Wiley Branton and his wife [Lucille McKee Branton] and [wife] Rachel [Boone Keith, M.D.] and myself. And so I said to Vernon or Wiley, I said, "Why you get me in these?" He said, "'Cause Thurgood wants you to be a part of the people who are hosting this party for him on his eightieth birthday." We gave it at Bill Coleman's house. But I--Thurgood and I had a relationship that was very good. When Wiley Branton became dean of the [Howard University] Law School [Washington, D.C.], he was--he had an investiture. So he called me. He says, "Damon, I want you to introduce Thurgood Marshall at my investiture." I said, "Wiley, you got a bunch of Howard University Law School graduates right there in Washington." And I started naming them off, you know. He said, "Damon, Thurgood wants you to introduce him." I said, "I'll be there." And so I introduced him. I still have the, remarks. So, and he would call me. And when I was being considered for the [U.S. Court of Appeals] Sixth Circuit, I was really concerned about it because I was chief judge of the Eastern District of Michigan here, and the first black chief judge here in the Eastern District of Michigan. And the lawyers, the black lawyers and a lot of the white lawyers were saying, "Well Damon, we need you here in Detroit [Michigan] as the chief judge of the court here." Because at that time the chief judge had a lot of authority in terms of selecting and appointing people to the probation department. And I appointed the first black probation director here in Detroit. And so I got a call one day. And it's from Thurgood. He says, "Damon, I hear you are pondering whether you should go to the Court of Appeals. Are you losing your mind?" I said, "What do you mean, Thurgood?" He says, "If you're offered--if they ask you to go there, you go there. Don't you dare just spend your time there in the Eastern District of Michigan as chief judge. I want you on the court of appeals. You can do some good there too." Speaker 1: So he was influencing in you, in going. You had had such a remarkable career on the, you know, on the federal bench, I mean, you know, on the district court. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh I had. Speaker 1: It was remarkable. Remarkable. Speaker 2: It had been just remarkable. And it was so remarkable that when I went over to be interviewed for a possibility to go to the Court of Appeals, the chairman of the committee at that time said, "Judge Keith, I understand you don't want to go to the Court of Appeals." I said, "Why?" He said, "Someone told us that you had talked to [U.S.] President [Jimmy] Carter and told him that you are so happy on the district court, you don't wanna go to the Court of Appeals." I said, "Well number one I've never talked to President Carter. Number two, my father [Perry Alexander Keith] and mother [Annie Louise Keith] who are both deceased would wonder what's wrong with their son if I have an opportunity to go to the second highest court in the United States and refuse it." I said, "That's not true at all." But someone had planted that seed in there that I was not interested in going to the Court of Appeals. And, of course, I went there. And then--life's so funny. While on the Court of Appeals, I was selected by [U.S. Supreme Court] Chief Justice [Warren] Burger to be the chairman of the bicentennial for the Sixth Circuit. And then when Justice Burger--Chief Justice Burger resigned, [U.S. Supreme Court] Chief Justice [William H.] Rehnquist appointed me to be the national chairman of the bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution [1987] over the whole country. And so you have now in almost every federal building in the United States and the Thurgood Marshall building in Washington D.C. at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], at Yale [University, New Haven Connecticut] at Guam and the FBI headquarters the Bill of Rights plaque with the ten amendments to the Constitution with only one name on it, and that's Damon J. Keith, it's chairman. And--. Speaker 1: Now back to--you said you developed a relationship with Thurgood Marshall. And, you know, we often think of Thurgood Marshall the, you know, U.S. Supreme Court Judge and Thurgood Marshall, you know, Brown v. Board of Education [Topeka, Kansas, 1954]. Thurgood Marshall NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] lawyer. And I'm wondering what was the Thurgood Marshall that you got to know at, you know, Howard during those years? Speaker 2: Well I--when I got to know, of course, I didn't know him at that time. I got the experience of just watching him perform and talking to him. I was just awed by that. Speaker 1: What was his--what would you consider his brilliance and his skill? Speaker 2: Well his intellect was absolutely outstanding. But his--this is a trend that ran through most of those men at that time. They--their total commitment to equality and the struggle of their people. I mean they would not take anything less in terms of their tenaciousness of trying to make this life better for black people. They were indignant at the way America was treating people of color. And they were determined to use the law as a means to eradicate some of these problems. And I just think it was just great. Because to this day, I feel as though the law is one of the strongest bull walks for eliminating racism legally in this country. You can't change a person's heart but the law can prevent them from doing what they were doing. You know the restricted covenants and everything else. Story_ID: 9617 Speaker 1: Do you remember at all when you first read Plessy versus Ferguson [1896]? Do you remember, you know, or any of the early cases like that what your thoughts of what were you--did you experience any surprise? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Well [James] Jim Nabrit [Jr.] taught me constitutional law. And Jim Nabrit was a genius. He finished at Northwestern University Law School [Evanston, Illinois] I think at the top of his class. And he taught constitutional law. And it was a good course for me. I got a B out of Jim Nabrit at Howard [University] Law School [Washington, D.C.]. He didn't give Bs out very often. But he was just so good. And could dramatize the constitutional concepts of the Fourteenth Amendment, the Bill of Rights, the Equal Protection Clause. And he--and he said--I remember him always saying that, you know, These justices of the United States Supreme Court read the papers and they get a feeling of the pulse of the country and when they--when you're arguing the case, remember that no one knows as much about it as you do because you prepared it. And be tenacious and not fear anything. And that type of determination. And it--it happened to me in the wiretap case that eventually was called the Keith Case [United States v United States Court for the Eastern District of Michigan, 1971] when I told [U.S.] President [Richard M.] Nixon and John Mitchell, then attorney general, that they couldn't wiretap without prior judicial approval. And I was working on this case. And every Monday of every--the first Monday in every month here in Detroit [Michigan] on the district court, we had then our judges meeting. And the judges knew that I had that case of Sinclair dealing with the wiretaps [US v. Sinclar, 1971]. And they were saying to me, "Well Damon, you know--I know you go that case but it's not a difficult case. If President Nixon and John Mitchell don't know what's in the best interest of the national security of our country, who will?" And they said, "I know you're gonna do the right thing. It's your case. But, you know they--you should let 'em go ahead and do that." And I said, "Well I don't know." I said, "You know, there's such a thing as the Fourth Amendment." "Well yeah. It's a Fourth Amendment. But he's the president and you have John Mitchell." So I rendered my decision which later became the Keith Case, saying that they could not do it without prior judicial approval. And it went to the Court of Appeals and I was firm. And then the Supreme Court unanimously affirmed me. And then at the next judges meeting all the judges said, "Well Damon, we knew you were right in the first place." But they--they didn't wanna do what was--I don't say--I'm not trying to say they didn't wanna do what was right. But I think the experience I had at Howard taught me to be courageous and to do what was the right thing to do in terms of the law. And I didn't hesitate. Story_ID: 9618 Speaker 1: When you graduated [Howard University Law School, Washington, D.C.], what were your thoughts about what you wanted to do? You came back to Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Came back to Detroit Speaker 1: And were your thoughts that you were gonna work, you know, in civil rights? 'Cause you started with--I wanna know how you end up going with a law firm at Loomis, Jones, Piper and--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Colden. Speaker 1: Colden. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: And who were those guys? Speaker 2: Well they were--it was one of the first black law--all of the lawyer, black lawyers were in the Tobin Building at 1308 Broadway [Street] [Detroit, Michigan]. And Loomis, Jones, Piper and Colden was a black law firm there, really a good--and some how I met Mr. Charles W. Jones who later would be the first black judge appointed in the state of Michigan. Governor [G. Mennen] Williams appointed him to recorders court. He subsequently lost the election. But I met him some how. And he said, "Well why don't you come on in my office and work as a law clerk." And that's where I first got started with that law firm over there. Speaker 1: And what did--how did that law firm come together? Do you know--? Speaker 2: No, I don't. It was an unusual--Loomis who was the senior partner graduated from the University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. Percival Piper who was a graduate of I think Detroit College of Law [Detroit, Michigan]. Bill Colden was a graduate of the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. And Charles Jones finished [University of] Minnesota's Law School [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. And it was a great firm. They represented some of the Charley Diggs--Senior Charley Diggs, and the House of Diggs [Inc.], and the Gotham Hotel [Detroit, Michigan]. And they had a great law firm there and I was just please to be a part of that. And to see those black lawyers moving. They weren't as civic minded as I would like for them to have been. It was strictly monetary with them during that time. Speaker 1: Well they had to make a living in many ways. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: In many ways. Now the other thing though. How did that--was there things that were surprising to you about that practice? You know, as a young lawyer coming out? Were there things that were disappointing? And you wanted, you know, 'cause you're coming out an environment where there was a lot of civil rights going on. And I'm not saying that was not the, you know, the manner of the day. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: But I'm just saying were there things that were surprising as a young associate? And--? Speaker 2: Well I don't know if there was anything surprising. It was just that I, I saw the structure there of a law firm. Black men coming in every day and clients walking in and out. I had an opportunity to interview them and file papers. And at that time we didn't have any black judges. Had one or two black assisting prosecuting attorneys. They had sort of a quota there. Gerald K. O'Brien was the prosecuting attorney and he had a rule that there be two blacks who would be on the assistant prosecuting attorneys. There were no assistant attorney generals and no blacks in position of authority legally in the city. So it was a very disheartening experience. And I got assignments in recorders court from every now and then from the white judges to go over there and try a case or plead someone. And it was very demeaning. And one of the experiences I had that is lasting to me today is I represented a young black boy who was home for Christmas from college. At Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama] or some place down there. And they had picked him up for robbery armed. And he was locked up and I represented him. And I was before (ph.) Judge John Ricka, in terms of the bail hearing. And Judge Ricka set about a fifty thousand dollar bond on him. And just before he set the bond on my client, he--I saw a white young man who had also been charged with robbery armed get out on personal bond. So I told Judge Ricka, I said, "Judge Ricka, this young man is here from college. He said he didn't commit this crime. His father works in juvenile court under Judge Coffman over there, and his family is stable." I said, "Can't you let him out on personal bond." He says, "No." And I kept presenting my case to him. And he said, "Can't you hear what I said Mr. Keith? Get out of here." And just to follow that story further, the young man stayed in jail all during the Christmas holidays. He said he hadn't done it. He took two lie detector tests and failed both of 'em. But after the first of the year I get a call from Judge Crouse. And he says, "Mr. Keith, come over here and we're bringing your client here. We found the young man who committed this crime who's confessed to it. And come--I wanna release your client." And that stuck with me all this time. But the irony of this is when I was being considered for a federal district judgeship, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was interviewing me. And they said, "Mr. Keith, I understand you've been disrespectful to the court, years ago when you were before Judge Ricka." And I said, "I've never been disrespectful before the court." And I had to recite what took place about that bond hearing, that my client was eventually acquitted for, just let off. But that thing ran right through. I don't know who planted that seed in the FBI but I had to respond to it. Speaker 1: So you think there--do you think anything went in any file? Or you just think--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh I have no way of knowing. I have no way of knowing what happened. But all I do know is that the FBI questioned me about my conduct before Judge Ricka. Speaker 1: Hmm. Now that--did you ever see on the--I mean on the--well it's the same line of questioning. Did you ever see any of your, you know, the partners of the firm or any other black lawyer in, being treated in a less than pleasing manner than it would have been--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh absolutely. Frequently. Frequently--and I don't want this to be self-serving. But I have been on the court now as a federal judge for about thirty-two or thirty-three years. I have never held anyone in contempt of court during my entire time. And I've handled some difficult cases. I've had great lawyers before me. And I think a part of that is the way that I was treated when I was practicing law and now as other black lawyers were treated. I wrote a dissent in a case last year where an assistant United States attorney or prosecutor--I don't know his state court-had, had ex parte conversations with the judge. And at conference with my colleagues on the court, I said, "Look, this is a violation of the Sixth Amendment to a fair and impartial trail." I said, "The prosecutor should not be talking to the judge without the other side being there." I said, "Now as a practicing lawyer in Detroit [Michigan], growing up in the '50 [1950s], I used to see white prosecutors go into the judges chambers, talk to him. And then they walk out together." And my client says to me, "Mr. Keith, what took place in there?" I said, "I don't know!" I said, "You cannot allow that to happen." And that's based on my own personal experience. And I wrote a very scorching dissent about this. But it was based on number one, as you know, you shouldn't have ex parte communication between the prosecutor and the attorney or the defense attorney and the court. But it was the experiences that I saw and witnessed and the demeaning things that happened to black lawyers during that time that hurt me and set the course of my life. Story_ID: 317560 Speaker 1: Today is March the 6th, 2007. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, and our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Damon, D-A-M-O-N, J. Keith, K-E-I-T-H [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith]. I'm a judge of the United States Court of Appeals of the Sixth Circuit. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: July the 4th, 1922. Speaker 1: And place of birth? Speaker 2: Detroit, Michigan. Story_ID: 317561 Speaker 1: We covered your growing up and going to law school at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and meeting Thurgood Marshall, James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.], and other people, and I think what we'll try to do here is to talk about your appointment to the bench by President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], I think-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in 1967 and try to talk about some of the seminal cases that you worked on in the time we have. So, can you tell us about your appointment to the bench? Speaker 2: Well, I was appointed by President Lyndon Johnson to the district court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan] in 1967 and I had a lot of interesting cases. It's a trial court, and I handled the Sinclair case [United States v. Sinclair, 1971], which dealt with wiretapping. Speaker 1: Now this is 1971 right? Yeah '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I held that President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and John Mitchell [John N. Mitchell] could not wiretap unilaterally citizens' phones without getting prior judicial approval. The Sinclair case dealt with the White Panthers [White Panther Party] and they allegedly were about to blow up a CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] building up in Ann Arbor [Michigan]. And Plamondon [Lawrence "Pun" Plamondon] was the head of the Black Panthers at that time. Speaker 1: The White Panthers. Speaker 2: I mean the White Panthers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The White Panthers. And they started the lawsuit--the government had started this lawsuit wanting to--no let me, excuse me, let me just--I'm going back a long time now. Yeah, you ready? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The government had indicted Plamondon and some others for conspiracy to blow up the CIA building up in Ann Arbor, so the lawyers for Plamondon came in and wanted to find out whether or not in violation of the Fourth Amendment. These--there were phone taps, wiretaps on the phones of Plamondon and some of the White Panthers and Secretary Mitchell, who was attorney general at that time said that we don't have to disclose whether or not these wiretaps were there under the theory of inherent authority of the president in terms of national security, they could wiretap without prior judicial approval. The attorneys for the White Panthers said, no, you have to get a warrant to see if there is probable cause before you can just go indiscriminately and start wiretapping people. And Mitchell and Nixon's theory was that we in terms of national security have the inherent authority to do this. So, they filed motions before me as a district judge, and I said that the government had to disclose whether or not there were wiretaps on Plamondon or any of the defendants in the case. Now, I issued my order that they do that. They refused my order and they mandamused me to the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit], and the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, with George Edwards [George Clifton Edwards, Jr.] writing the opinion, agreed with me. It was a two to one decision with the chief judge, Harry Phillips, concurring with George Edwards and Paul Weick [Paul Charles Weick] dissenting. And since it was a mandamus case [United States v. United States District Court, 1972], I was a part of it, and that's why it was known in the legal books and historically as the Keith case, because I had to hire my own lawyer to represent me before the United States Supreme Court because I had been mandamused. And I hired Bill Gossett [William T. Gossett] to do this pro bono, and he argued the case before the United States Supreme Court on my behalf, and the United States Supreme Court unanimously affirmed me. Story_ID: 317562 Speaker 1: Okay now I've read that the Keith case [United States v. United States District Court, 1972] contributed to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act [1978]. Is that--did you have any knowledge of that? Speaker 2: Well, I think years later that it did. But I think more important than that, it broke Watergate wide open, because Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] then had to turn over the tapes which, of course, incriminated him and all of the people in--but prior to that case he had not turned them over. Speaker 1: Right 'cause this--so this case, U.S. v. Sinclair [United States v. Sinclair] takes place in '71 [1971] and, you know, Watergate the burglary was in '72 [1972] and then the case of course, you know, reaches its conclusion in '74 [1974] I guess, so that, so that's--but your case was adjudicated in '72 [1972] was it, I mean did they reach a decision in '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Now Rehnquist [William Rehnquist] was on the court [U.S. Supreme Court], but he didn't sit on the case that was argued before the--the Keith case, because he had formulated, I understand, the inherent authority of the president under the guise of national security that they could do this without going to a magistrate and show probable cause. So, he recused himself and so was it was an eight to zero decision, but it was unanimous. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, we're leaving Rehnquist out of it. Now, something else about that case, I know the attorney for the White Panthers [White Panther Party] was William Kunstler. He headed up their team, but he wrote about how the contrast and how they were treated by Judge Hoffman [Julius Hoffman] in Chicago [Illinois] in '68 [1968] when they, when the Chicago Eight were on trial, I guess, and how they were treated here in Detroit [Michigan] by you in this White Panther case. They said they were--the treatment there, there wasn't the antagonism, the open hostility in the courtroom and the--no contempt of court citations were issued during this trial. Speaker 2: No, I've been on the bench now for forty-eight years now and I've never held anyone in contempt of court and never threatened to hold anyone in contempt of court. Bill Kunstler came over here with Leonard Weinglass right after the Hoffman case, and I called them into my chambers and, and told them and I said, "Now this court, the court"--I never use a personal pronoun I. I said, "The court will be understanding of your position and I under--I would like for you to be respectful of the court. When you get up to speak, stand up, say what you have to say, sit down, let the other side respond, if you have any rebuttal you--then the court will make a decision and then we'll move on," I said, "but the court is gonna treat you with respect and dignity that you deserve." So, we had coffee together, the prosecution and the defense lawyers and we didn't have any problem, but in the book that Bill Kunstler wrote, he was very laudatory about the way I handled the case, the way I treated the lawyers. Speaker 1: That's right, he cited this court as a model of how it should be--of your, you know, handling of this as a model of how this should be done. He said it was fair, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, thank you. He did say that. Story_ID: 317563 Speaker 1: Let's go on to another case. Let's go onto Garrett v. Hamtramck [Garrett v. City of Hamtramck, 1971], the--now that case was another 1971 case, right? Speaker 2: Yes. This was a case where the City of Hamtramck [Michigan], under the guise of redeveloping and urban renewal, wiped out a complete black community in the City of Hamtramck which is basically an all-white suburb of Detroit [Michigan] and it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Isn't it, it's more like an enclave, isn't it? I mean, it's almost in the contiguous metropolitan area of Detroit, but it's a Polish, it was a traditional Polish-- Speaker 2: Yeah, basically it was Polish, yeah, and under the guise that they were going to build redevelopment and things there to benefit the community. And Mr. Garrett [sic. Sarah Sims Garrett] and other people, blacks in the community started this lawsuit. Believe it not, it's still going on after all of these years. But I got a letter just the other day that their building houses, and they have to go out and try to find some of the residents who were still there, and most of them are dead, and they're trying to get some of the children or grandchildren of those there, and I issued an order that it was black removal in Hamtramck, and that case was affirmed in this, at the court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit]. And it was just a very vicious way of removing blacks from the City of Hamtramck and not finding suitable housing for them after you took the housing away. Speaker 1: Okay, so the city declared eminent domain and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --took the housing from the black residents-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --under the guise of urban renewal. Speaker 2: Yes, under the guise of urban renewal, but you were also under the guise of urban renewal supposed to find suitable housing for the people that you removed. And basically the ones that were removed were all blacks, and this was a very difficult case. We heard it for a few months, and I made that ruling and ordered them to number one start building housing, find the blacks that were displaced and find housing for them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, it's very difficult because they kept appealing it and they were very difficult to handle because they wouldn't follow the court's orders. And, but when I got on the court of appeals I got a special designation to sit as a district judge so that I could track and follow through on the Hamtramck case as a district judge, because I didn't want another judge to get it and then reverse my findings. So, I still sit as a district judge on the Hamtramck case to this day. Speaker 1: To think, I mean, this is since 1971, so we're talking about thirty-six years. Speaker 2: That's right thirty-six years, and you know, justice delayed is justice denied. This is a prime examine of that. No question about it. Speaker 1: Okay, and now did this case--we've heard, you know, during these interviews I heard about like urban renewal problems other cities, you know, Tulsa, Oklahoma, my hometown of Dayton, Ohio, building interstate highways through the black community and then removing people. Has this case been used by other district judges as a precedent and, and-- Speaker 2: I think it has. I heard judges say to me, "Judge Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith], I followed the Hamtramck case." But, it is unique for more reasons than one, just the length of time. And Hamtramck has not been a financially sound community, so they've used the fact that they were near bankruptcy and they couldn't do this and they couldn't do that, but now we, I think we have it after all these years moving in the right direction. In fact, I got a letter last week from the lawyers involved in it saying that the houses are going up, and they're looking for relatives of the people who were displaced, and things are finally moving along. Story_ID: 317564 Speaker 1: Tell us about Stamp v. Detroit Edison [Stamps v. Detroit Edison Co., 1973]. That's a 1983 [sic. 1973] case-- Speaker 2: Well, this Stanton--Stamps [Willie Stamps], it's Stamps-- Speaker 1: Stamps, okay. Speaker 2: S-T-A-M-P-S v. Detroit Edison. That was a discrimination case where som- the black employees of Detroit Edison [Detroit Edison Company; DTE Electric Company, Detroit, Michigan] started a lawsuit saying that blacks at the Detroit Edison, the utility company, were in the most menial jobs at Detroit Edison. There's janitorial, driving the executives, and no super, no blacks in supervision, in the supervisory positions, unequal pay for the black men and women, and they started this lawsuit. I heard it without a jury for maybe eight to ten weeks, and made a finding that Detroit Edison discriminated against blacks, and fined them at that time, I think it was four or five million dollars, which they say now would be worth twenty or twenty-five million dollars. But, I also found out and fined the labor union because they were working in cooperation with their employer to keep blacks down in these menial positions. So, I think I, I don't remember the exact amount, but I think I fined, levied a fine against the labor union that was supposed to represent the blacks, a quarter of a million dollars at that time, because they were collaborating with, with the employer rather than representing their employees that were paying their dues. Speaker 1: Do you find this to be a common case, especially in those days of the, the employer and the union both, I guess, working against the interest of a black employee. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know whether it was common or not, but it was detailed and brought out clearly that this was happening at Detroit Edison, that the union was not performing its duties of their dues paying members. And I said they had to do something about it. So, I levied a fine on them and then I, in my order, I told Detroit Edison that they would have forthwith start hiring blacks in supervisory positions and get some black vice presidents and things like that; and they did. Malcolm Dade was the first black VP over there after my order, and he in speeches said he wouldn't have been over there as a VP if it hadn't been for Damon Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith]. And then Martin S. Taylor [S. Martin Taylor] followed him, and they have blacks in positions of authority over there now, but it took this type of order to, for corporate America--The New York Times and other papers picked up on this decision in the corporate world, and said what the district court judge in Detroit [Michigan] did, and corporations in the country better start working up, waking up to this. Story_ID: 317565 Speaker 1: We were talking about the Detroit Police Officers Association v. Coleman Young [1993]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I think that's where we left off. Speaker 2: Well, the police officers association filed a motion for me to recuse myself because I knew Coleman Young. In fact, I swore him in as mayor of the City of Detroit [Michigan], and I refused to recuse myself. I said, "Just because he's black and I'm black why would you want me to recuse myself? I can be open-minded and fair." And they said no we want--and they appealed to the Court of Appeals of the Sixth Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit], and they affirmed me, said, "Judge Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] doesn't have to relieve himself of this case." And I went on to hear it and affirmed the affirmative action program, and we had very few blacks who were above the sergeant status in the police department, at that time, and now they've all gone up and they've done well, but it was through Coleman Young's affirmative action program of the police department. That's why the Detroit Police Officers Association sued Coleman Young, because he was the mayor of the city, and I drew the case, and they wanted to relieve me, but incidentally after I had made the decision and then the organization gave me high praise and had my picture on the front page of the magazine dealing with the police department. They said, "Judge Keith was absolutely fair and impartial." Speaker 1: Now, are you familiar with the case of the African American Patrolmen's League [Afro-American Patrolmen's League] of Chicago [Illinois] vs. the City of Chicago that Judge Prentice Marshall ruled on, I guess, back in-- Speaker 2: No, I'm not familiar. Speaker 1: Okay, all right I thought I'd ask because in that case the black union sued the city for affirmative action, some kind of program and Marshall entered--he--well he came up with a consent decree where they had to do so much every year. Speaker 2: Well, Larry [Larry Crowe], you know it's interesting, I was talking to Congressman Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] today about the power that he has now as head of the judiciary of the United States Congress, and I was saying, "Congressman Conyers, the independence of the judiciary is absolutely vital in importance." I said, "If it hadn't been for the federal judges down south, Frank Johnson [Frank M. Johnson, Jr.] and the others who desegregated the schools, the drinking fountains, and things like that under the threat of terror, it would have been bad. So, it's important that you, John Conyers, as the chairman of the judicial branch of Congress, maintain and see that it's maintained that the federal judges have their independence," and John is gonna do that, and that's important. See in state courts, the judges there have to run for office, but our forefathers had enough vision to in the First Amendment, to indicate that the judges would be appointed for life and doing good tenure, and would be independent. We didn't--we don't have to run for office. Story_ID: 317566 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your friendship with Willie Horton before we go to another case, just-- Speaker 2: Yeah Willie Horton's statue is now out at Comerica Field [Comerica Park, Detroit, Michigan], baseball, and he was a young man at Northwestern High School in Detroit [Michigan] where I graduated. John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] graduated from there, Willis Ward, Nate Conyers [HistoryMaker Nathan Conyers], we're all west siders, and Sam Bishop who was the coach of the football and baseball team over there who called me when Willie was a baseball player over there and said, "Attorney Damon Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] we have a ballplayer over here who has great potential. He's only about fifteen years of age, but I wondered if you would talk to him and see if you could help him." So, I had him come down to my office at 1308 Broadway [Street], and we talked and he was very young and I went over and saw his mother [Lillian Wattison Horton] and father [Clinton Horton]. They were living on Forest Avenue. Speaker 1: That was about 1960 or so, or when would you say? Speaker 2: Yeah it was early '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --about '65 [1965] or '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have the exact date out there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in my chambers. And Willie was so young that his mother and father said, "Well judge--Attorney Keith, you represent him as his lawyer and as his guardian." So, I represented Willie, and Jim Campbell was the president and general manager of the Detroit Tigers, and I think we got Willie a fifty thousand dollar signing bonus at that time. I don't recall. And what Willie did to his credit, the first thing he did was to buy his mother and father a home in Detroit [Michigan] on Edison [Street], I think. And the sportswriters ask him, "Willie I understand you bought a house for your mother and father and where is it?" He said, "It's in the suburbs." He was so far removed from where he was living on Forest that he thought Edison, Detroit was the suburbs. Because when I got him and, and took control of him, he was living at a house on Forest with one toilet, no shower, and about sixteen people living in it. And Willie has come a long ways. I remember his mother called me one time and said, "Attorney Keith, Willie is driving without a driver's license, and would you please contact him about this?" So, I said, "When he comes back would you let me know and I'll leave my office and come over to see him." And Willie came home on Forest and his mother called me and said, "Attorney Keith, Willie is here." So, I drove over and said, "Willie your mother tells me you're driving without a driver's license." He said, "No Mr. Keith, I have a license," and he showed me a license with another person's name on it. I said, "Willie, this is not your name. You have to have a license with your name on it." So, I called the Berg brothers [James Berg and Louis Berg, Jr.], who were the superintendent and the deputy superintendent of the police department, who were very much concerned about Willie, we drove down there and I got Willie his first driver's license. But, he was so out of the mainstream of things he thought since he could drive, all you needed was somebody's driver's license. Story_ID: 317567 Speaker 1: We were talking about Willie Horton the, I guess the first great black baseball star in Detroit [Michigan], for the Detroit Tigers, and you kind of being his--providing guidance and being his legal counsel, and over the years. He went on to become a big, one of the big stars of the 1968 World Series-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --where Detroit actually won the World Series and that was--was that the last time--no Detroit was in it in '84 [1984] too, right, right, that's right. So, there have been others since. Speaker 2: Yeah, well Willie is now a VP at the Detroit Tigers, and Mike Ilitch has been very loyal to him, and when they put the statue out there of Willie I spoke at that time. I have a picture out there with Mike Ilitch, Ernie Harwell, Willie, and myself when they put the statue out there honoring Willie. Story_ID: 317568 Speaker 1: We didn't talk about the Tony Giacalone [Anthony Giacalone], Jimmy Hoffa case. Speaker 2: Well, it was Tony Giacalone--the government had indicted Anthony Giacalone, also known as Tony. He was allegedly one of the top, allegedly, mafia men in the State of Michigan, and they indicted him under the theory, the net worth theory, that you had been declaring so much money as your income and yet you're spending this. How do you reconcile with what you're declaring with your expenditures, and that's what they call a net worth case. And we tried that for eight months here in the federal building. I was in the district court and the government wanted to bring in this alleged mafia, these alleged mafia allegations, and I said, "No, you can't do that." He's indicted--and indictment is just an accusation. He's indicted under the theory that he is spending more money than he's disclosing, and nothing else matters. Now, Tony allegedly was supposed to have lunch with Jack [sic.], with Jimmy Hoffa at the time Jimmy Hoffa vanished, and Jimmy Hoffa had called his wife, so the papers said, and said, "Darling, I'm to have lunch here," I think it's the Silver Fox [sic. Machus Red Fox, Bloomfield Township, Michigan] or something out there in the suburbs, and Jimmy's never late. I mean not Jimmy, but Tony is never late. Well, that was the last they heard of Jimmy Hoffa, and Tony was at a recreational facility at a spa at the time he was supposed to be there to have lunch with Jimmy Hoffa. But, we tried Tony for eight months and he was found guilty of this net worth case, and the jurors after they found him guilty were asked how difficult was it to find Anthony Giacalone guilty of this case, and they said, "We tried to be as fair in reaching our verdict as Judge Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] was during the course of this trial." So, a judge does have a way of directing the fairness of a trial, even when you have jurors, they see whether or not your leaning one way, towards the prosecution, or another way. But, a defendant in a criminal case is presumed to be innocent, and that defendant need not do anything. He's entitled to a fair and impartial trial, he need not take the stand in his own defense; he need do nothing. The government must prove him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. You've got to let the jury know that because sometimes when we are voir diring the jury trying to select twelve jurors, if one of the attorneys of the court asks, "How do you feel, as Mr. Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] sits here now, how many of you feel as though he's guilty," and some of the jurors almost, in most cases will say, "I think he's guilty now or the government wouldn't have started this lawsuit." So, that's why you have to instruct them that this is just an accusation. This is the first time he's had a chance to see his accusers. And, but as he sits there he is presumed to be innocent and he need not do anything. The government has the burden of proving him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Speaker 1: Now how--over the years I'm sure you've seen example after example of the opposite of, of the court not being fair. Have you--can you give us some examples of the court not being fair to people and-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if it's--I don't think the court deliberately would go out of their way to be unfair, but I think some judges also feel as though the defendant wouldn't be there if he or she were not guilty, and just by their conduct in the courtroom by sustaining the government on everything and denying motions on the defendant, the jury can get impliedly that the court's on the side of the government. And the government has all the power in the world. They have the money. They have the good prosecutors, but the defendant--our forefathers made it difficult for the government to prosecute and convict a defendant. That's why the presumption of innocence is so important. Story_ID: 317569 Speaker 1: You were placed in charge of a bicentennial committee, or what was the, what was this (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the national chairman of the Bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution [Commission on the Bicentennial of the United States Constitution] appointed by Chief Justice Rehnquist [William Rehnquist] as we celebrated the bicentennial, and this was very important, because we, all of the federal judges in America as we celebrated the bicentennial were under my jurisdiction, because I was appointed by the chief justice of the United States Supreme Court and was the head of the judicial committee of the bicentennial. And I was not only the chairman, but I was the only black on this committee, and there are three hundred Bill of Rights plaques, almost in every federal courthouse in America with my name on it as the national chairman of the bicentennial. These plaques are at the Thurgood Marshall Judicial Center [Thurgood Marshall Federal Judiciary Building] in Washington [D.C.], in this federal courthouse, the courthouse [Potter Stewart U.S. Courthouse] in Cincinnati [Ohio], almost in every federal courthouse in America, but it, it's interesting how it happened. Judge Frank Altimari [Frank X. Altimari], who was on the committee and a judge on the Second Circuit [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit], good friend of mine, I was chairing the meeting, and on this committee we had Justice Blackburn [sic. Harry Blackmun], former Chief Justice E. Warren Burger [sic. Warren E. Burger], Burger, Ken Starr [Kenneth Starr], J. Harvie Wilkinson [J. Harvie Wilkinson III] and all these, but Judge Altimari said, "Damon [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith], we want to take something up in your absence. I said, "Well, Frank, I'm chairing this meeting, you don't need," he said, "Please go," so I went out and came back and Frank said, "We'll hear the motion," and they said, I'd forgotten who did it, said, "We move that only one name be on the Bill of Rights plaque and that's our chairman, Damon Keith," and then he said by acclamation that's it. But--so this Bill of Rights--it's at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and most of the law schools in the country, and it's good when you're selected by your colleges to do this. But, it is an interesting thing that happened. Now, we were having this big meeting with the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg [Virginia] that as chairman I was in complete charge of and Judge Altimari and I walked out of the hotel there, of the Williamsburg Inn [Williamsburg, Virginia]. It was just one of those beautiful, lavish hotels in America, and as we walked out a man, a white man walked up to me and said, "Boy will you park my car," and Frank got all upset and he said--(unclear)--. I said, "No, Frank, this happens to me almost every day of my life, and in some way large or small I'm reminded of the fact that I'm black." And I told this man, "No, I don't park cars here." But then I went to the meeting where all these federal judges were, and told them why I was late and what happened to me, and Judge Altimari was there. Judge Altimari was just furious, and some of the judges said, "Well, Damon, why didn't you take the man's keys, drive the car and throw the keys away." And they gave me all other things. I said, "Look they would have arrested me if I started doing that, you see." I said, "I go through this every day and I'd be in an insane house, hospital if we didn't take care of this." Speaker 1: You can't react to all that stuff, you know, you can't react to every little slight and-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, you can't. Speaker 1: --it's not gonna work. Story_ID: 317570 Speaker 1: Now, there's a recent case [Detroit Free Press v. Ashcroft, 2002] that has to do with the PATRIOT Act [Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001] that you were involved in 2002, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Detroit--yeah. The Detroit Free Press sued the federal government, Ashcroft [John Ashcroft], and Bush [President George Walker Bush] because there were reporters and lawyers and family members that were not allowed to get into these administrative hearings dealing with immigration, because they said it's not a judicial process. And the case came to Judge Nancy Edmunds [Nancy Garlock Edmunds] here in the federal district court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan], and she said that the government had to open the doors. It's a part of an open society. And it came to our court in Cincinnati [Ohio] and Judge Daughtrey [Martha Craig Daughtrey] was presiding, and she asked me to write the opinion, and I said, "You have to keep these doors open to the press and to the lawyers and to citizens because we have an open society," and the phrase that is still around is "democracies die behind closed doors." You have to open up all proceedings. This is not a star-studded chamber where you can do things behind closed doors. We have an open society. Speaker 1: Now that's, you know--do people generally understand that? I mean, do you get, I mean--I guess what I'm trying to say is, a lot of times you hear complaints in the black community of black officials not leaning strong enough towards the black community in some ways, and they complain about it. They say well if I got in a position of the white man I would do the same thing to him he does to us, that sort of thing. You hear that kind of talk, but do you, do you ever hear that kind of talk and how do you-- Speaker 2: What they'd rather not go before a black judge? Speaker 1: Well some--no, the people that say that well, when we get in a position of being a judge or a mayor or any position of authority, we should treat white people the way they've treated us. I mean, I've heard those kind of complaints in the black community before. I feel-- Speaker 2: Well, I've heard that also-- Speaker 1: But I think that, that's the fear of a lot of white people that we're gonna do that. Speaker 2: But, but, but that's not true. I think when Coleman Young became mayor of the City of Detroit [Michigan], he had a more integrated administration than any other mayor. Any of the white mayors that were there before him had very few blacks in any positions. I think when Coleman Young took over there had never been a black man who was head of the fire department, chief of police, or the corporation counsel, or anything like that. But Coleman Young integrated his entire administration, and in Atlanta [Georgia] it's the same way, it's integrated, in Richmond, Virginia. Story_ID: 317571 Speaker 1: But, I do say that a black man or woman who is in a position of power and authority who doesn't reach back and open the doors for other blacks, really is in a position of prostitution, because they should open these doors and plant the seed so that others can follow, and I think we owe that obligation to each other. I know when I took senior status as a federal judge, I let the White House know that I wanted a black person to succeed me. I didn't want to let this position go to some person, not of color, because we'd be losing a lot of what we've worked for, and so my former law clerk, Eric Clay, who now sits on the court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit] with me, succeeded me in terms of my taking senior status. So, we now sit on the court together, although I'm a senior judge. Now Judge Nathaniel R. Jones [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones] did the same thing when he left the bench in Cincinnati [Ohio], he insisted that President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] appoint a black to succeed him, and Judge Guy Cole [R. Guy Cole, Jr.], who is from Columbus [Ohio], succeeded him on the bench. So, now we have two black judges on the court of appeals that could have very easily have gone to someone else. Speaker 2: Are we proportionately represented equally now? Do you think? Speaker 1: No, not all, not at all. Speaker 2: Okay, so yeah it's a lot of people think, oh well, you know, we've got it made now, but we still have some, some things to do right in terms of-- Speaker 1: Well, I--last night I was in New York [New York] for the Jackie Robinson Foundation's dinner, and they honored Spike Lee and two other people, and they talked about how Jackie Robinson sixty years ago opened the doors for so many of us, but we still have an obligation to open the doors for others, and we've gotta do that because we're so far behind. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, now let me--speaking of opening doors, now you've had quite a few law clerks come through here who have gone on to do some great things. Can you talk about some of 'em? I know we talked about, as I was coming here we were talking about Peter Hurst [HistoryMaker Peter F. Hurst, Jr.] and Jennifer Granholm, and there's probably a score of others. Who have been some of your clerks and what have they done? Speaker 1: Well, I've been very fortunate in selecting law clerks. The present governor of our state Jennifer Granholm is a former law clerk of mine. I swore her in as attorney general and then I swore her in four years ago as governor. Then just this past January I swore her in again as governor of the State of Michigan. [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier, the first black tenured professor, a woman and tenured professor at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], is a former local law clerk of mine; Jim Coleman [James E. Coleman, Jr.] who is associate dean at Duke University law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina], is a former law clerk of mine; Connie Rice [HistoryMaker Constance Rice], who I call the flame thrower out in California, is a former law clerk of mine. Speaker 2: She's the cousin of Condoleezza Rice. Speaker 1: Yes. She's quite a lady and so I've been very fortunate in the way my law clerks have done. And I said, Judge Clay who now sits on the bench with me is a former law clerk, and a number of judges, down in North Carolina is one of my former law clerks. The associate dean at the University of Minnesota Law School [Minneapolis, Minnesota] is a former law clerk of mine, and they've gone on and on. Got a number of judges and professors. Myles Lynk [Myles V. Lynk], who is a tenured professor at the University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona], is a law clerk of mine. Spencer Overton, who is a tenured professor at Georgetown Law School [sic.] is a former law clerk. I guess it's George Washington Law School [George Washington University Law School, Washington, D.C.], Spencer Overton. So, we can go on and on; they've done quite well. Story_ID: 317572 Speaker 1: Now you were also in charge of the funeral of Rosa Parks a couple of years ago, right? That was just, it was just in the end of 2005, right? Right, towards the end of 2005? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Can you tell us about that experience? You got some stories from that. Speaker 2: Well, it was one of the most moving experiences that I have ever had, but before we get to the funeral I would like to explain why Rosa Parks and I became so close. I presented her with the Spingarn Award [Spingarn Medal] in Louisville, Kentucky, when she received that. But, she was beaten up a few years prior to her death, and I said, "Mrs. Parks I don't want you to go up in that neighborhood again." Speaker 1: She was living in a house in Detroit [Michigan] here, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was living in a house in Detroit. Speaker 1: Was that on the east side or the west side? Speaker 2: On the west side. Speaker 1: The west side, okay. And a young man broke into her house, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, broke into her house and molested her. Speaker 1: Didn't know who she was, right? Speaker 2: Didn't know who she was. He said, if he had known he never would have done that. That's not an excuse. So, I called Al Taubman [A. Alfred Taubman] who is a friend of mine, and he was in New York [New York], and he and Max Fisher own the Riverfront Apartments [Riverfront Towers, Detroit, Michigan]. And I said, "Max and Al, I don't want Rosa Parks to go back in this neighborhood," and they said, "Well take her over to the Riverfront Apartments, and we'll have a place for her over there." And I took her over there and they got a place for her, and she died over at the Riverfront Apartments, but it was through the generosity of Al Taubman and Max Fisher that we were able to do this. And then after she passed, we met in my chambers, Elaine Steele and a couple of others to plan the funeral right here in my chambers. And Southwest Airlines gave us a free plane to fly from Detroit [Michigan] to Montgomery [Alabama], Montgomery to Washington [D.C.], and Washington to Detroit with two black pilots. And I accompanied the body all the way from Detroit to Montgomery, Montgomery to Washington, Washington back to Detroit. And after we had the funeral session at the church in Montgomery that Mother Parks went to, we got on the plane going to Washington D.C., where President Bush [President George Walker Bush] and the senators, and she lay in state there, waited for her. But, before we go to Washington, the captain of this 737, which was a Southwest Airlines flight, took off and told us, got on the microphone and said, "Ladies and gentlemen, I'm gonna circle Montgomery twice and tilt the right wing of this plane in honor of Rosa Parks. So we--he tilted the plane and just circled Montgomery twice, and then as he started upward and he climbed above the clouds, he started singing 'We Shall Overcome,' and it was one of the most moving experiences I've ever had in my life. There wasn't a dry eye on the plane. Speaker 1: This is the kind of story you don't hear unless you-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --you know you have to be there. Speaker 2: I came home and told my wife [HistoryMaker Dr. Rachel Keith]. I said, "Darling, you wouldn't believe that experience." I've told this story two or three times, and when I write my book or something, I certainly want to point that out, because it was--it's just such a wonderful experience, moving experience to see these two black captains with that plane, and how moving it was for him to tilt that right wing and circle Montgomery. Speaker 1: It was moving to see the outpouring of people in Detroit who stood outside in the cold to view the body of Rosa Parks (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thousands and thousands of them, thousands of them. Story_ID: 317573 Speaker 1: As someone who participated in trying to rescue her [Rosa Parks] from the situation that she was in, you know, prior to moving into those apartments [Riverfront Towers, Detroit, Michigan], how do you feel--do you have any thoughts about how she was dealt with. You know, I know there are a couple of lawsuits filed on her behalf, one against a group called Outkast for naming a song after her, and there's been some criticism of how she was handled by the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, without getting into that, Larry [Larry Crowe], I wanna give you another example of how God works in mysterious ways. Nelson Mandela was coming to Detroit [Michigan], and we knew when he was coming, and just by accident, I called Rosa Parks' house. I said, "Mother Parks, how are you gonna get to the airport?" She said, "Judge, I've never been invited." Now, that was an oversight because Coleman Young loved Rosa Parks. So, Elaine Steele was there, and I said, "Mother Parks, I'm gonna come and pick you up and take you to the airport." They had tight security all around there with Mandela coming in. But I knew I wouldn't have any trouble getting in, so we drove out to the airport and we got to the security gate and I said, "I'm Judge Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith]," and I said, "this is Mrs. Parks and this is Elaine Steele." So, we go, and we stand outside, so where the plane was, landed. And standing in line waiting to greet Rosa Parks, I mean Mandela, was Governor Blanchard [James Blanchard], Mayor Young, the president of the UAW [United Automobile Workers; United Automobile, Aerospace, and Agricultural Implement Workers of America], and some other dignitaries. But when Mandela got off the plane, he passed Governor Blanchard, he passed Mayor Young, he passed Owen Bieber, the president, and he walks right up to Rosa Parks and says, "Rosa, Rosa, Rosa Parks," and he hugged her. And I've got pictures out on my wall there in the hall, and I'll show you, but he was so thrilled to meet Rosa Parks, because her demonstration of courage helped him live through those years imprisonment in South Africa. Speaker 1: It kind of makes you think that maybe there's not an act of courage that's wasted maybe, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and people pick up on it-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: What was she like as a person, I mean, you, you knew her fairly well? Speaker 2: Oh, I knew her well. She was as sweet a person as you could imagine a person could be. She was--she's always stayed under the radar screen, never raised her voice. Very much concerned about children. She wanted her legacy really to be with the children. That's why she developed the Rosa and Raymond Parks Self Development Program [Rosa and Raymond Parks Institute for Self Development] so that she could help children. It hasn't reached the point that it should reach, but it was her vision, pathway to freedom, and--I wanna give you another story about Al Taubman [A. Alfred Taubman] and Rosa Parks, because it shows you how we as people have to learn to live together. They were opening up the museum a few years ago in Montgomery [Alabama] in the name of Rosa Parks, and she had become very frail and I really don't think she knew who I was because I saw her, and we couldn't put her on a commercial plane because she just was not able to get on it. And I called Al Taubman again; he was in New York [New York]. I said, "Al, Rosa Parks has to be on Montgomery, Alabama, this coming Sunday or whatever day it was, we're dedicating the Rosa Parks Museum in her name and in her honor in Montgomery, and she can't fly commercially because she's not strong enough." He said, "Let me call you back," and he called me back within an hour and said, "Have Mrs. Parks go out to the Pontiac airport [Oakland County International Airport, Waterford Township, Michigan] tomorrow morning at ten o'clock, and my plane will be there and we'll take her to Montgomery." And I called Elaine Steele, they drove out there and the plane was there and they flew Rosa Parks to Montgomery. Story_ID: 317574 Speaker 1: --Charles Diggs [Charles C. Diggs, Jr.], too. He was your first congressman, right, from around here? Speaker 2: Congressman Charles Diggs was the first (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah I know a friend of my used to be his African specialist. Well, my teacher, my mentor in college, Dr. Yvonne Chappelle [HistoryMaker Yvonne Seon], at that time. She's the mother of Dave Chappelle, the comedian, now-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, but she was the African specialist for Congressman Diggs in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] in the mid-'70s [1970s]. She was in charge of the--cause he was in charge of the House [U.S. House of Representatives] committee on African affairs, Subcommittee on African Affairs. So I used to, when I'd go to D.C. I visit her, you know, up in Diggs' office and we would--so I mean Detroit played a pivotal role in what was going on in the country, you know, in a lot of ways. Speaker 2: Oh yes, Charlie Diggs. Speaker 1: Diggs and Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.], and you know. John Conyers is still the truest guy I know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in the House, I think. Speaker 2: Now for him to be--in fact I talked to John today and he says--he calls me DK, said "DK [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith], would you believe yesterday I had lunch at the Supreme Court Building [U.S. Supreme Court Building, Washington, D.C.] with Chief Justice Roberts [John Roberts], Justice Stephen Breyer, and Judge, Justice Anthony Kennedy, had a lovely lunch with them. We talked about the independence of the judiciary, and what I could do as chairman of the Judiciary Committee [House Judiciary Committee] to help the judiciary and to get their salaries upgraded and things of that sort." He said it was a wonderful luncheon, and he said, "Justice Stephen Breyer didn't know that your wife had passed, and I called him and told him that." But, he was very much impressed and very committed to the federal judiciary. John and I are very close. I'm the godfather for his oldest son. His brother [HistoryMaker] Nathan Conyers and I were law partners and very much a part of our family. Our families are close. Story_ID: 317575 Speaker 1: I think before we were gonna talk about [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier some in this--so let's talk (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, well Lani is very special, and she has always been gifted. I remember when I was on the district court, and she was with me for two years as I was a federal district judge [on the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan], and I had charged the jury. I said, "Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, when you go back into the jury room I want you to select your foreman to be your spokesperson." So, when I got back into my chambers, Lani had left a note on my desk saying, "Judge Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] why didn't you say you can select a foreperson? They may want to select a woman as their foreman." So, don't, don't--and I said, "Lani, that's so important. Thank you for correcting me." But, she was that type--in one of her books, she said, "Some judges would have resented this little young law school graduate telling them what to do," said, "but Keith, Judge Keith was very appreciative about the fact that I wanted, that I was correcting and suggesting to him that it may be not a man, but a woman." So, why don't you go select your--a foreperson, you know. That stuck with me all of my life, how you have to be careful of words and description because you can be thinking one thing and saying another. Now I didn't know I was directing that jury to select a man. It wasn't my intent, but the result was that. They thought, the jury probably thought that it was mandatory that they select a man as a foreman. Story_ID: 317576 Speaker 1: You have several times been cited by people who write about you as being fair. Do you have a certain, I mean, do you have--is there an origin for your judicial philosophy that you-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, it, started at Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. Thurgood Marshall and I were very close friends, and in fact when we had his eightieth birthday party at Bill Coleman's [HistoryMaker William T. Coleman, Jr.] house in Washington he--Bill lives in McClean, Virginia--it was Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] and his wife [HistoryMaker Ann Dibble Jordan], Wiley Branton [Wiley A. Branton, Jr.] and his wife, Bill Coleman and his wife [Lovida Hardin Coleman], and my wife, Rachel [HistoryMaker Dr. Rachel Keith] and myself. We gave the party for Thurgood on his eightieth birthday at Bill Coleman's house and he had Justice Bill Brennan [William J. Brennan, Jr.] and Justice John Paul Stevens, and Justice Blackmun [Harry Blackmun] would have been there, but he was in Aspen, Colorado, and wasn't able to make it. But, there is a picture out there in my corner of Justice Marshall cutting his birthday cake on his eightieth birthday. He and I were very close. And so when I was at Howard's law school, I had the advantage of being with Thurgood, Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston], Jim Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.], Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson III], George E.C. Hayes [George Edward Chalmer Hayes], and they taught us about the law and they said, "Equal justice under law." Those names, those words etched and marvel at the Supreme Court. And Thurgood and Jim Nabrit and Spottswood and them would say to our class, "The white man wrote those words, equal justice under law. The white man said all men are created equal and endowed with their unalienable rights among those, life, liberty, and the pursuit. Let's make them live up to their words. They wrote 'em, we didn't. And when you leave this law school, I want you to go back to your respective communities and get involved in the community as lawyers," and as Charlie Houston said, to use the law as the means of social change. And I was fortunate enough to have Charlie Houston's grandson as my law clerk for two years, and Thurgood Marshall will say and has said that Charlie Houston was the architect for the whole legal Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] strategy. He was a genius, and his grandson looks just like him. And I was up at Harvard [sic.] a few years ago with his grandson, Charles Hamilton Houston, and we went over to the library to see this portrait of his grandfather and Charlie Houston's son doesn't look like his father, but his grandson looks exactly like his father, and I have a picture right in my chambers up there with his grandson standing next to the portrait of his grandfather at the Howard law school. Speaker 1: Okay, would you say that the Howard law schools in those days under Charles Houston was the crucible for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. (LDF)]? Speaker 2: Well, not the legal defense fund-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. It was only later that for tax purposes the NAACP was--because of the southerners were saying that you didn't have any non-tax schedule you couldn't do it, so they had to break the NAACP up-- Speaker 1: Into two parts-- Speaker 2: --in two different things, and that's the legal defense fund. Speaker 1: Okay, but, I guess what I'm saying, is it the crucible for the, I guess, the legal strategy for the NAACP? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Absolutely, Charlie Houston. And when I was at the law school Charlie Houston and Spottswood, Bob Ming [William Robert Ming], and Jim Nabrit would argue cases before the student body at Howard's law school, and then we would have the wonderful opportunity to go hear them argue these cases before the United States Supreme Court. Marvelous experience, and the fire that some people say I have in terms of the commitment to equality and to fairness and to the Constitution derives from my teaching at Howard's law school. They just indoctrinated all of us, and you have to go back and use the law as a means for social change. We've gotta make this country live up to its commitment. Story_ID: 317577 Speaker 1: And the struggle has been largely successful. Do you have--people have that I've interviewed, I guess, in this project have reflected on the achievements of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in term, terms of school desegregation and other things and they--there's a--they see the victories, but they also regret the, I guess the disintegration of the black community on some level because of integration. Do you have any thoughts about that? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, and I've argued this with professors at forums, but Thurgood Marshall, Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston], Jim Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.], Spottswood [Spottswood William Robinson III], George E.C. Hayes [George Edward Chalmer Hayes], Bob Ming [William Robert Ming] were committed to integration, and we as a people will corner ourselves into a position if we segregate ourselves. I remember going to a seminar at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] one summer, and they were talking about cross-district busing, and this great constitutional professor at Harvard, I don't know his name, said, "If we don't have cross-district busing in America, the major cities will become all black and poor and inferior." He says, "You have to mix blacks and whites together for two reasons: Number one, it's the right thing to do legally, and number two, so that blacks and white can find out about each other," and that the white people have no place to run if you have cross-district busing. And his prediction was true. The major cities in our country now are all black and poor, the schools are inferior, and it's very difficult for young married couples to come into a city, looking for the best schools for their young children, and they're all inferior. The programs, the school facilities are just not there. You want your children to get a good education, and somehow the city schools in the urban communities have been neglected. Story_ID: 317578 Speaker 1: When you look at Detroit [Michigan], the political history of Detroit, and Detroit was, you know, people, black people all over the country, you know, watched Detroit as black people here gained political power and began to exercise a power, first with getting blacks on city council and then finally a black mayor, Coleman Young, and then we've had Dennis Archer and now Kwame Kilpatrick, and what are your hopes and concerns for Detroit at this stage? Speaker 2: Well, after the 1967 riots, the major corporations left Detroit. They took the money and their wealth to the suburbs, and they left the city in a very precarious position, because the jobs had gone, the money had gone, the identity, corporate identity had left the city, and although we gained political power, we lost economic power. When I was a kid, my father [Perry Keith]--I was born on Hudson [Street] and Vinewood [Street] in Detroit and most of the blacks in the neighborhood there worked at the Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan], and we'd get the Grand Belt streetcar, my dad, and drive out to, ride the streetcar out to the Ford Motor Company. I could look up and down my street in the morning and see blacks coming out of their houses, we're all there together, going out to the Ford Motor Company, and then at the three o'clock shift, going out there and there just--that was the thing to do. But, since that time, the neighborhoods have sort of diminished in terms of the businesses. The Gotham Hotel [Hotel Gotham, Detroit, Michigan] was one of the finest hotels in America. Because at that time, blacks could not live, couldn't get in the Statler [Detroit Statler Hotel, Detroit, Michigan], the Book Cadillac [Book Cadillac Hotel; Westin Book Cadillac Hotel, Detroit, Michigan], and these major hotels downtown. I remember when my mother [Annie Williams Keith] wanted me to get hot dogs for her down at the Lafayette Coney Island [Detroit, Michigan]. I couldn't go in there and take my mother in to eat. I had to bring the hot dogs out and give them to her in the car. It was very difficult. I remember, and this is going back to what you asked me about the police department [Detroit Police Department], I remember when they didn't have any blacks on the mounted police horses, they didn't have any blacks on the motorcycle, there were no scout cars that were integrated. If you and I were in a scout car, and you got sick, if they couldn't find another black to sit with me they would put two whites in the scout car and make me walk. That's what happened. And that's what segregation was doing in the police department, and most of the blacks, lawyers, were in the Tobin Building [Breitmeyer-Tobin Building; Harmonie Centre, Detroit, Michigan] at 1308 Broadway [Street]. We didn't have any black judges until Charlie Jones [Charles Jones] was appointed by G. Mennen Williams. And I talk to some black--Chris Johnson, who is a vice president for General Motors [General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan], had a group of black general counsels from around the country to meet with him three or four years ago, and I spoke to them, these blacks, general counsels and vice presidents, and as I got up to speak I became very emotional, because I told them, "As I look out at you, you've got your Brooks Brothers suits on, you're dressed immaculately, you have your briefcases," and I said, "I remember when the majority of black attorneys in the City of Detroit worked in the post office at night and tried to practice law during the day. They would go over to the recorder's court where there were no black judges and sit in the jury box and wait for a white judge to give them an assignment to plead somebody guilty and get thirty-five dollars, and now to look out in this audience and see you men in your Brooks Brother suits and you women who are doing so well, I become emotionally involved in this, because I've seen how far that we've come." And I said, "I challenge all of you to plant seeds and open doors so other blacks can follow you. You owe an obligation to them." Story_ID: 317579 Speaker 1: --What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in general here in the United States? Speaker 2: Well, I just feel as though economically we've got to do better. We've gotta really get a part of the financial action in our country now, because--but the one core, the one thing that is a cynical none of what we as blacks will have to do is get education. If you don't have an education and you're black, the chances of going up the ladder is almost non-existent. You got two strikes from right at the beginning, you're black and you're uneducated. Everything is technology now. My ten-year-old granddaughter can get on--and she's been able to do this for eight years almost, get on the computer and do everything in the world. And I talked to her yesterday, she's now ten and I said, "How many books do you read a week Camara [Camara Keith Brown]?" She said three books a week. That's in addition to what she gets at school. And I said, "I'm just proud of you." And there's not a day that I don't, when I talk to them that I don't tell 'em, grandpa loves you and grandpa is proud of you. I think you have to continue to encourage them to do well, but get an education. Feel proud of yourself, be honest, have integrity, and develop your people skills. Learn how to speak, learn how to write, feel comfortable around all people. Story_ID: 317580 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you had to do it over again? Speaker 2: Really I cannot think of anything. I used to tell this to my wife [HistoryMaker Dr. Rachel Keith] and I tell this to my children now, I have done the best I could with the talents that God gave me. I have no reservations about it. What ability he gave me I've tried to utilize it. I've tried to make a difference, not only legally but in terms of involvement in the community in trying to make this a better place to live. I was at Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee] a few years ago and I got a call from Bill Pickard [William F. Pickard] and Art Johnson [Arthur L. Johnson] and they said, "Damon [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] we want you back in Detroit [Michigan]." I said for what. They said the Charles H. Wright Museum [Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, Detroit, Michigan] is about to go into bankruptcy, and we don't raise some money, about a million dollars, to save it, we're in trouble. So, I came back, and in these chambers I got some black entrepreneurs to come in and within six weeks we raised a million dollars to save the Charles H. Wright Museum. I told these black businessmen, I said, "It would be a tragedy and in indictment on our city and our black community if you wealthy blacks, who have gotten where you are now because of all of the struggles of our fathers and grandfathers, and you let this great museum, one of the greatest in America, go down to bankruptcy because you haven't helped 'em," I said, "would be a tragedy. So, let's raise this million dollars and save this Charles H. Wright Museum," and we raised it. Speaker 1: Yeah there was, interestingly there was a story in the March 4th Detroit Free Press about Juanita Moore, who's the director, that cited this very same story. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So it's well--this story was cited in the Free Press on Sunday. Speaker 2: Oh, it was? Speaker 1: The same, yeah, the story you just told. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: I don't know if you saw it, but, yeah, and so it's a well-known story now, but you did, you mean and they cited you as the motor force behind, you know, raising the money. Story_ID: 317581 Speaker 1: We know that you won the sixteenth annual Edward J. Devitt Distinguished Service to Justice Award. Now, tell us about that award, and I know we couldn't remember the exact year, but it's the sixteenth annual award you won-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a couple of years ago. Speaker 2: The award is given to a federal judge, and the judge is selected by a justice of the United States Supreme Court, a judge of the court of appeals, and a district judge, who has really done the most in the prior year or years in their community or in the judiciary, and they are selected for this award. I was selected--Justice Clarence Thomas was the justice of the United States Supreme Court. I've forgotten the judge who was on the Court of Appeals and the district judge, but they selected me as the outstanding federal judge to receive the Devitt Award. It was here in Detroit [Michigan], and they give an honorarium of fifteen thousand dollars to the judge that is selected, and that money went into the Damon J. Keith Collection of African American Legal Affairs [Damon J. Keith Collection of African-American Legal History], and it's a high honor. At this point, I believe I am the only black judge who has ever received the Devitt Award for outstanding judicial service. And I think mainly it was due to the fact that I was the national chairman of the Bicentennial [Commission on the Bicentennial of the United States Constitution]. I don't know what the yardstick was, but Justice Thomas at the time they presented the award at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan] said they had a lot of names that were submitted for them to look at that is a committee of the three judges, and he said, and it's in the record as he talked, that he told the other two judges, "Let's look at all these names and come up tomorrow when we meet with the number one, two, and three judge in the country, federal judge in the country, that should receive this award." And he said the next morning when they, they met, he was the last one to speak. The other two federal judges said, "Judge Keith is the one that should get this award," and Justice Thomas said, "I agree with you. He was the one I selected also." Speaker 1: Okay, so you nailed this. This is better than the Hall of Fame (laughter) in some ways. But, now you've received lots of awards over the years and have given out lots of awards. You've been the presenter for a lot of awards and I remember a couple of years ago you gave an award to one of the, one of your colleagues from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill]-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and he's approaching his hundredth birthday. Do you wanna say something about, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, May the 1st, the lauded Oliver will have his hundredth birthday, and I plan to be down in Virginia for it. I've presented the Spingarn Award [Spingarn Medal] to three Spingarn medalists, Rosa Parks, Coleman Young, and Oliver Hill, and I've also received the award, and Charlie Diggs [Charles C. Diggs, Jr.] presented it to me when I received it in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Rosa Parks received it in Kentucky, Coleman Young received it in Colorado, Oliver Hill received it in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], and I received it in New Orleans. Story_ID: 317582 Speaker 1: Considering everything you've done to this point and all the honors you've had to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I--that's always difficult to say, as I mentioned on the other I've done the best I could with the talents God gave me. I've tried to make this a better community, a better state, a better country as a lawyer and as a judge, and I've tried to treat people fairly and equally. I just received notice two weeks ago that a friend of mine who has since passed, Max Fisher's wife [Marjorie S. Fisher] and the Max Fisher Foundation [Max M. and Marjorie S. Fisher Foundation] gave the Damon J. Keith Center for Civil Rights at Wayne [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] a half million dollars. Al Taubman [A. Alfred Taubman], a friend of mine, gave the lead gift of $300 million--I mean $3 million, for the Damon J. Keith Center for Civil Rights. People are giving money all the time. Richard Manoogian gave a quarter of a million dollars to the Damon J. Keith Center for Civil Rights. So, I've tried to live my life in a manner that I've tried to help people, tried to be unselfish. I've tried to take the high road in terms of my dealing with people. I've tried to in a way be an example how people should live, white or black, Jew or gentile, Protestant and Catholic, male or female. I've just tried to treat everyone equally, and I feel comfortably around everybody, I feel comfortable. I don't make any difference between, but I've tried to take the high road and I've tried to teach my children and my grandchildren never to use the word hate, it's too strong. You can say you dislike a person, but I wanna know why you dislike them, but never use the word hate because you, it's too strong. But you can say, there are a lot of people I dislike and even you were to say, judge, why? I can say, well this is why I dislike that person for the following reasons, but if you tell me--if you were to say why do you hate that person, I couldn't give you a reason. There's a difference. Speaker 1: Okay. I guess I have to ask this question. What is the difference, I mean, really between hate and dislike (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know what it is. Speaker 1: The intensity of it or is it-- Speaker 2: No, I've nev- but there are blacks that I dislike, and if you say, "Judge, why do you dislike that certain black?" I say, "Well number one, they're selfish. They're not committed to the struggle of black people. They intimidate people," and I can go through it. This person is very selfish. Their people skills are bad. They're arrogant. They're bullies. They only care about themselves. They mistreat their wives, their children. I could give you a reason for that. I could do the same thing for, about a white person, but if you had said, "Why do you hate that person?" I couldn't give you a reason for it. It's too strong of a word. Speaker 1: Now you mentioned the black struggle, and I think I wanna take the opportunity to ask you, people don't often, you know, flesh that out, but what is our struggle to you? Speaker 2: Well, our struggle to me is very simple. It's to be a part and make the fulfillment of the American dream a reality. Just whatever anyone else wants for their family. They want the good life. They want a job. They want their children educated. They want a nice neighborhood to live in. They want a nice home. And we as blacks desire the same thing, nothing less and nothing more. You get the question, I get what do you blacks want? We want the same thing you whites want. You want a good job, you want opportunities for your children, you want a nice home to live in, a nice neighborhood, you want to be able to take a vacation and enjoy the beautiful things in life. Whatever you want, that's what I want for my children and my family. Story_ID: 317583 Speaker 1: In terms of family I know you just, you recently lost your wife. Can you talk about your wife, [HistoryMaker] Dr. Rachel Keith, and tell us something about your children and grandchildren? Speaker 2: Well, I lost my wife on January the 4th of this year [2007]. On the first of January, my wife and I, along with my daughter, Gilda [Gilda Keith], went to Lansing [Michigan] to swear in my former law clerk, Governor Granholm [Jennifer Granholm]. Governor Granholm sent a car down to us, picked us up, and we went up there and it was just unbelievable that when we got in the hotel, but the next morning when I was to swear her in, a car took us to the capitol [Michigan State Capitol, Lansing, Michigan] and Governor Granholm had told the state trooper that when we came there to bring my wife and me and Gilda into her private room at the capitol, the governor's room, and it was just her family and her husband [Daniel Mulhern] and my wife and my daughter, Gilda, and myself. And we sat around as family, I mean, maybe for an hour just talking and the governor's husband and Rachel spent a lot of time together, and we almost missed the swearing in. The state trooper had to say, "Governor it's time for you to be sworn in," because our family was together and enjoying each other. And I swore the governor in and came back home, and I said, "Darling, I have to go to Washington [D.C.] to administer the oath to the Congressional Black Caucus, forty-three or forty-five of 'em." And she said, "Well, sweetheart, I have to do that on Thursday." That was the 1st, and she says, "Well, darling why don't you go in on Wednesday and have dinner and have a good night's sleep and then administer the oath on Thursday morning, but stay that Thursday night and get a good night's sleep and come back Friday." I said, "That's good, because I'm getting older," and she wanted to preserve my energy. So, I flew in that Wednesday, I think, and had dinner and, and at the Oceanaire fish place [The Oceanaire Seafood Room] in Washington. My wife and I used, would like to go there, and I would generally have salmon and she'd have lobster, and so I called her that Wednesday night after I finished dinner, and I said, "Darling, I'm back at the hotel," and I said, "How are you feeling?" And she says fine. She said, "I'm just looking at the beautiful burial of Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] in Grand Rapids [Michigan], and she said, "It's one of the most beautiful experiences I've seen." I said, "How are you feeling, sweetheart?" She said fine, and I said I'm fine, then she said, "Now get a good night's sleep, and I hope things go well tomorrow when you swear in the Congressional Black Caucus." Well, I went in that Thursday, we had--they, they had set up brunches for us, food and things like that and coffee, and then went over to the auditorium where I was to swear in the Congressional Black Caucus, and Michael Dyson [Michael Eric Dyson] was the master of ceremony, and Michael and I are good friends. In fact, he stated when he introduced me that he wouldn't be where he was if it hadn't been for Judge Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] spotting something in him in terms of his talent when he was just a young, young man when we were at Tabernacle Church [Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan]. So, he called on me and I went up to swear in the Black Congressional Caucus, and I gave him a charge that I use quite frequently of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] where it says, "Cowardice asks the question, is it safe? Vanity asks the question, is it popular? Conscience asks the question, whether or not it's correct? And there comes a time when we cannot do what is safe, popular, but we must do what is right." And I said, "You ladies and gentlemen of this Congressional Black Caucus cannot worry about what is safe, what is popular, what is politic, but you must do what is right," and then I charged them and I sat down, and someone rushed to me and said, "Judge Keith call your office immediately, it's urgent." So, I got up to call my office and they said, "Judge, we hate to tell you this, but your wife just died." Just--and then Michael Dyson apparently heard about it and he announced it on C-SPAN or CNN. It was all over the country because when I got back to my office here in Detroit [Michigan] that afternoon, people were calling and my friends, about ten of them, were here when I got off the plane and were here to talk to me. We were married fifty-three years and it's--but I'm trying to look at it to thank God for a good fifty-three years and not negatively, because he didn't have to let us have those fifty-three years together. Story_ID: 317584 Speaker 1: Well, what did she [Keith's wife, HistoryMaker Dr. Rachel Keith]--what was the cause of death? What was the cause of death? What was the cause of death? Speaker 2: She had a heart attack. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was driving, and apparently she knew that this was a heart attack, being a physician, and she drove into the police station and was getting out of the car to go into the police headquarters to get help, and she dropped dead going in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you have three daughters, right, and some grandchildren too. Tell us a little bit about them. Speaker 2: Well, my oldest daughter is Cecile [Cecile Keith-Brown] who finished Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and the California Institute of Arts [California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California], and she's now working in the development department of the University of Michigan. My middle daughter, Debbie [Debbie Keith], finished Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and then got her master's degree in languages from NYU [New York University, New York, New York], and she is working at AAA. My youngest daughter, Gilda [Gilda Keith], got a scholarship to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], stayed there two years, then transferred to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] because she was flautist and then went on to the Boston Conservatory of Music [Boston Conservatory; Boston Conservatory at Berklee, Boston, Massachusetts] and stayed a year there as a flautist, and then decided she didn't have the talent to be an exceptional flautist, so she just stopped and she got her master's degree at Wayne [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] in English and she's now working at the Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan], or at least she was today. They're firing so many people out there. At least she was as of today. Speaker 1: Okay, I know one of the things that you, that I've--now you've got grandchildren too, two (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, two granddaughters. Speaker 1: --two, yeah two granddaughters [Nia Keith Brown and Camara Keith Brown]. One of the things, I know, when we interviewed your wife a couple of years ago, she talked about being in charge of the big, at least on one occasion or if not a couple of occasions, the big NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] dinner here in Detroit [Michigan], which is the largest in the country from what I understand. Speaker 2: Well, she was very much involved in the NAACP Freedom Fund Dinner [Fight for Freedom Fund Dinner], and she was there when we started it at the Latin Quarter [Detroit, Michigan] and we used to have meetings at our home. Got a picture of Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] in our home there after he entertained the Freedom Fund Dinner. There four of us still living who started the Freedom Fund Dinner, Dr. Arthur L. Johnson, Forrest Green, and myself, and the fellow who married Dr. Haley Bell's daughter, Wendell Cox [Dr. Wendell F. Cox]. We're the four living members who started the Freedom Fund Dinner. Speaker 1: That's here in Detroit? Speaker 2: Here in Detroit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's the largest dinner in the country and-- Speaker 1: Just give us some idea of the scope of it? I've heard people describe it. It just seems unreal. Speaker 2: Oh, they have about ten thousand people there. It's a sit down dinner, and we've always, it's always been integrated. You'd have the governor, the mayor, both United States senators, and it's, and you've invited the greatest people in the world. Thurgood Marshall, Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]. I think this year president, former President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] is coming in for the dinner. It's a magnificent event, and it was all started with Art Johnson and the black medical doctors who after there was a tragedy, killing in, I think in Mississippi. Is that Emmett Till? Speaker 1: Right, in Money, Mississippi right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and the doctors and--got together along with the NAACP and decided that we were gonna have this dinner and Dr. Alfred Thomas was the first chairman, and then D.T. Burton, and I was chairman and others, but the NAACP's--it was their vision that puts this together and has kept it together. Story_ID: 317585 Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you that you think I should ask, or we want to talk about, before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, it's like arguing a case before a jury, and I tell my law clerks now, I say, we have to do the best we can on this case, because I don't want it to come back and say, if we had done this we could have done that. I think you've done very well. It's hard to evaluate yourself, and I haven't done it very well. On the court, I never use the personal pronoun I. I say the court. And what you've done is to make me talk about myself, and you've done it quite eloquently and been very provocative to get me to talk about myself, but it's very difficult. Speaker 1: Okay, well our last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, I think I perhaps answered that. As a man and as a person who loved his family, loved his children, was a man of God. I'm a man of great faith. Every morning when I come in my office in my chambers I read the Bible, I read the Proverbs, I read the daily word. No one interrupts me at least for an hour. I clear my mind up, thank God for being here, thank him for his many blessings, and then clear my mind out, and then I open my door. But, no one interrupts me during that period. I have been doing this for years and--because without--when I look at my life and my struggle and the difficulties that I had and in the all the all-black outfit in the [U.S.] Army with white officers and with the struggle I had never having a black teacher in Detroit [Michigan] from the kindergarten until I finished high school at Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan]. It wasn't until I went to West Virginia State College [West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] where Dr. John W. Davis was, and I saw black Ph.D.s, and he would bring in educators like Carter G. Woodson, Mary McLeod Bethune, Mordecai Johnson, Benjamin Mays, that I saw, the cataracts came off my eyes. I said, "My God, where have they been?" I hadn't seen them before, didn't know of them. And so I've been very blessed, and I enjoy my work so much as a federal judge. I just--God put me here. It's just unbelievable. Like he gave me all these big cases. It was a blind draw, but I thought the blind draw had eyes on it, but then you look at it, had it not been for these cases that were the result of the blind draw, you wouldn't be interviewing me now, because I wouldn't have had the opportunity to resolve them...