 Story_ID: 619410 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me? Speaker 2: Sure. [HistoryMaker] Ivan Lemelle, that's I-V-A-N, two middle initials, L period R period, Lemelle, L-E-M-E-L-L-E. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is June 29, 1950, born in Opelousas, Louisiana. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: A United States district judge. Speaker 1: The location of this interview? Speaker 2: Location of interview is in my chambers at the federal courthouse [Hale Boggs Federal Building - Courthouse] in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is June 8, 2010. Story_ID: 619411 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you a little, few questions that might be like People magazine-ish type questions, but do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting, I'm colorblind, so to the extent that I believe a color is yellow, black, those probably are my two favorite colors, primarily because, I guess, it's also my fraternity's colors [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food is seafood. I'm in New Orleans [Louisiana]. There could be only one type of food I enjoy, and that's seafood. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Time of the year is probably spring and early part of the summer. Even though that's part of our hurricane season, I do enjoy warm weather. Speaker 1: And do you a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Any place where I can swim is usually my favorite places to take a break and relax, be with my family, and, usually, that's around beaches or around lakes that I can fish in 'cause I enjoy all forms of water sports. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: You know, my, my dad [Clifford Lemelle] told me a number of times this one saying that I, I sometimes, you know, use in, in presentations. And that basically was: the reward for doing good work is to do better work. I don't know the author or the creator of that phrase, but I do hi- recall him saying that numerous occasions when I was a young, young man. Story_ID: 619412 Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your family, and I'd like to start with your mother. Tell me her name, where she was born, and what year she was born if you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's name is Cecilia Mabel Comeaux [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle], my mother was born in the Opelousas, Louisiana area, November 21, 1922, and she was the youngest of five, five siblings. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, when she was born--and I didn't realize this until maybe my high school years--that my mother's mother [Dorothy Comeaux] died giving birth to my mother two days--two or three days after she was born, and found that out by happenstance at a--visiting the grave site once. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your mother share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: She did. And one of the things that, that stuck out in my memory about her early life was how much my mother enjoyed the outdoors. And I think that's where I get my enjoyment of the outdoors and water sports because she enjoys all forms of, of outdoor recreation, and that's one, one thing. The other thing, I believe, is even though my mother was born in Opelousas, because of her mother's unfortunate death, her dad, my maternal grandfather [William Comeaux] was, I guess, he didn't feel comfortable raising her on, on his own 'cause she was a newborn baby. And Mom told me how he was able to get the Sisters of the Holy Family, one of the earlier orders of African American Catholic nuns in the country, to take her in, and in effect, help raise her. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know about her education? Speaker 2: Yeah. She was educated primarily in New Orleans [Louisiana] by the nuns at what's known as Hol- St. Mary's Academy; it was originally in the French Quarter. The order of nuns of the Sisters of the Holy Family were founded by Mother Blessed Henriette Delille who's--there's an effort now to declare her a saint. But Mom was educated at St. Mary's Academy in the French Quarter in New Orleans, historic site now. And it was through those years at St. Mary's that she got her formative years--hard worker and diligent worker, very religious individual. And she later on became a secretarial assistant at Standard Life Insurance Company [Standard Life Insurance Company of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was one of the oldest black insurance companies in the country. And she worked there after getting an associate degree in, in business secretary studies, I believe, from Straight Business College [Straight Business School, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Story_ID: 619413 Speaker 1: Tell me, do you know more about her father? Speaker 2: Her father's name was William Comeaux and-- Speaker 1: Can you spell Comeaux for me? Speaker 2: C-O-M-E-A-U-X, and they, their primary residence was at Washington, Louisiana, which is a small community right outside of Opelousas, Louisiana, basically agricultural community. Her dad was a baker by, my profession. And he was a gentleman, from what she tells me about him. He, he died before my, my birth. And what Mom [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle] would always tell me about him is how gentle he was, mild mannered he was. She says that I remind her of him. Frankly, I think that's a compliment to say that I'm mild mannered, but that's my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know any more about the family tree? Speaker 2: Yes. On, on my mother's side, not as much. My mother's mother, her name was Dorothy McNichols [Dorothy Comeaux]. My mother's mother was, I believe, second generation Irish. My, my--her husband, my grandfather on my mom's side, was French and African American. And I went as far back as their parents, again, primarily in Washington, Louisiana area, and that's the extent of it. So, it's only gone back, in terms of that research side, to perhaps the, I would say, 1800s. But on my father's [Clifford Lemelle] side, we've done more research and, and had more input and knowledge about that than on my mother's side. Story_ID: 619414 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father. Tell me his name, where he was born, and when he was born. Speaker 2: My father was known as Clifford Joseph Lemelle [Clifford Lemelle], but when you, when I saw his birth certificate it said Joseph Clifford Lemelle. Somehow that got reversed in terms of the first and middle names. My dad was a, again, a, a student of farming initially. His, his dad [Joseph Lemelle] was a farmer. And my dad grew up on a farm, along with his sisters. In fact, the first three years of my existence, from what they tell me, my parents and I stayed on my grandfather's farm. And that was an interesting side of the history because I still enjoy going to the old farm site, even though it's not worked as a farm. The family, a member of the family, still owns the property. We, we developed, through a cousin of mine, Floyd Malveaux [HistoryMaker Dr. Floyd Malveaux], who's--Floyd is a former chancellor of Howard med school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], and he, along with several other--others, other members of the family, developed a family tree which I have a copy of. And he goes back to--well, we went back as far as the early 1700s. Speaker 1: So, so tell me what you know about your great-grandparents. Speaker 2: Interesting, on my dad's side, the first recorded history of a Lemelle was Francois Lemelle in the early 1700s. Francois Lemelle was a member of what's called the Opelousas Post. It was then--I guess you could say, a colony, whatever of, of France. And he ultimately, actually married a freed woman of color. She was manumitted at some period prior to their marriage. And that's the history of, of the Lemelle family. She was--in fact, her--my, my grand- my great-great-great-great-grandmother that he married was a Donato--Della, Dello Donato, D-O-N-A-T-O. And it turns out that--well one, his, his relatives on that side had connections in Italy as well as France. He came here and produced children with Marie who were, as I said, she was a manumitted former slave who, from what we could tell from the history, either bought her freedom or she was simply given her freedom of right, by her, her previous owner. That history in, in terms of where her family came from in Africa, as best as we could find, was from West Africa, more like northwest Africa. And, in fact, when I was in Africa a few years ago, even though I was in South Africa, Johannesburg, and then all through in Malawi, I made some connections with, with some people who were going to assist us in trying to, try to determine relatives there through DNA and some other analyses to see what kind of commonality we could find in that regards. And so, my, my initial bloodlines--I guess if you want to call it that--was African, French, Italian and then ultimately, through the history after that, Native American Indian, Spanish. Someone said, even though I couldn't tell from the family tree, German. I didn't detect that. There was a Grandpre [ph.], and Grandpre, as I understand it, were people from the Alsace-Lorraine area, border between France and Germany. So, my, my dad used to say, "Boy, you the, you the true melting pot." Story_ID: 619415 Speaker 1: Your grandfather was--tell me again so I make sure I have (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandfather, my immediate grandfather on my dad's side, his name was Joseph Bartholomew Lemelle [Joseph Lemelle]. And Papa Jim as we called him was an unusual farmer. He raised legal product, and I later on found out, il- illegal product. Grandfather was a moonshiner. I didn't realize that until much later, and he, he did more than sell corn. He sold corn liquor and, you know, unbeknownst to a lot of us until later. And he was, he was fun. He died at seventy-four years old with a stroke, and I remember that. And my dad [Clifford Lemelle], just by happenstance, died at the same age, seventy-four. Speaker 1: Do you know how they paid for the land that they bought the farm? Speaker 2: Yeah, the--it's a large family. He, Grandpa, Papa Jim, had a number of siblings. And his, his dad, who also was Joseph Bartholomew Lemelle [Barthelemy Lemelle], and his spouse, in effect had saved up enough money to buy a number of acres that were later subdivided between my grandfather and his siblings. They all had parcels of land approximately, I think seven to ten acres if I remember correctly, given to each, so each had that amount of acreage among--I believe that was about six or seven siblings with my, of my grandfather, my paternal grandfather. And it was through his father, my great-grandfather's initiatives that did it. Whether or not he'd got it from moonshining, I don't know, but Grandpa developed it and did well. Speaker 1: And your grandmother, what was her name? Speaker 2: On my dad's side, her name was Idolia Lee Donato Lemelle [Idolia Donato Lemelle]. That's I-D-O-L-I-A, same spelling with Donato, D-O-N-A-T-O. Back in the small community, like Opelousas [Louisiana], they say there was a lot of marriage between cousins. As you recall, I said that the earliest history is of the Lemelles was between the Lemelles and the Donatos. And, ultimately, you know, as recent as my, my grandparents on my dad's side, you got--you had, again, the Lemelle and the Donato marrying each other. So, knock on wood, the Donatos that we, we, we haven't suffered any consequences of that mentally, although some people would debate that. And Grandma was a very quiet individual, but don't cross Grandma. Grandma used to discipline me and my first cousins by making us--when we were on the farm doing the wrong things, go outside and break a willow branch, and she would whip us with that willow branch--not to the extent really that she drew blood, but enough to make us remember that, hey, don't do bad things. She was a disciplinarian, and she was a diminutive, most diminutive person you could ever meet. Story_ID: 619416 Speaker 1: Tell me more about your father [Clifford Lemelle], what type of man was he? Speaker 2: Dad was an educator and, and if there, if there was one word to describe him, he was an educator. He was dedicated to teaching others. His whole life was into teaching. He ultimately became a principal of a school, ultimately became assistant supervisor with the St. Landry Parish School Board in Opelousas, Louisiana. And he was, he and Lawrence Emerson were, I think, some of the earliest African American educators in that area to rise to supervisory level positions. And Dad was a graduate of my alma mater, Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. And he was a, a serviceman before he, he went to Xavier and, again, that, that's the best way to describe him. As an educator, Dad, you know, he--I was an only child and that was one thing that he emphasized more than anything else was to get an education, get a degree, get an advanced degree. Get as many degrees as you can is what he used say and I, I think, I think I pleased him in that regard. Speaker 1: Did he have siblings as well? Speaker 2: Yes, Dad had sisters, and he was the only, only son, or surviving son. His parents had a son who died at childbirth, but he was the only surviving male child of my grandparents [Idolia Donato Lemelle and Joseph Lemelle]. All of his siblings, practically all of his siblings, were also educators. And my mom [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle] was a teacher's aide, so I had no option but to get an education. Story_ID: 619417 Speaker 1: And you said that you, you are an, an only child? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: When you think back, if you could think of a sound, a sight, or a smell that would take you back to your earliest childhood memory, what would that be? Speaker 2: I guess the farm--chickens (laughter), seriously, you--chickens. One of our duties on the farm was to tend the chickens, collect the eggs and, you know, make certain the chickens were going to roost when they were supposed to go to roost. And, and between the chickens and being chased by geese--my, my [paternal] grandmother [Idolia Donato Lemelle] raised chickens and geese. And my [paternal] grandfather [Joseph Lemelle] tended to the hogs, the cattle, the agricultural crop. And I remembered being chased by geese, I remember being chased by some bad roosters as a young kid. And that would be one of the most memorable, early childhood experiences, yes. In, in fact, it, it caused me to do something bad that I got punished for. Speaker 1: What was that? Speaker 2: You would ask. Back then, to own a BB gun was, was a big thing. Oh, you, you own a BB gun, you, you, you know, you're something. And kids who would love to hunt, and on the farm, my grandfather used to take us hunting. He didn't start us out with a .22 [caliber] or a shotgun; we started out with a BB gun. And one day, I decided to see what effect a BB gun would have on a chicken. And that was cruel, and I regret it, and I, I, I shot one of Grandmother's chickens. It didn't kill it, but Grandmother found out about it, mainly because she saw the look on my face, and said, "What did you do, Ivan [HistoryMaker Ivan Lemelle]?" I had the BB gun in my hand, and I confessed, couldn't lie to Grandma. And I got that willow branch. Chicken survived. Speaker 1: What smells take you back to the farm? Speaker 2: Yeah, again, it, it, it, it--the wildlife, the, the farm animals. A pleasant smell would be simply Grandma's cooking. Grandmother, I mean, she believed in breakfast, lunch, and dinner. And she believed in having full meals at each of those sittings, and she believed of all of us eating together at the table. And one of the more pleasant smells is not just her biscuits in the morning and a coffee milk, but at every meal practically, at least lunch and dinner, Grandma would serve wine. And the kids would get a little, a little demitasse of wine. And I remember the taste of wine at an early age (laughter). My grandfather I think made that wine, but she put it in--what was that wine back then--Manischewitz, or something like that. It was a sweet wine, but my dad [Clifford Lemelle] said that my grandfather was actually was making it, putting it in those bottles. My dad told me that. Story_ID: 619418 Speaker 1: So, how long did you live on the farm? For just three years? Speaker 2: Three years, but we would still go back to the farm after school and, and other occasions to help out on the farm. It was a family operation, owned still by the family or family member. So, that was an occasion, but every time I go to Opelousas [Louisiana] now, I, I tend to go back and check on, you know, what's, what's going on back there. Speaker 1: Where is it located in relation to New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Opelousas is approximately two hours, fifteen minutes by interstate from New Orleans. It is past Baton Rouge [Louisiana], our state capital, and it's more in our south--I guess you could say--not quite south central, but it's, it's--the best way to describe is between Baton Rouge and Alexandria [Louisiana], which is more central, Baton Rouge is--I mean, Alexandria is. And Opelousas is just north of, somewhat of, of Baton Rouge. Speaker 1: So, where did you move to once you left the farm? Speaker 2: When we--again, as a, as a young kid, my parents [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle and Clifford Lemelle] ultimately bought a home in Opelousas when they saved up enough money. And we moved more into the Opelousas proper, the city part of Opelousas as opposed to the farming part of Opelousas. And it was on a street called Market Street. In fact, the original address is 831 North Market Street. And Market Street was a popular street in that it connected back then and still does, what I would call the two city parks. Back then, we were closer to North City Park [Opelousas, Louisiana], which was primarily for us, for the African American kids and families. And the other end of Opelousas was South City Park that was used by the white community. And, ultimately, with desegregation, that, that all changed, but it was a popular street. It's one where a lot of activity--activities occurred. It was easy for us to get to North City Park 'cause we'd just ride our bicycles home to, to our park, as well as ride bicycles to school when we moved into town. Story_ID: 619419 Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood besides the parks. Who lived in the neighborhood, and who are some of your friends, and what were the occupations of their parents if you know? Speaker 2: Yeah. Most of the people in Opelousas [Louisiana] that I grew up with, my classmates from school, both from North Elementary School [Opelousas, Louisiana], which is where I started public school, first and second grade, as well as later on in school in Opelousas. Most of my class- classmates' parents were in what I would call service type industry. If it's not in agriculture and providing, you know, agriculture, whether it's livestock farming produce or whatever, to different businesses, schools, churches. They were bus drives. Some, like my parents [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle and Clifford Lemelle] were educators, and my dad's siblings were educators. My closest friends were my, really, my neighbors that I--we practically grew up next to each other in Opelousas. And we maintained contact throughout the, throughout the years. My--we, we still maintain contact. We've had class reunions from high school. My high school is Holy Ghost High School [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School] in Opelousas. We only had about thirty-five graduates of the senior class in 1967, but it was an interesting group of people. And, unfortunately, some of us have died and, and, and, surprisingly, many either stayed in Opelousas or came back, and maintained some kind of contact if they're not back. Story_ID: 619420 Speaker 1: Take me on a tour of a square block of where you lived. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What stores were there and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Give me an idea. Speaker 2: My favorite store in Opelousas [Louisiana] was probably LeBlanc's, L-E capital B-L-A-N-C, LeBlanc's grocery store was one. Another one was Guillory's grocery store. And, of course, direct--almost directly across the street from my parents' [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle and Clifford Lemelle] home, was a pool hall. And back then, minors, like myself back then, could go into the pool hall and shoot pool. We just couldn't buy alcohol, but we could be in there shooting pool. We lived in an area where it was mostly residential except for those, those businesses. About two blocks from there was a liquor store and that was the Morentz liquor store [ph.]. And all those families that owned those businesses were African American families, except for the Guillory grocery store, which was white owned. But Morentz liquor store, LeBlanc's, as well as the pool hall, were owned by black families. The area then was, when I was growing up, I would--it was majority black; I would say, approximately 70 percent black, 30 percent white. Across the street from us was a white family, and next door to us were, was a white family. On the other side, the, the major business in that area really was Lemelle gas station, which was next door to my parents' home. They were related to us, distant cousins, and they operated that gas station for years. In back of my parents' property were homes that my, a lot of my classmates who--lived in right nearby. And Opelousas, itself, back then, maybe fifteen--twelve to fifteen thousand people, and I don't think it's changed much any in terms of numbers. The, the black-white ratio back then was probably--I'm certain was majority white in the whole city area, not just my area, which was predominantly black, but the City of Opelousas back then was majority white. Now, it's majority black. And the whole parish [St. Landry Parish, Louisiana], I think, is still majority white. Opelousas is the parish seat, was--the states call it county seat. Speaker 1: I see. Were the, the parents or the, the households in your neighborhood, were most of them two parent homes? Speaker 2: Most back then were, although I do recall a family down the way that was one parent. Again, you got to remember, you're talking about South Louisiana, traditional Catholic type of family. Very religious even if you weren't Catholic; we had a very strong Protestant community, Baptist community. There was a church not far away, Mount Olive [Mount Olive Baptist Church, Opelousas, Louisiana], which was one of the oldest black Baptist churches in, in the state. That, again, very strong religious background, bible studies, et cetera, so those type of influences, along with the educators back then, I guess, emphasize marriage, emphasize having kids when you are married. And, and, and so, I can only recall growing up being aware of one family that didn't have both parents there with them. Now, after some years, I, you know, some people that were two parent homes, people got divorced or what have you, but divorce back then in Opelousas? Unh-uh. Story_ID: 619421 Speaker 1: So now, tell me about your elementary school. What was the name of your elementary school? Speaker 2: North Elementary [North Elementary School, Opelousas, Louisiana] is where I began school. It's a public elementary school. And my first grade teacher was Ms. Shirley Richard and she was one great teacher. In fact, she's still alive and I see her on occasion. Her son, one of her sons, was a classmate of mine as well, both in elementary school and later on, in high school, Walter Richard [Walter Richard, Jr.]. Walter is deceased now. In fact, when we had our last reunion of the high school class, we had it really in honor of our deceased members, like Walter, and she was there and celebrated Mass and breakfast with us, and some other things. North Elementary was located really on the grounds of North City Park [Opelousas, Louisiana], the park that I, I mentioned to you earlier, and very small school. It still is a small school. And in addition to Ms. Richard being my teacher for the first and second grade, I also had one of my aunts, my oldest aunt, Inez Lemelle Malveaux, who taught there, and she kept an eye on me for my parents [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle and Clifford Lemelle]. When my parents were able to afford sending me to Holy Ghost, which is a Catholic school, they did so in the third grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Holy Ghost was located also near where I lived. And I rode the bike basically to school back and forth to Holy Ghost and enjoyed those days. Holy Ghost, again was a small school. Again, the community is small, and, again it's all black. To my disappointment, Holy Ghost was shut down when the black school, Holy Ghost Catholic [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School], merged with the white school, AIC, Academy of the Immaculate Conception [Opelousas Catholic School]. And that, those beautiful grounds are just sitting there. And it's part of my history that I wish I could resurrect and, and keep going, but the powers that be there, you know, have other thoughts. And that's the only unfortunate experience, I think that I've had, since leaving Holy Ghost in Opelousas [Louisiana], was seeing that school just sit there. And I shouldn't say, just sit there--they, they use it for adult education and some other things, but not, not all of the, the premises. Speaker 1: Were you taught by lay teachers and nuns or (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, initially, at North Elementary, it was all lay teachers. At Holy Ghost, it was primarily nuns--again, the Sisters of the Holy Family, the nuns who raised or helped raise my mother, and they were disciplinarians. In fact, the, the nun who was the primary caregiver for my mother when she was here in New Orleans [Louisiana] at St. Mary's Academy, Sister Mary Raymond Green [ph.]. Sister Raymond, as we called her, you see, introduced me to others as her grandson and, you know, and people didn't understand that: Catholic nun has a grandson, how did that happen? And, you know, they, she explained the situation. But she was tougher on me, I think, than anybody, Sister Raymond. Story_ID: 619422 Speaker 1: Do you remember your communion [First Communion] and Confirmation? Speaker 2: Yes. I remember more Confirmation 'cause you're a bit older than, than communion, but I remember those moments, and we had fun with that. I look back on it, though, and I, I wonder how in the world--for the Confirmation, we had these gowns on. And it always occurred in hot weather month and, and how we didn't sweat, you know, through those gowns, but, yeah, I remember that. I remember always kidding everybody about you realize when you, you get confirmed, the bishop is going to slap you in the face, in addition to anointing you with oil, oil, and all that. And I'm looking forward to, for a slap, and all it was is a little touch on the cheek but, yeah, I remember those days. Holy Ghost Church [Holy Ghost Catholic Church, Opelousas, Louisiana], which was associated with the school, with Holy Ghost [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, Opelousas, Louisiana]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Is--I think is the third oldest African American Catholic church in the country. And that was our, our church that we all went to. And I think it's now, I think the largest African American Catholic community in the country. At least, that's what I was told two years ago. Speaker 1: Were you an altar boy? Speaker 2: Yes, I was an altar boy. And the only thing I remember being an altar boy was, well, learning Latin to some extent, and drinking the wine after, after Mass, and that was bad, but don't go tell nobody. Yeah, that was, that was an experience. In fact, it led me and influenced me, to some extent, in going to the seminary [St. Augustine Seminary, Bay St. Louis, Mississippi]. And, back then, seminary consisted of a high school education and then college. And now, it's a bit different, but I went in the seminary in my sophomore year of high school. Story_ID: 619423 Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in school? Now, we're, we're staying up to high school. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. In, in school, I think that it was between science and, and English and in reading--anything that I could do, reading, you know, the history, I loved history, I love science. I--the only thing I really didn't like, at least in my sophomore year of school, high school, was--I did not like geometry, I did not like geometry. And it's ironic because after high school, I majored in accounting [at Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], in a math type subject, as opposed to the sciences or, you know, liberal arts, reading type, type curriculum. And I just love to read. It's, it's--anything li- anything that involves reading I enjoy. Speaker 1: Did you have a library that you would get your books from? Did, were there books in the home, magazines, what (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had hand me downs. Holy Ghost elementary [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, Opelousas, Louisiana], as well as high, and even, North Elementary [North Elementary School, Opelousas, Louisiana], I recall in my second grade, as well in high school at Holy Ghost, where we'd noticed that our textbooks and our other materials were sometimes torn, or the cover is missing. And, you know we thought it was just from the prior class or whatever. And it turns out that many of our textbooks, and many were outdated, I later learned, were hand me downs from the white schools. The white public schools, the white Catholic schools, and I remember seeing stamped on some of my high school textbooks, AIC [Academy of the Immaculate Conception; Opelousas Catholic School, Opelousas, Louisiana], which was the white high school back then. And I remember covers torn, pages missing, what have you and, you know, we, we kind of joked about that back then. But it was serious stuff that we didn't realize, I guess, the potential consequences of not having fully equal access to the same materials and quality of materials that our counterparts had in the white schools. Speaker 1: That was common in, in the public schools, but to hear that your parents [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle and Clifford Lemelle] are actually paying for you to go to school and, and the same type of thing was going on. That's interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and, and Holy Ghost as a, as a Catholic school, again, would--it's supposedly being well funded to the extent that parents are paying for the education. And there are some subsidies, I assume, from the archdiocese--or, or the diocese [Roman Catholic Diocese of Lafayette]. Yeah, we, we had a, we got a number of hand me downs. Story_ID: 619424 Speaker 1: Were there any other extracurricular activities that you were involved in? Speaker 2: Band, I loved, I love music, I was a member of the band at Holy Ghost [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, Opelousas, Louisiana]. I played the coronet, I was the first coronet and enjoyed that. I had a great band instructor, Mrs. Yuel [ph.] who's still alive, and attended my investiture ceremony when I became a federal judge [on the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana]. She was a disciplinarian. She required you to practice, practice, practice, and if you didn't, you'd hear about it. I also enjoyed baseball. In fact, one of my most memorable times as a baseball player was my first time at bat in a Little League at, at north central--North City Park [Opelousas, Louisiana], was hitting a ground rule double as a young kid, and those years were very, very fun loving years. And, of course, water sports was another in competition, mainly speed racing. Didn't like diving too much as a swimmer, but I enjoyed swim speed racing. Speaker 1: What pool did you use to practice (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) North City Park. That was the only pool we had. None, none--no black, black family back then, to my knowledge, had their own private pool. We, we went to the public pool. And my cousins taught me how to swim by really throwing me in the water. And I hope Carolyn [ph.] and Jimmy [ph.] sees this, but that was fun, was swimming at, at the park. Story_ID: 619425 Speaker 1: Besides the teacher who you, who said, was very strict, was there a teacher that influenced you in any way? I mean, you knew that you were going to go to college, say, in your junior high school years, or middle school age, did you give any thought to what you would become? Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that was difficult for me to decide. I think that being an only child, I was privileged in the sense that my parents [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle and Clifford Lemelle] only had to support me basically. And so, I noticed with my kids [Christopher Lemelle, Marc Lemelle and Tricia Lemelle]--we all want our kids to have better than what we had. And the more options I think I had, and the more options they had led to, to a certain extent, some indecision. I thought that, initially, I wanted to go into some of the, some area of the sciences, like become a medical doctor. Later on, I started researching and, and found that, well, accounting seems interesting, and I sort of decided to go into just researching that. And, and that was a decision that I made in my senior year of college, that I was going to go into accounting. Up until that point, everybody thought I was going to major in premed because of my enjoyment of the sciences. And, but I think, I think back then, what really was going on, because of my earlier enjoyment of reading, I think that once I found out about how much I would get to do that as a lawyer, particularly when I took some elective courses at Xavier undergraduate college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] that I decided to go to Xavier--into law. Speaker 1: So, in high school [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, Opelousas, Louisiana]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you knew automatically that you were going to go to Xavier, or did you apply to other colleges? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was probably already pre- preordained that I was going to go to Xavier. My dad was a Xavier graduate. My--two of my aunts were Xavier graduates and, yeah, that was sort of preordained that I was going to go to Xavier. And I'm glad that, you know, I did opt for it. I mean, they, they discussed, you know, some other options with me, and I asked for some other options, too. There was a university in Lafayette [Louisiana] near Opelousas [Louisiana], less than twenty minutes away, called University of Southwestern Louisiana, USL. It's still there in another name, University of Louisiana at Lafayette. Discussed Southern University, I had several cousins that went to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was never discussed as an option. Heard too many negative things about LSU in terms of race relations back then that discouraged me from going. So, Xavier was the logical choice for me and I'm, I'm glad I, I went with it. Story_ID: 619426 Speaker 1: Now, growing up in your teenage years, you're in the--or the country's in the height of civil rights. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Were your parents active in pol- in civil rights or politics at all? Speaker 2: My dad [Clifford Lemelle] as well as my mom [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle], but mostly my dad and, usually sort of, to some extent, behind the scenes. My mother was the first black sales clerk at a major department store in Opelousas [Louisiana] called Abdalla's. And I remember stories from a number of people. A black minister told me a story about, you know, how difficult it was to get my mother in that position. My mother was working there before, primarily as, like an associate. She, she wasn't in sales; she would just assist in terms of stocking, sort of like a stocker, putting materials on the shelves, and getting the product out there, but not selling it. And they, an organization, I don't think it was NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] back then in Opelousas. It was primarily the black ministers who approached the owners of Abdalla's. And they thought my mother was a logical choice and, and she reaped the benefits of that effort. And to her credit, she took it despite the subsequent recriminations from the white sales clerks who, as Mama puts it, they would, they would take her sales book, where she kept a record of her sales, and hide it from her. They would do other things to, I guess, in their way, intimidate her, is my viewpoint on it, although Mama wouldn't say that. And she never complained about it. She would just say about some of the things they did, but she continued to do her work and, and enjoyed that. My dad, on the other hand, is an educator, believed that, again, that the example I gave about the hand me down textbooks, you know, is one aspect of, of things that he always fought against, and wanted us to have the best of everything. And in terms of his efforts in that regard, my daddy was more of someone who people came to. And I remember several times, people would come to the home in Opelousas, and meet with my dad about different issues along race relations and, and civil rights issues. And usually it was educators who had come and say how they felt discriminated by, you know, some member of the school board or principal, a white principal, or white teacher or what have you, or even, just in general, the elected officials, people who wanted to run for office for the first time. Black candidates for office would come to my dad to ask for support and see what he could do, and advise them, fundraising efforts, and other things. So, Dad was kind of behind the scenes, behind the scenes advisor. Dad was not the kind of person, nor is my mother the kind of person, to get there on the picket lines and do things. They were behind the scenes in that regard. Dad, again, through the efforts of both my dad and Lawrence Emerson, who was somewhat of my dad's mentor, Lawrence Emerson was one of the first black principals in Opelousas. And he and my dad formed, I would say, a friendship, a bond that lasted over the years. And Mr. Emerson was the principal of J.S. Clark [J.S. Clark High School], which is the predominantly black public school, high school, in Opelousas. My dad was an assistant principal under him. And later on, they, my dad moved up through the ranks. But I'll never forget how Mr. Emerson and my dad, and--'cause I would go there a lot of times after school to J.S. Clark, even though J.S. Clark was a rivalry of Holy Ghost [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, Opelousas, Louisiana], I was always accepted, I think, for that, J.S. Clark students, because of my dad and my, and Mr. Emerson, who I think took me under their wing over there. But I recall several conversations they had about the need for getting equality of pay for black teachers, for black administrators, and ways about doing that. And, and they acted in an advisory role, sort of a conduit for information to those people who actually got on the front lines and, and said, we demand this, that, and the other. And, you know, I'm, I'm really proud of that, you know, they were able to do that. Story_ID: 619427 Speaker 1: Do you remember any specific incidents that happened in your, in your city? Speaker 2: Yeah. In regards to those efforts, from Mr. Emerson [Lawrence Emerson] and my dad [Clifford Lemelle], I remember phone calls, you know, not too kind choice words were said about my dad when I would happen to answer the phone. And my mother [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle] was concerned about that, but my dad always was trying to be reassuring, and tell us that nothing is going to happen; we're fine. And that, more so than anything because it disturbed my mother, I think, more so than it disturbed my dad or even me were the phone calls. And I wish we had caller ID, but I would assume that over the years, I probably came into contact with those callers and didn't realize it. Things change gradually in Opelousas [Louisiana], probably the slowest in all the state with, with the citizenry in the South to change in terms of race relations and still have our problems. But, yeah, the phone calls. And also, you know, the separation. I mean, we, we couldn't go to the white city park [South City Park, Opelousas, Louisiana] which had better facilities. We couldn't go to the theater. We, we had to, we were separated in the theater. We, we had the upstairs balcony area, and the whites had the lower. Restaurants, you had takeout for blacks. And, you know, I'm--in Opelousas, everybody knew who you, you know, what you wore, and what family you came from and what have you, where you lived. And when I left Opelousas, and came to New Orleans [Louisiana] to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana], one of my first experiences had been in New Orleans. I was on a bus and back then, it was NOPSI [New Orleans Public Service Inc.], and on this public bus, I recall going to sit towards the back. And someone said to me, and I don't know who it was, whether it was white or black, said to me, "Why are you sitting towards the back?" I said, "I don't know, I just came to sit here." And I didn't think about it then, but then, later on, you know, when I shared with somebody else who's from New Orleans, who's a native New Orleanian, he said that, well, they probably thought you were white and said, you should have sat in the front instead of the back. So, I was kind of glad I chose the right seat at the time, or the same time I should have been insulted, but didn't realize I was being insulted to the extent that even back then, this is 1967, people thought that, you know, still the races should be separated. So, that was an eye opener. I, I think in Opelousas, it was--I guess you knew who you were dealing with in Opelousas, and this is a new environment for me to come to New Orleans, the big city, country boy, you know, experiencing New Orleans. And had to deal with perhaps a different perception of, of people. I thought New Orleans was more progressive than Opelousas was, but as it turns out, I don't think there's much difference. Story_ID: 619428 Speaker 1: We're going to go on to, to your college years [at Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], but I just want to step back a little bit because during that time, as well in being that you are Catholic during that time, there was a lot of tragedy. President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed. And as a Catholic, I want to get your, you know, how you felt and your family, the climate of, of the city, and also of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] as well. So, tell me about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I-- Speaker 1: --those times. Speaker 2: --I recall all those incidences, the John Kennedy's killing, the assassination of Dr. King, the, the murder of Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy]. Speaker 1: Bobby Kennedy. Speaker 2: You know, all those were memorable moments in, in my early, early life. And, and I recall, particularly after the incident with Dr. King and his murder, how people were not simply upset, but enraged to the extent of, I could understand, not as an excuse, but I could understand that their frustration level had reached the point where enough is enough. And you had violence all over the country. You didn't have that to that extent, like in Watts [Los Angeles, California], or what have you in Louisiana, or in Opelousas [Louisiana], or in New Orleans [Louisiana]. There were demonstrations and protests, or in honor of Dr. King, and that incident. I remember, we wept on all three occasions. And, you know, we had so much hope in what they had to, to give, and to serve. And, and it served as an inspiration, I guess, as to all of us that said that, hey, freedom is--it comes at a price, and it's unfortunate that there was a price of people's lives, but, but you got to remember that it wasn't anything really new. People were lynched during the slave days, even post-slave days and Reconstruction, in the Jim Crow era. Beyond that, people being lynched today. You read about harassment of people, whether they're black, or whether they're, because of their religion, because of the, their sex or, or sexual orientation. And discrimination is nothing new to, to society of any kind, whether it's in the U.S. or any place else. And it was just unfortunate, though, that public figures like that who had so much yet to give, you know, were taken from us. And, and I guess it's a selfishness that you always feel when you have somebody dead, die that's close to you or you feel some relationship with. And that feeling of selfishness is probably what creates, to some extent, not just the remorse and the grief, but also frustration. You were angry--we were angry. And, you know, I look back on it, and I wonder why, you know, our anger did not demonstrate itself as much as it did in other areas. I disagreed with the, the riots associated with it, but, again, it's unfortunate that that occurred 'cause two wrongs don't make a right. Story_ID: 619429 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit more about your, say, your, your senior year, and your preparing to go to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Were there other social activities that the kids in your, your class participated in? I mean, what music, you said you liked music, what music were you listening to (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Motown sound; it was all about Motown [Motown Records]. You know, my--[HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and The Miracles, you know, Marvin Gaye, The Temptations, Diana Ross and The Supremes. I mean, that, that's, that's, that's my music, Motown. My, my kids [Christopher Lemelle, Marc Lemelle and Tricia Lemelle], to a certain extent, enjoy it. They've influenced me to some extent into other forms of music. But back then in high school [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, Opelousas, Louisiana], before going, coming to the big city in New Orleans [Louisiana], house parties were, were great, you know, the old 45 [rpm] records. You're too young for that, but the 45s were very popular. The small records, the, you know, we didn't have tapes of any kind. Back then, the only kind of tape was reel to reel film type tape, and very awkward to deal with. So, we used 45s and the 33s [33 1/3 rpm record], the albums and, you know, we, we played our records at house parties. The other thing we enjoyed doing, we, you know, like, like some of the big city folk, you know, if you're able to either get a car or get somebody who had a car to drive you, you know, we would go to movies. We'd, you know, go to bowling alleys. Back then, bowling alley were very popular. Drive-in theatres were very popular in Opelousas [Louisiana], the Yam Drive-In, and perhaps the Yam Drive-In was the only movie theater in Opelousas that was not segregated. You know, you drove in and you--I don't recall an area that you have to go in 'cause you're black or white, as opposed to the Delta Theatre [Delta Grand Theatre, Opelousas, Louisiana], which was a regular movie house, enclosed, where you were separated, like I said earlier. So, yeah, those are all main activities or social activities back then. Story_ID: 619430 Speaker 1: Did you have a senior prom? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. What do you mean? You didn't think we had a senior prom? Of course, we did. We had a junior prom, too. My date for the junior prom was a young lady from Alexandria, Louisiana. And I had an aunt who lived, one of my dad's [Clifford Lemelle] sisters lived in Alexandria, named Nyrene [ph.], and her husband, Uncle John [ph.]. And we had a large family of kids and my first cousins. And we would love spending summers in Alexandria, and they enjoyed spending summers in Opelousas [Louisiana]--don't ask me why. But, yeah, I met a young lady from Alexandria, who I asked to my junior prom, and she accepted and came to the prom. It was held at the downtown inn of Opelousas. It's still there, but not as a hotel. Now, it's a sort of a social services type of organization that occupies it, mainly, I think for, for young mothers and their, their, their kids. Want to know about my senior prom? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Had one of those, too. Speaker 1: And you said at the ho- at the hotel, was it a black hotel? Speaker 2: No, it was a white hotel, and we had the ballroom. But if they--and we were able to park there and everything else. We couldn't use the swimming pool, though, couldn't use the swimming pool, not that you would use a swimming pool after the prom, but, yeah, that was fun. Senior prom was held at North City Park [Opelousas, Louisiana], the black park, in the civic center [North Park Civic Center]. And my date for that was a classmate of mine my senior year, Brenda Billadoe [ph.]. She was a, she was valedictorian of the class, and I was salutatorian of the class, and I don't--that's the reason why we went together? To this day, I don't know why or how, if I asked her, or she asked me, or, or how that came about. But, yeah, Brenda is still in Lafayette [Louisiana]. She's a teacher now. And every now and then, we, we hear from her, but it's been a while. My junior prom date, Connie Vaddon [ph.], from Alexandria, she died, unfortunately, of health reasons a few years ago. But, again, I maintained contact with her up until her death. Speaker 1: So, tell me more about your graduation. Speaker 2: From high school [Holy Ghost Catholic School; Opelousas Catholic School, Opelousas, Louisiana]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Well, it was short, only thirty-five graduates, so it didn't take long. And my salutatorian speech was really the welcoming speech, didn't take long, it was on little 3 x 5 cards. I think I still have it somewhere around, talked about the crossroads of life, you know, big topic. And that was--the, the main speaker for that, I believe back then, might have been--I think it was the, it's a shame I don't remember the main speaker. I think it was, it was either the bishop, (air quotes) Catholic high school, right, or, or some other religious type, but don't ask me what they talked about 'cause I don't remember, but again, very short. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 1: And how old were you? Speaker 2: I was sixteen, sixteen--in fact, I'll give you the exact date. It was May 28, 1967. My parents [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle and Clifford Lemelle] gave me this watch day of my graduation and it still works. Story_ID: 619431 Speaker 1: So, tell me what you did the summer before you were going to the big city. Speaker 2: Summer before I came to the big city, my dad [Clifford Lemelle] got me a job as a aide during the summer school at--in fact, at North Elementary public school [North Elementary School, Opelousas, Louisiana]. I did some work there--it was really volunteer work. I said it was a job, but I really didn't get paid for it, but he, he wanted me to get a little taste of education. I think he--Dad probably really wanted me to become either a doctor or an educator, like he was. He didn't say that, but I, I think he would have--like me, you know, in a way I look back and I say, well, none of my kids became lawyers. And I wonder if Dad wanted the same thing, or why didn't he go into education. So, I guess, he gave me a little taste of that experience in the summer school before Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. And I assisted in summer school. And many did go for work for the teachers who were teaching summer school but enjoyed the heck out of it. I guess, back then, I--my dad was somewhat of a practical joker. So was my mom [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle]. And, and one of their ways of inspiring you to, to, I guess, learn a lesson, so to speak, is they would tell a story about, which I think they've made up, tell a story about what would happen if you didn't do certain things, like getting an education, like work, and, and, and make it on your own, so to speak. And it would always tie you into that story--the rewards for good work, again, that expression about the reward for good work is to do better work. And Dad was never, was never satisfied with my school work. If I came home with a A, a B, it was always--well, you got the A in the easy course, you got the B in the tougher course. Now, it could be math and science, A and B. But he would always challenge you and say, you know, you need to think about picking that B up, or picking up that, that A to A plus. Back then, there was A minus, A plus and A's and, yeah, I remember him always challenging me in that regards, and, and telling me that, you know, how do you think Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got to be a doctor, you know, you know, how do you think--and he would use example of the Kennedys. Of course, I didn't realize later on in life the whole story behind the Kennedys, but that's another story entirely. And it still didn't depreciate my appreciation for them. But, yeah, the, the summer was spent basically in, in education mode. And, and later on in life, I, I did do further teaching, but I, I couldn't be a full-time teacher. Story_ID: 619432 Speaker 1: You told us about one of your first experiences here in, in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Was there anything else that might have happened that you can remember that stands out in your mind? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I grew up as an only child all these years. And all of a sudden, I'm cast in New Orleans in a dormitory, and I'm sharing a dormitory, not with one roommate, but two roommates. St. Michael's dormitory [St. Michael Hall] at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] was the men's dormitory, and St. Michael's dormitory didn't have air conditioning back then. Of course, we didn't have, really have air conditioning in Opelousas [Louisiana] back then either, but you got to imagine a dormitory room that is maybe, not even a third the size of this room, with three guys in it. And me being the only child growing up with, towards the--my high school years, at least having my own room. The only other time I had to share a room and, was when I went to the seminary [St. Augustine Seminary, Bay St. Louis, Mississippi] that one year, and I shared a--it was an open dormitory. No one had really a room--it was an open dorm, like a military barracks. You had cots all in this big room. Well, this little dormitory room at Xavier, at St. Michael's, was confining but thank god, thank god I wasn't claustrophobic. That was an experience. I had to adjust to that, but I didn't do too well because in my--let's see, second semester, first year, yeah, the next semester, I requested that I--I got a private room. I just couldn't, I couldn't study well with, with others. And, again, I guess, it's my fault that I didn't make, do that well an adjustment from being in an only child setting to now setting with, with roommates. Story_ID: 619433 Speaker 1: Well, how did you do as far as classes? Speaker 2: Well, I got to classes. I graduated, but I, I think that, initially, I was shy being on a campus with, with, with, with so many students, hundreds of students all over. And I was a bit shy in asking questions in class in my first semester. I think I grew out of that and--by the time I got to my second semester. And, again, I think it's because, you know, I'm overwhelmed with New Orleans [Louisiana]. I wanted to discover New Orleans; I didn't really want to discover the classroom that much. And as it turns out, my roommates and I--we, we hung out a lot together. We just couldn't study in the same room together, but we did hang out after hours, after classes, together with--there are some sights in New Orleans in the area, area called Gert Town. One of the first things you learn when you come on Xavier's campus at orientation for freshmen, the good nuns would tell us don't go to Gert Town--full of bars and, you know, the wild side of New Orleans. Well, you know, the worst thing you could tell us, don't go to Gert Town. Well, what did we do that night? We went to Gert Town. And I think they realized it, and that was an experience. And I had to adjust 'cause my grades, first semester, showed I needed to adjust. And, again, my dad [Clifford Lemelle], my dad gets those grades and says, "You got Cs and Bs. You're not going to make it on Cs and Bs," so he was right. Speaker 1: Gert Town, where is that located? Speaker 2: Gert Town is right across what we call the canal from Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana]. Xavier is located in New Orleans in--it's above Canal, only about maybe five, six blocks from Canal Street heading uptown off of Carrollton Avenue, bounded by Carrollton Avenue, Jeff Davis [Jefferson Davis Parkway]. You wouldn't know all that, but Gert Town is right, it's the adjacent neighborhood, the adjacent neighborhood, predominantly black, still predominantly black neighborhood. And we used to go to a place called J.T.'s, Joy Tavern [New Orleans, Louisiana], and had great times there after basketball games and after other kind of on campus activities. We would all meet at Gert Town. In fact, that's primarily how the city students and, and to some extent, the dorm students kind of intermingle. Back then, there was a lot of competition between, and somewhat of a friendly dis-friendship with the city students versus the dorm students. And I guess every college campus you have that. And, but I think Gert Town is where we all met and forgot about, you know, whether you're city student or dorm student. Story_ID: 619434 Speaker 1: What type of activities, 'cause you're only sixteen going on seventeen? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What activities are you involved in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I, I, I was able to buy some beer there (laughter). They didn't ask for IDs back at Joy Tav- at J.T.'s [Joy Tavern, New Orleans, Louisiana]. So, yeah, you know, back then, our drink of choice was always a beer and, and so, socially, whenever we'd go out, you know, we, we were able to buy beer. But Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] afforded something that I never was exposed to before, and that was classical music. Xavier had a fine reputation for a music department--its jazz bands and some other things. And I, I liked music from high school days, so I've eventually joined Xavier's jazz band, and that was a social outlet, extracurricular activity that I enjoyed it at Xavier. House parties, too, once, once we befriended a number of city students. And I dated some, some girls who lived in the city. And I remember getting on the bus, the Carrollton [Carrollton Avenue] bus near Xavier University--the Carrollton bus to the Tulane Avenue bus, to the Galvez Street bus, catching about two different transfers, going all the way to the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana]. And we're talking about on the fringe, Lower 9th Ward, on the fringe of New Orleans' boundary with St. Bernard Parish [Louisiana], to see and date one of my girlfriends in, in school. And I remember her dad used to tell me, you know, the last bus leaves at such and such time, which I knew was my cue: Ivan [HistoryMaker Ivan Lemelle], get out of here, time to go home, up to the dorm. And so, yeah, we had a lot of social activities and, again, being a, a, you know, from the small town [Opelousas, Louisiana], I think I did reasonably good job discovering New Orleans. Speaker 1: You said you were in a jazz band? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you play traditional jazz? What type of jazz was this? Garage band? What (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was, it was more--I would consider to be modern type jazz. And, of course, we, we, we loved, you know, Louis Armstrong and, and that history, and then played some of his, his tunes, but it's primarily more of a modern type jazz group. And I was only in it for, what about, one year because I got involved in other things. I eventually became active in student government. And my time in student government started eating into my, my practice times with the jazz band. So, I, I chose to--and I got excited being in student government, something new, and that was fun. Story_ID: 619435 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about student government. I mean, what office did you hold (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, I was, I was, I was an officer pretty much all my four years at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] in student government, primarily the first three years, as treasurer for the Student Government Association. And you're elected into that by your, your classmates or the student body. And eventually, in my senior year, I was elected to be class president, by the students of my class to be the senior year president. But as student government treasurer, one of our biggest functions was to promote a concert given on Xavier's campus. And we were bringing in some pretty good stars, the Checkmates [Checkmates, Ltd.], we would bring in. And people seemed--as most of them probably wouldn't even remember the Checkmates. But, again, that's the, kind of the, doo wop sound but, but, you know, sort of like the Shadow Lights [ph.], the, you know, a little bit different sound than Temptations [The Temptations], but similar. Temptations came on campus back then. And the highlight of all that, though, was bringing The Dells. We got The Dells to come and do a concert at Xavier, and I was treasurer. I had to man the ticket booth, and that was an experience for a number of reasons. One, because my future wife [Patricia Waddell Lemelle], who I was dating at, at Xavier, she was a year behind me, and I had broken up at the time of Dells concert. Well, I brought in someone, another young lady from Alexandria [Louisiana] who I, I was dating, and brought her to The Dells concert. And, oh, boy, did I catch hell from my wife on that--well, not my wife then, but later on my wife. And, but the, on the professional end of it, as treasurer for that concert, I guess I got so caught up in the moment. We got this famous group, great concert. I had people that I worked with manning the ticket booth and the cash box. I gave instructions--what to do with the cash box at the end of the day, went and checked on it at the end of the day. Well, lo and behold, the next morning, I get a phone call from the president of the student government saying, "Where's the cash box from The Dells concert?" I said, okay, well, So and So had it last, and I told him to turn it in. Didn't turn it in. So, it's my responsibility. So, luckily, we went back to the gym where the concert was put on, and searched the ticket booth, and found the cash box in the trash can. Don't know how it got there, but from best we could tell, all the money was still there. But I saw my whole career flash in front of me when the president called and said, "Where's the cash box?" So, I was lucky. Speaker 1: Who was the president then of, of the university? Speaker 2: The president of the university back then was [HistoryMaker] Norman Francis. He was our first lay president at Xavier, and the only lay president since I've been there, and he's still president. Norman is eternal, but he was also one of our inspirations to go to law school. Dr. Francis was the first African American graduate of Loyola University College of Law [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana], where I went to law school and, and he was that graduate when he became president. And he inspired many of us, encouraged many of us to go to law school, and many of us chose Loyola. President of student government, who made that call to me, was a good friend of mine who's still in the city, Kenneth Ferdinand [ph.], and, yeah, I remember that call from Kenneth, but Kenneth, if you're out there, I'm glad the money was found. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 619436 Speaker 1: Now, tell me, did you pledge? Speaker 2: I sure did, I pledged. We reactivated in fact, the chapter, the fraternity chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], Beta Tau Chapter of Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], spring of 1970. All of the fraternities and sororities were kicked off of Xavier's campus by the nuns who operated Xavier, then Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament, because of brutality and hazing back in the, I think, late '50s [1950s]. And it wasn't until spring of '70 [1970]--in fact, my line, the king's line, named after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], who's also a great Alpha, went over. We pledged for six and a half weeks in the spring of '70 [1970], and we went over, and we were the first fraternity to come back. And that was a, that, that was interesting in the sense that I was pulled by the--to go with the Alphas 'cause my dad [Clifford Lemelle] had connections with Alphas, Dr. Francis [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] is an Alpha. Most of the leadership at Xavier were Alphas. I was also pulled by the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] 'cause a lot of my best friends at Xavier were going Kappa. And I had a cousin or two who are Kappas, first cousins. So, you know, I had to make a choice. Up until the deadline to select where you're going, a lot of people thought I was going to go Kappa, but I went Alpha, and haven't regretted it since. Still have good friends in Kappa, and--but Alpha, to me, you know, represented a lot. Most of them, then just being the first (air quotes) of a lot of different things by its membership and, and by itself being the first predominantly black social Greek letter fraternity. But I thought it, it did quite a lot in the New Orleans [Louisiana] community. And, again, Xavier is representative of that in terms of its leadership being mostly Alphas, so that's where I chose. Story_ID: 619437 Speaker 1: Now, in your, your studies, you said that Dr. Francis [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] was an inspiration for you to go to law school. Tell me more about his leadership or, or guidance there, or any other professor or instructor that might have been inspirational for you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or encouraging? Speaker 2: Right. But there's one thing about Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and, and, you know, it was under Dr. Francis' leadership with a lot of assistance and encouragement and work of the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament, along with a lot of instructors at Xavier who, again, somewhat like my, my dad [Clifford Lemelle], challenged us all the time, challenged us. Don't just set a goal, exceed those goals. Dr. Francis was one for the reason I just mentioned. There was a, a white professor there that I didn't get until my senior year, in an elective course, political science course that I took at Xavier, by the name of Ashton Phelps, Jr. Ashton Phelps is a local white lawyer. His family operated and owned back then, the local newspaper, the Times-Picayune. But Ashton, I thought, was very progressive in his attitude and his political thinkings, and as well in his teachings. And he was an influence. On campus, a number of occasions, the student government type activities, we would have Dutch Morial [Ernest Morial] who was a local lawyer who'd come on campus. Israel Augustine [Israel M. Augustine, Jr.], who was one of the early black judges, but he wasn't a judge then, but a very active lawyer in the community back then. Robert Collins, who eventually became the first African American federal judge in the Deep South, would come on campus even though he was a Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] graduate. We had a number of other ones--lawyers who came on campus who, I think, I don't recall them per se encouraging us to go to law school, but they talked about what they did, and that in itself was an encouragement 'cause usually when they came on campus, they were soliciting support from the student body through the student government to participate in some of the civil rights struggles that were occurring in New Orleans [Louisiana] back then. We're talking about the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]. So, it was what they were doing that, that inspired many of us to go into law school and, and become involved in what they were doing. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when did you make that decision that you would go on to law school? Speaker 2: Senior year, second semester; my last semester at Xavier is when I made that decision. Did not take--and I don't even know if it was available--a law school admission test review course. I just took the LSAT blind, one time. And, again, it was the influence of the people that I just mentioned--and others. And the, the choice of Loyola [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana], again, came primarily because of Dr. Francis and some other people, and, again, the influence of, of the teachers that I told you about. And, and, and probably, more so than anything else, was I felt, based upon some discussions with some people at, at Loyola, that Loyola, and Tulane [Tulane University Law School, New Orleans, Louisiana] to some, but mostly Loyola, offered a lot in terms of helping us to adjust to going into the law as a course or curriculum. Story_ID: 619438 Speaker 1: My biggest disappointment about law school was that, back then, at least at Loyola [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana], and to some extent at Tulane [Tulane University Law School, New Orleans, Louisiana], there was a high attrition rate for first year. And-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about attrition rates at Loyola law school. And we had approximately fourteen of us, fourteen African American, first year law students at Loyola when I went in 1971. And out of the fourteen or so of us, only six of us graduated in the class of '74 [1974]. So, you know, more--a little more than half of, of my, my, my colleagues, my, my closest friends, did not make it for one reason or another. And, you know, there was a lot of, a lot of suspicions back then, why we have such a high attrition rate, situations of racist motivations in the grading, suspicions of lack of assistance in the studying, and other access issues. I, I can't say I found any concrete evidence of that, but there were suspicions back then. Many of us thought that we, you know, really aced the exams, studied hard, aced it, and came out with something less than a A. But, again, this is suspicions. I'm still dedicated to Loyola, but it wasn't perfect, and it's not perfect--no, no institution is perfect. I'm not perfect. And there's a lot that, that's left to be desired, but I think that, you know, good, good intention and hardworking people will do good things. Speaker 2: All right. Well, who is the, the president at that time? Speaker 1: President of--well, the dean of-- Speaker 2: The dean-- Speaker 1: --of the law school-- Speaker 2: --law school-- Speaker 1: --at that time was Dean Papallie [ph.], but that was only for a brief period when I first got there. I think, even before the end of my first semester, Marcel Garsaud [Marcel Garsaud, Jr.] became the dean, and he was a very progressive dean. He reached out to, you know, all students, including the minority students. And, you know, I still debate him about giving me a B plus as opposed to an A, but I, I never questioned, you know, his motives or anything like that. I think he was a straight professor, a challenging professor, and a hard grader. But at the same time, I think that he was one of, again--I guess, I'm selfish in that regard, I think he's one of the best deans we've had, even though one of my classmates eventually became the first African American dean of Loyola law school-- Speaker 2: Who was that (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Louis Westerfield, who also became the first African American dean of Ole Miss law school [University of Mississippi School of Law, Oxford, Mississippi]. Unfortunately, Louis died unexpectedly several, several years ago. Story_ID: 619439 Speaker 1: Vietnam was going on right before you-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --get to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me about that era and what your thoughts were at that time. Speaker 2: I'll tell you something that's not that complimentary of, of my, my days at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. I actually prevented Lady Bird Johnson from being water ballooned. During the height of that, that war, she paid a visit to Xavier. And I was in student government, living in St. Michael's dormitory [St. Michael Hall], and I heard that some students at, at Xavier, St. Michael's dorm, and some city students were planning on going on the roof of St. Michael's dormitory and throwing water balloons on her motorcade as she came in, to Xavier's campus. The access to Xavier's campus, and where she was going, was a one road--almost one lane access road, and very cramped, buildings spaced close together. When I heard of it, I said, okay, they're protesting the war. I could think of a better way to protest, but they want to protest. I said, no, that might not be too good because [U.S.] Secret Service, guns, water balloons, potential threat, and we met and discouraged it. I was criticized by some of the more activist student leaders saying oh, you, you're one of those accountant business majors, you know, you bourgeoisie, that kind of stuff, and, and, you know, you, you're just supporting the war. I said no, I didn't necessarily support the war. I just don't like the idea of any of us getting shot for throwing water balloons on the first lady. And you could do--have better recourse than that. But, but, luckily that, that didn't transpire, so, no, no one got injured. But Xavier, to me, back during those days in, in terms of Vietnam War, we had protests. Student government sometimes led those protests, and we organized some protests. When I was at Xavier, Xavier, when I was there for the first time, had a course actually taught on African American studies and African American history, as opposed to just getting it as some other snippet in a regular history course about our history. You got it in one course, it, for that purpose. And this, the teacher of that course--and I took that course as an elective--and I would, you know, accounting major, I've come to class, had my little briefcase and all that. And I'll never forget Ms. Thornton [ph.] telling me that, yeah, you look like you're going to be ready for Corporate America with that briefcase. And, and she would say it in a half jokingly--joking way, but I knew that, you know, she also is trying to remind me, you know, don't--she never wanted us to become what I would call conformist, and just going along with the crowd. She wanted us to be leaders. She wanted us to be mindful of our history. She wanted us to remind others of our history. And whether we're going to Corporate America or not, you know, she wanted us to, I guess, in her words, (air quotes) do the right thing before, you know, that was, you know, penned by the film producer [Spike Lee]. Story_ID: 619440 Speaker 1: Was there anything else about Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] because I, I want to go on. We did talk a little bit about law school, but I want to go into more, more in depth about that, but is there anything else about Xavier that you wanted to talk about? Speaker 2: I love Xavier and I still support it, and I still go back as often as I can. I have several classmates who work at Xavier and-- Speaker 1: And they are? Speaker 2: One is director of their placement, career student placement services. And she's fantastic, very dedicated to that job. And, and, and she's, she's done a great job placing students who are graduating, either in graduate studies or in jobs, and several others, including a lot of frat brothers there as well. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, you're only twenty years old when you graduate from, from Xavier, is that right? Speaker 2: Sounds right, I'll accept that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're going into, to law school [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana] at twenty years old? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: All right. So, now, besides what we talked about earlier, tell me about your experience. Was it what you expected? What method (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Total shock. Speaker 1: --did they use? Tell me all about that. Speaker 2: Total shock. For the first time in my educational history, my, my grade was, my final grade was going to be dependent upon one examination at the end of the semester--never before. You usually have midterms and some other pre-final exams and all, all be added up to your grade, in addition to the final. And I wasn't prepared for one grade, one exam, and that's it. Didn't do too well my first year. Well, didn't, didn't, wasn't flunking out or anything, but didn't do as well as I probably should have. And as a result of that shock, first semester, and remember, Dad [Clifford Lemelle], in the background: "Hm, got a C, huh?" Yeah. So, and, and some of my students--my classmates, as well, you know, we all had our problems with dealing with that. So, yeah, first semester and that, that shock really was an eye opener and, and then, as I said before, we lost a lot of my classmates first semester, second semester, black and white. And, and this is my first time, too, where I am in a predominantly white environment. I'm always in--not just predominantly, but 100 percent practically, black schools, black populated schools, except for Xavier, which had a certain percentage of white student population, and for the first time at Xavier, white teachers. Never had white teachers before 'til I got to Xavier. And then law school with majority white teachers and students. That was an experience, only because we didn't know what to expect, but I guess we were naive in that regard. We, we, you know, I should have realized it. I mean, we knew what type of environment we were going into, but just hadn't experienced it. And that was an adjustment because you didn't know who to trust. You didn't know if you would befriend a white student, to what extent the white student may go back and tell a teacher or somebody in administration what negatives or whatever we might have said about a teacher or someone. And there was one incident where a, a student did just that; a white student went and told what a black student said about that teacher, thought the teacher was a racist, and had some good grounds to believe in that. And so, that level of distrust was there and, and so, we, we, we tended to be a bit, perhaps a bit more tight knit, tight knit among the black students. And, unfortunate, but at the same time, we were dealing with reality there that we didn't create. Story_ID: 619441 Speaker 1: So, what was your favorite part about law school? Speaker 2: Reading. Again, while at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], I had a chance to read, but certainly not research, read and write as much as you, you finally went to law school, and that was fun. It was not fun, however, to go to the law library at Loyola [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was very small back then in my first year, and look for a, a book, a book of cases, called them Southern Reporters, Federal Reporters, Supreme Court Reporters were the texts usually, and to find the books missing. Loyola's library back then had a lot left, a lot to be desired of, and we wound up going to Tulane [Tulane University Law School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and, and getting in their library to, to do studies. So, it was enjoyable, but at the same time--could be frustrating at times 'cause you're competing with a lot of other students for the same books and, and so we had to do extra to, to get those books. Speaker 1: What else happened during that time? I mean, you're there for-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --four years so. Speaker 2: Again, I think for what I said earlier, adjusting to, not just because I was, I was a dorm student also at law school, and it was a majority white dormitory, and all the law students were on the same floor who were in the dorm. And I think it was good that I had the opportunity there to develop relationships, who had a group of people that I never had real rela- or relationships with before until law school. And a lot of friendships still remain from that. We have reunions all the time, both Xavier as well as Loyola. And the dorm students at the law school, who lived in the dorm on Loyola's campus, I think got to be close knit as a result of, you know, that, that setting. They learned a lot about us, we learned a lot about them. Also, I think that whatever paranoia that each group had, black and white had, slowly dissipated over time, not immediately, because of the earlier incident I told you about, and some other things. But by the time of our graduation, I think we really felt like family--not black, not white, but all one group of individuals. Speaker 1: Where did the other students, the white students, come from? Were they local or they, where did they come from? Speaker 2: The ones in the dormitory were mainly from up north; they were from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; they were from New York; Virginia, which is north to us, compared to Louisiana; some from California. The majority, however, the whole student body for the law school at Loyola back then, was primarily from this area, New Orleans [Louisiana], South Louisiana. And, you know, there, there was some who didn't really associate that much with us, but eventually over time did. And I think that when people learn more about each other--to me, knowledge is power. It's a, it's a helpful tool, and I think the more you know about somebody else, I think you appreciate, and I think you learn. I was active with--we were one of the charter members--at least, my group at, at Loyola, the black students were one of the, the charter members, what we call the black law student association, BLSA [Black Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association]. We created a chapter. It's a national organization of black law students, still in existence, and we chartered it at, at Loyola when I was there. And that was a good thing. I remember some of the professors, and even some of the white students asking, "Why do y'all need that?" You got the Student Bar Association which is the, the corollary, or counterpart of the Student Government Association in, in undergrad. We had the Student Bar Association, SBA, in law school. And, and some people questioned, why do you need that? And, you know, another reason back then was, is that we felt as if we needed that to study together, common interests together, and present a unified front on issues that we thought needed to be addressed in terms of race relations. And, and then, I think, eventually, people realized it was productive, and it's still productive. And, and it does a lot of great things: scholarships, study aids, and everything, communicating. We have representatives on the SBA from BLSA. So I, I think it grew into a good thing. And it's not limited to black law students. You know, a white law student can come to meetings and participate and other things. It's like the National Bar Association, group of predominantly black lawyers, and other association--NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I mean, you know, it doesn't exclusive to, to people of color. Story_ID: 619442 Speaker 1: So, tell me more about your, your classes or the courses that you were taking [at Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana] and moot court, and all those good things that they have in law school. Speaker 2: Moot court was fun. We had a great moot court professor, Professor Gisevius, Fred Gisevius [Frederick J. Gisevius, Jr.]. Fred Gisevius was a Greek American lawyer and he was just excellent moot court instructor. And I say that because he treated everybody the same; he was hard on everybody, and if he wanted to be soft, he was soft on everybody. He was very compassionate, always accessible to everybody. Encouraged you to talk to him, seek his advice. Marcel Garsaud [Marcel Garsaud, Jr.], I thought was in the same vein of, of Garsaud [sic.], although he was a bit younger than Gisevius, the dean of the law school. You had other professors. One of the most brilliant professors I ever had was Thomas Sponsler. He taught us federal civil procedure and jurisdiction, and that is probably one of the most difficult courses to teach the law students and inspire law students at the same time to get involved in that, that procedure or jurisdiction type course. And he did an excellent job of it. He was a fascinating teacher. He ultimately became the dean of the law school after I had graduated, after Garsaud, I believe, and he also became a circuit executive in the federal court system in, I think, Colorado or Arizona, I forgot, years ago. So, we had a lot of great teachers there. Janet Mary Riley, a female law professor, constitutional expert, wonderful instructor--a number of others. You know, I could go on and on--I hate, I hope I'm not insulting any of them by not mentioning their names, but I don't think there was--except for one professor, I really appreciated all of them. And I won't mention the one I didn't--he's not there anymore. Story_ID: 619443 Speaker 1: Which course did you enjoy the most? I mean, was there something that, that made you say, well, this is the type of law that I, I want to go into? Speaker 2: You know, when I went to law school [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana], I thought I was going to become a corporate lawyer, a tax lawyer. I was an accounting major, a business major, undergraduate [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], minor in economics. You know, to me, law, corporations, tax, that was going to be, you know, my, my, my future. And it wasn't until the summer, after my first year of law school, that I got a taste of litigation. And I worked that summer, nine- summer of 1972 in a, a, a, a nonprofit organization called New Orleans Legal Assistance Corporation [New Orleans, Louisiana]. We call it NOLAC after those--that name. NOLAC was a legal services organization funded in part by the federal government to provide legal services to the poor. And back then, we had field offices. I was assigned to a field office in the Central City area [New Orleans, Louisiana] call- at, in, we call it the Ernst location; it's, it was near a food market called Ernst food store [Ernst Food Mart, New Orleans, Louisiana]. We had a very small satellite office manned by two lawyers, Bob Danner [ph.] and Bob Piper [ph.], and I was assigned there to be their law clerk, and we had a secretary, and another assistant. Got my first taste of actually interviewing clients, people who come into the--NOLAC, our office, for assistance on their legal problems. Those problems ranged from housing matters to property matter, family law issues, child custody issues; a number of areas. And we provided services through different grants and funding sources free of charge to people who qualified, who were poor, couldn't afford a lawyer otherwise. And, again, that experience and, and things that happened in that connection and Bob Danner and Bob Piper, my supervising lawyers, were inspirational to me and, and they allowed me to do things that I didn't think that, as a law student, you know, I could do, you know, interviewing a client, prepare a, a witness summary, go to a housing authority meeting where our client was the subject of potential eviction from a public housing development. And, and, and I say, "Well, don't you need a lawyer for that?" Said, "No, no, no, you could be their representative." They could designate you to be the representative to appear this, this eviction hearing with them. It wasn't in, in court, but it, it was like a court. Housing authority [Housing Authority of New Orleans] had these little--I would call them tribunals, administrative bodies that dealt with certain types of eviction proceedings. And I remember going and representing a client with my client there. And I remember my client must have been more nervous than I was, saying this kid is not even a lawyer yet, and they got him going with me to an eviction proceeding? And I had a chance to make the presentation, to question witnesses, put my client on and let, let them tell their story. And lo and behold, they didn't evict him, so, you know, I won my first case, not even a lawyer yet. And, and, then, it grew from there. Story_ID: 619444 Speaker 1: Courses I took were preordained, mandatory courses for a law school, but every summer, you had a chance to get a clerkship. Your first clerkship was at NOLAC [New Orleans Legal Assistance Corporation, New Orleans, Louisiana]. The next summer, I worked with the Fifth Army Judge Advocate General's Corps [U.S. Fifth Army; U.S. Army North], and that was an experience, too, because I'm at Fort Sam Houston, San Antonio, Texas, a beautiful historic fort and oh, yeah, take it back, I'm sorry. The summer before, that was NOLAC. The summer my junior year [at Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana], this is the summer of seventy--what is this now, summer of '74 [1974]? I guess it was. I'm losing track of time. But when I did that work with the JAG Corps, Fort Sam Houston, I got a chance to see perhaps another side of the law, criminal law. And, and you, you're interviewing soldiers who may be subject to court martial proceedings for various offenses. So, NOLAC was primarily civil. Now, with JAG Corps, some criminal, and some civil, too, accident situations. And that was interesting to see. Well, for some reason or another, I never did do a clerkship into corporate law, tax law. Had I done that, I probably would have been into that area, but I guess that experience and excitement of having proceedings in court, tribunals, whatever, you know, got me going into that area. Story_ID: 619445 Speaker 1: And I'll never forget going to, in my senior year of law school [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana], the first time they had a program that allowed senior year law students, under the supervision of a licensed attorney, could actually go to a (air quotes) real court, and represent a client before a real judge, and in civil and criminal proceedings. And it was a rule in the Louisiana Supreme Court that authorized that to occur. The law schools had to set it up, get it approved, and I was one of the first students of doing that, and going to court, representing a client with a licensed lawyer. And my first time appearing before a judge in a court in that context, it was in Jefferson Parish [Louisiana], where I heard all kind of stories about, and said, okay, I'm going outside of my parish [Orleans Parish, Louisiana] now to Jefferson. And I appear for this proceeding. It was a criminal case. And the client (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I'm sorry, what parish is this? Speaker 1: Jefferson Parish. It's right across the--it's an adjoining parish to New Orleans [Louisiana]. And going to that state court and in the criminal proceeding--I think it was an arraignment where you just go in, and the client pleads guilty or not guilty to the charges and advised of a trial date and some other pretrial proceedings. My supervising lawyer, who was the director of the law clinic, was late for this proceeding. And I'm thinking, okay, he's late. There's a lot of other people in here waiting for their cases to be called. So, nothing to worry about, tell my client it's okay. Not okay. They called my client's case. The client walks to the podium with me. I tell the judge, "Judge, my name is [HistoryMaker] Ivan Lemelle. I'm appearing as a student practitioner pursuant to Louisiana Supreme Court rule--," blah, blah, blah. The judge cuts me off and says, "Did you say student practitioner?" I said, "Yes, Judge." He said, "I don't know what that is. Are you a member of the bar?" I said, "No, Judge." And he says, "Well, you can't appear. You step outside of the counsel area, and I'll deal with your client--," no, "with, with this defendant and without you." I said, "But, Judge, I'm appearing, pursuant to the Louisiana rule--," blah, blah, blah. The judge said, "You didn't hear what I said? I'm going to hold you in contempt if you proceed with it." At that point, you know, I'm, I'm thinking, okay, here's the end of my career about to happen 'cause I'm just stuck there--frozen. And he must have sown--seen that I was not moving. In bust my supervising lawyer that moment, and kind of rescued me from being held in contempt. And he asked me afterwards--the supervising lawyer asked me, he said, "What were you going to do?" I said, "You know, I don't know. I was just standing there trying to represent my client, and trying to advise the judge of this rule, but, you know, it wasn't getting through," so that was scary. But, again, it, it--scary and exciting at the same time. And I guess you could say it was one, one of many moments where I guess I disagreed with the judge, but didn't lose my cool, so to speak, in, in, in being disagreeable to the judge. So, again, all this influenced me to go into litigation, as opposed to corporate law, and, and enjoyed it since. Story_ID: 619446 Speaker 1: So this is 1974. So you, you're twenty-three years old when you get your, your law degree [from Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974], you got it right. Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, 'cause my-- Speaker 1: --that's very young to-- Speaker 2: Twenty-four in June of, right after graduation. Speaker 1: Of that year. Speaker 2: So, young, but, but, again, I, I started first grade [at North Elementary School, Opelousas, Louisiana] when I was five years old. And back then, we didn't have kindergarten or even pre-K and, and the public school and the Catholic schools would allow you to start at five. But, yeah, I guess, and I was, I guess, kind of naive in a sense because I always thought that no matter how I appeared or whatever, young, old, whatever, that I'd be treated, you know, the same or respect that, you know, many times, I was challenged by, by people. I don't get challenged now, but, you know, who would card me and say, you know, "Show me an ID." They'll let me come into this, this bar or whatever. I'll never forget that my dad [Clifford Lemelle] gave me, when I was at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], my senior year at Xavier, my dad gave me a Playboy Bunny card for the Playboy Club which was in New Orleans [Louisiana] at one time. And I'd go to this club with my date, and another friend and his date. And they challenged all of us to show IDs back then. You, you--they were kind of liberal and let us go in. Again, we're talking about 1967. I was only, you know, sixteen back then and--not sixteen, I'm sorry, fifty-whatever--I was twenty, twenty, I was twenty years old. Speaker 1: Twenty, you graduated-- Speaker 2: And so, yeah, so they, they let us in, but after getting in, the waitress wanted to see our ID. I showed her the ID. Waitress wanted to see our card again--showed the card, the Playboy card. Okay. They bring the bill. Back then, you know, it wasn't that much. Well, I didn't realize that the card Dad gave me was not a credit on account card--it was a cash card. Well guess what? We didn't have the money to pay for the bill at the Playboy Club. And I remember they wanted us to do something afterwards--clean up or something, I forget what it was, but they were kidding us. And said, oh, y'all too young to do that, so they let us go. So, yeah, I guess, you know, our youthful appearance or whatever helped us out of that one. But young in the sense of age, but I don't think in terms of experience, we--I think law school forced you to experience a lot that you would not ordinarily experience 'cause you see people with problems in law school through the programs that I told you about in the summer and the clinic [New Orleans Legal Assistance Corporation, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Made you appreciate perhaps that there are people out there that need help, that you might have some ability to help them with. And getting that ability to help people who could not afford help was, to me, exciting. Story_ID: 619447 Speaker 1: After law school [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana], I, I had the opportunity to go and do either private practice work with a, a major law firm, in fact a law firm that was involved in the civil rights struggle. It was the successor law firm to A.P. Tureaud's law firm and Dutch Morial's [Ernest Morial] law firm. It was known back then, initially, as A.P. Tureaud firm, then Tureaud and Morial, and then the successive firm was Thierry and Gerdes [New Orleans, Louisiana]. And I, and I had an opportunity to go with them. In fact, I clerked with them for a little while. Speaker 2: This is right after law school? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, the summer, and, and I had this opportunity, but then I was also clerking at criminal district court [Orleans Parish Criminal District Court], at the same time I was clerking with the private law firm, Thierry and Gerdes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, tell me how, how you did, how you did both. Speaker 1: Yeah, and, and--it was easy. You know, you, you basically were working maybe perhaps twenty, thirty hours apiece with each. And, and so, that was, that was a heavy schedule, but I enjoyed doing it. But I decided to go into the DA's office, which kind of surprised a lot of people, including me. And the only reason I did it was because I had an opportunity as an assistant DA [district attorney] to get right into court. I didn't have to wait. I didn't have to carry somebody else's briefcase and files. I could go right into court and try cases. My first day as a lawyer, in fact, I tried a case as an assistant DA. I was sworn in as a lawyer on October 3, 1974, and on that very afternoon, sworn as an assistant DA, and had my first trial. Speaker 2: When did you take--how, how did you take the bar exam? When did you take that, and how was that for you (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bar exam was the summer of 1974. Speaker 2: Okay. And how was that for you? Speaker 1: And then, admitted in, in, admitted to practice law in October of '74 [1974]. Speaker 2: October, so it was a breeze for you then? Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: It was a breeze for you then. Speaker 1: Law school? I mean, the exam? Speaker 2: No, the--uh-huh. Speaker 1: I wouldn't say that. I was scared (laughter). We were all scared. Again, I was clerking down at criminal court, and also with the law firm. And I'll never forget, I was--I'd, I'd just gotten married as well and, in April of '74 [1974], and my mail was going to my, my in-laws' residence at the time. And 'cause my wife [Patricia Waddell Lemelle] and I just had an apartment, and so, the mail wasn't, you know, I, I didn't trust it going there, and I let it go to my in-laws. And I get a phone call from my father-in-law saying, "You got some letter from the Louisiana--well, an envelope from the Louisiana Bar Association [Louisiana State Bar Association]. What do you want me to do with it?" I said, "Open it." And he opened it and he, and he said, "Well, 'Dear Mr. Lemelle [HistoryMaker Ivan Lemelle], we are pleased to inform you--.'" I knew then, and that was, that was the notice, the notice for that came--I think back then, you got the notice in either August or September. And then, you get sworn in in October. But, yeah, I was--we were all worried. Again, one exam, again, determining your whole future practically. And, yeah, I, I passed it the first time out, and that was, that was interesting. It was a--what, a three day exam, I think it was and, and very tough. But, you know, the, the bar examination is something that came about in my opinion, when someone got this bright idea that we had too many lawyers. And so, with us having the exam to make, you know, kind of limit who became lawyers. At one time, all you had to do was really a--I said, all you have to do is tough. You have to apprentice for the lawyer; you didn't take an exam. I know some lawyers practicing today who didn't have to take a bar exam. But, you know, well, it was one of those things. And, you know, it has some benefits. Story_ID: 619448 Speaker 1: You told us earlier that you met your wife while you were at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, tell me the story of how you got together, and how you proposed and got married. Speaker 2: She swears it was all me, I swear that it was all her. Speaker 1: What is her name? Speaker 2: Patricia, Patricia Waddell, W-A-D-D-E-L-L [Patricia Waddell Lemelle]. She was one year behind me at Xavier. She was an education major, eventually became a public school teacher. And we were dating off and on at Xavier--more on than off. And I told her that it was in the, it was--we were on a date to, I think, Fitzgerald's [New Orleans, Louisiana], which is a seafood restaurant on Lake Pontchartrain. And we were on this date, and I'm in law school [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana] and I'm, I'm doing some work clerking while in law school my last year. She was, by that time, teaching in public school. She was a kindergarten teacher. And, you know, I said to her, I said, "You know, we're dating a long time, I'm about to finish. I don't know where I'm going to go eventually when I finish, but I don't want to lose you." And, you know, she kind of grinned, and I saw a tear, and she said, "Is, is that a proposal?" And I said, "Yeah." So I told her she was the one who asked the question; I didn't. But, yeah, we, we got engaged like that. Story_ID: 619449 Speaker 1: Right before we go into talking more about your career, we ended with you saying that you proposed to your wife [Patricia Waddell Lemelle]. When did you get married? Speaker 2: We got married April 28, 1973, April 28, 1973, and, like I said, I was clerking. She was a schoolteacher. We just, I think, bonded together during our days at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. And as a result of our marriage, we had three beautiful kids and, really, the credit for the education really was her 'cause she was the educator. I would mainly help the kids with their reading and writing courses, and she would primarily take care of everything else. Speaker 1: Tell me their names and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what they do today. Speaker 2: Christopher [Christopher Lemelle] is a medical doctor, pediatric anesthesiologist. He's a professor at Vanderbilt University med school [Vanderbilt University School of Medicine] in Nashville, Tennessee. And he also practices with a group of anesthesiologists in that area as well. And Marc [Marc Lemelle] is my next oldest child, my middle child. Marc is a, Marc is sort of like my prodigal child. He, he graduated in engineering from LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], worked with Halliburton engineering [Halliburton Company] for some years--after that, graduation in mechanical engineering. I get a call one day from him, and he says, "Dad, what do you think about me going into pharmacy school?" And I said, "Okay, engineer-pharmacist, you're going to invent some kind of machine to help manufacture drugs or what?" He said, "Nah, I think I'm interested in pharmacy school," so I didn't question him. And he became a pharmacist, and he's married--my only child that's married. Now he's married to a lovely bride, Marcia Williams [Marcia Williams Lemelle], and Marcia was a business major, a graduate of Xavier. They met while he was at Xavier in pharmacy school. Christopher, backtrack a bit, also went to Xavier. The whole family went to Xavier. Tricia [Tricia Lemelle], my daughter, is my youngest, is a medical school student. And she is now in her second half of her rotations, hospital rotations, after about, I think, what was it? Two years of med school the students then go into hospital rotations, which is sort of like a prelude to their what--internship/residency. I can't, I don't get it, I don't, I, I never get it right, but all of them into sciences. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you say, no grandkids yet? Speaker 2: No grandkids, no grandkids yet. Story_ID: 619450 Speaker 1: Tell me more about your clerkships. You clerked from '72 [1972] to '74 [1974] for Judge Robert Collins. Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me, tell me more about that. Speaker 2: Interesting experience, started out as his law clerk earning about, I think, twenty-five dollars a week. And that was part time, and that was five days a week, about twenty hours a week, so it didn't come out to much. And then, he told me and, and another individual who worked down there, told me that--well, look, you could work as a messenger. And this was when he was a judge in state court [Orleans Parish Criminal District Court], and the messenger for a judge was basically a glorified janitor, in my opinion, because you not only cleaned the chambers and organized the library, and some other things, but you actually cleaned up. And he said, you could do that, and be a law clerk. Okay. What does that pay? Fifty dollars a week. So, okay, I got a promotion, and did that work for a while, and learned a lot about what a judge does from watching him doing his work, interaction between him, lawyers, and litigants, and other people in the court system. And now, that was a, a really educational experience for me and enjoyed that immensely. Speaker 1: Were there any interesting cases while you were clerking for him? Speaker 2: That period was a period where we had to develop a--what we call a first appearance proceeding. It was a proceeding that was required to be held after a supreme court [Louisiana Supreme Court] case, I think the name of the case was Pugh v. Rainwater. And I recall that I had to research that case, and propose to him some procedures for when the court should conduct preliminary examinations, and how there are to be conducted and what procedures, and I recall doing research on that. That, to me, was, was probably the most fascinating part 'cause I'm, I'm here, helping to form the foundation for what this court is going to do for years in the future. So, that, that project, more so than case was probably the most interesting part of the work that I did there. But other than that, you know, I don't--none, nothing else stands out in that regards. He later on became a, the first African American federal judge in the South, in the Deep South. He was a President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] appointee. And, unfortunately, he had some problems down the line. I was a practicing lawyer by the time he became a federal judge, and then, ultimately, had these problems. And now, he had to resign from the federal bench because of those problems. Speaker 1: How did that make you feel, you know, at that time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What, what were your thoughts about that? Speaker 2: Mixed. One, I felt disappointed by him, but at the same time, he was still my friend, and also my frat brother. And I thought that he needed help, and I was not going to abandon him as a friend. In fact, some of, some of the judges from my court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana], including me, visited him during the period of time when he was incarcerated at a federal prison camp in Alabama [Federal Prison Camp, Montgomery, Montgomery, Alabama], and I learned a lot from that experience. To me, every experience is an opportunity to the extent that you not only learn something, but I think you could also be of service to other people, whether they are facing some of the problems, or trying to guide people from not doing those similar problems. And, again, I still consider him to have been one of the best mentors I had, but for that one disappointment, major as it was, but he was still my friend. Story_ID: 619451 Speaker 1: So, now, you move on in 1974 to, to do what? Oh, this is when you become the, I'm sorry, the assistant district attorney of New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: This is, the incident with Judge Collins [Robert Collins] with his, the--his federal problems was later. I was an assistant DA when he was still a state court judge [on the Orleans Parish Criminal District Court]. Speaker 1: Right, okay. That, that was in '72 [1972] to '74 [1974], and I got, you know, I understand that part, but as moving on, as far as your career. Speaker 2: Oh, my career. Speaker 1: We, we, yeah, we jumped a little ahead (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. After-- Speaker 1: --because I just wanted to-- Speaker 2: Sure-- Speaker 1: --make the relationship-- Speaker 2: --sure. Speaker 1: --with Judge Collins. But moving on in your career, after you leave in '74 [1974], is this when you become the assistant district attorney? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I am an assistant district attorney. Harry Connick [Harry Connick, Sr.] was the DA, district attorney. And I started as an assistant DA in a section, as we call it, section of court, and then, ultimately, I became a, one of the co-chiefs of what we call narcotics screening as a narcotic screener. You're getting all of the drug cases that police officers bring to the court. You're screening those cases to determine a number of issues. Ultimately, the issue to be decided by the screener is whether or not the, you're going to accept the charges or refuse the charges; in other words, prosecute the people, bring them to trial or whatever. And I did that for a while and then, ultimately, the district attorney wanted me to work in the career criminal bureau, which is a federally funded program to deal with habitual offenders. And I did that for a while, but I got a little taste of private practice during that period of time doing some work, kind of moonlighting with the firm I eventually to, Douglas, Nabonne and Wilkerson [New Orleans, Louisiana], as a private practitioner. And that was--I left the DA's office in January of '77 [1977] to become full time with that law firm. The law firm itself (background noise) was the predecessor law firm for--it was the successor law firm for Judge Collins' old law firm. It was originally Collins, Douglas and Elie [New Orleans, Louisiana], named after Judge Collins when he was a practicing lawyer. Nils Douglas and Lolis Elie, all of them were very active in the civil rights struggle with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]; they were the primary attorneys for CORE in civil rights cases in Louisiana. They were a part of the Supreme Court decisions of the U.S., they argued, briefed--amazing, amazing law firm. That law firm generated--we were the, the largest African American law firm back during that time in the State of Louisiana. And, ultimately, a lot of lawyers, future law- future lawyers, future judges came out of that firm. And my work with the firm was as a, as a civil litigator, primarily doing Title VII [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII], labor law cases representing people who claimed that they were discriminated aga- discriminated against in their jobs. It was also doing what I called Section 1983 defense work, defending public officials who are accused of some constitutional violation. I did that primarily in federal court. Speaker 1: And, so you, you stayed there until what year? Speaker 2: Stayed there until 1984. During that period of time, between 1977--January of '77 [1977] and 1984, in addition to the private practice that I just mentioned with the firm, I also did work with the City Attorney's Office from New Orleans [Louisiana] as an assistant city attorney under Moon Landrieu when he was the mayor of the City of New Orleans. I ultimately also did work with the Louisiana Department of Justice as an assistant attorney general, where I did a lot of the 1983 defense work I told you about earlier. Story_ID: 619452 Speaker 1: And then in 1984, had the opportunity to become a federal magistrate judge. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, tell me what a magistrate ju- judge does. You're, you're voted by-- Speaker 1: The judges of the court. Speaker 2: --the judges of the court. Speaker 1: Correct. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: At that time, there were thirteen active district judges of this federal court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana]. A district judge is an Article III judge appointed by the president, confirmed by the [U.S.] Senate. The magistrate judge is what we call an Article I judge, it's an article of the [U.S.] Constitution that created the--these judgeships. You don't have a lifetime appointment like the Article III judges, district judges, but you're appointed by the judges of the court. You go through a screening process that were met by the magistrate selection panel, a group of citizens and lawyers, community leaders who will screen applicants for the position. They then recommendate--make recommendations to the court. The court then interviews you and then they make a selection. And I was chosen in 1984 in that capacity. Magistrate judge primarily is responsible for both initial appearances in criminal cases: setting bonds, holding detention hearings in criminal cases, conducting preliminary examinations. They--we also, magistrate judges also are used in a lot of civil cases. For instance, all pretrial discovery motions are usually handled by a U.S. magistrate judge. Each court throughout the country, each federal court throughout the country can decide for itself what types of cases they wanted to refer to magistrate judges. This court traditionally has referred just about everything that the law allows them to refer to a magistrate judge. And we conduct a lot of settlement conferences on civil cases for the district judges, and that was primarily what I did for approximately, almost thirteen years. Speaker 2: Well, let's, let's step out, 'cause you, you talked about a couple of different things. It's, the City Attorney's Office [of New Orleans, Louisiana], what do they do? Speaker 1: As a city attorney, assistant city attorney, I was assigned to the traffic/municipal courts [New Orleans Traffic Court and New Orleans Municipal Court]. And I was prosecuting people for traffic violations, and violations of petty crimes, misdemeanors, and that was part-time work, and again, assigned to local city court. Story_ID: 619453 Speaker 1: And then as the magistrate, you said you applied. Do you apply--I mean, like fill out an application to say, I want to be a judge? Speaker 2: The application is about an inch thick, yes. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Tell me what, what made you decide that you wanted to be a judge now? Speaker 2: I used to joke with my senior partner, Nils Douglas, with the law firm that I was working with at the time I applied. And I used to joke with him, telling him that he kicked me out of the law firm [Douglas, Nabonne and Wilkerson, New Orleans, Louisiana]. He inspired me to apply. He, he told me, "Look, you have a good chance at getting this. You ought to apply." I said, "Nils, what makes you think I have a good chance with this job?" Never had a black U.S. magistrate judge (unclear)--I don't know half the judges [on the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana]. I knew one half, but didn't know the other half. And I was worried--well, since I didn't know the other half of the judges who I had never appeared before, that they said, well, who is this kid? And I was young. I was thirty-four years old back then. And, but I did know half of them, of the judges. I had several cases in front of them. And Nils said, "I think you ought to apply." And, you know, in a way, I had mixed feelings. I was enjoying the private practice and I said no, I, I told him no at the time. I said, "No, I'm not going to apply." I get a phone call from a state court judge. And Nils, a, a part-time state court judge himself at the time--Nils Douglas. And I get a phone call from another state court judge, and this state court judge, you know, swears out of the blue he's calling me, even though I thought Nils got in the call, but he said no. He said, "Ivan [HistoryMaker Ivan Lemelle], look, we need somebody in that position, think about it, great opportunity. You, you have a chance to get involved in the federal court system." I said, "Well, Judge Collins [Robert Collins] is already there as a federal judge." And he said, "No, we, we need somebody as a magistrate judge." And so, I said, okay, to satisfy them, but also to satisfy myself, 'cause I was curious about the position, and I'd served as a, what we call a state ad hoc judge-- Speaker 1: What is that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for the local courts. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You're appointed temporarily to sit as a state court judge in the absence of the judge who's in that regular position because that judge is not available--illness, whatever. And so, I did that--the state court level, in First City Court [New Orleans First City Court], traffic/municipal court [New Orleans Traffic Court and New Orleans Municipal Court]. I'm probably missing other state court--but I did some state court judgeship work. I never did do federal judgeship work. So, and I enjoyed it, and, and talked to my wife [Patricia Waddell Lemelle] about it, and decided to apply, and the rest is history. Story_ID: 619454 Speaker 1: But tell me when you--the first time you sat on the bench as a, a judge, what was that feeling like? I mean, how did you feel? Speaker 2: Yeah, as a state court judge, my first case as a state court judge was in municipal court [New Orleans Municipal Court]. And, really, that particular case, you know, it wasn't a trial. The, the defendant in that case eventually pled guilty. My first trial as a judge, again, was in state court, but was in First City Court [New Orleans First City Court]. It was a civil case. And, and compared to the municipal court case where the person pled guilty, I now had to really decide the case; rule in favor of the plaintiff or the defendant after a trial. And to be honest with you, it was fright- it was not frightening, but it was difficult, difficult because you--maybe I'm, I'm being somewhere exaggerative in, in saying that I felt as if I was holding the balance of somebody's future in my hand, of both parties in my hands. But it was at First City Court. It was a small claim, but it was important to the litigants still. And here I am, I had to choose who's who; who's going to win. So, that was difficult and, but then, when I did it again, I did it in traffic court, and had trials there, and I felt a little bit more comfortable in doing it. I thought that as long as you give each side an opportunity to be heard, I think people appreciate that. There's always going to be somebody's who going to go away disappointed in, in a trial. But, again, I--it was interesting, exciting kind of work. The most difficult part about being a judge, period, is when you have to sentence somebody. I never had to sentence anyone as a state court ad hoc judge. Even in a case where the guy pled guilty, that was really just fine that, that was all that was applicable back then. It was a minor offense. But when I got to be a magistrate judge here in federal court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana], you then were sentencing people to real jail time where it, it was called for in, in the given case. And that was difficult because you, you had the person's family there who you, who you're about to sentence their, their loved one. And, you know, you're trying to reach a balance, as I call it, between rehabilitation and punishment, jail time, fine, probation, whatever combination--very, the most difficult part of the job. And then, when I became a district judge, the people before me were then facing even longer periods of time in jail than those who appeared before as a magistrate. So, magistrate judge, in the criminal side, when it came to sentencing someone as a magistrate judge, it was only for people who were accused of petty offenses and misdemeanors, which were minor compared to felonies. As a district judge, I'm handling mostly felony offenders for sentencing. That was difficult. Story_ID: 619455 Speaker 1: I'll never forget my first life sentence I ever pronounced as a federal judge. Speaker 2: Before you tell me about that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --tell me about the process to become a district judge. Speaker 1: Yeah. For me, I thought I had an advantage coming from the federal judiciary; from magistrate to district. And I'll never forget, I got a phone call again, Nils, Nils Douglas. He's saying to me, "Well, look, there's an opening in federal district court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana], are you going to apply?" I said, "Well, Nils, I never thought about it." And, again, you know, it, it's like, I'm getting other people to open my eyes. I, I guess, I'm just perhaps sometimes too focused on what I'm doing. Speaker 2: Well, let me ask you this. The magistrate judges are--they have terms, right? Speaker 1: Correct, eight year term. Speaker 2: Eight year term. Was your term (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You come up for reappointment. Speaker 2: Oh, so, after the eight years, you can be reappointed again? Speaker 1: Yes, you can be reappointed again by another vote of the judges. And I was in my second term when, you know, I applied toward the federal district judgeship. And really, that process is a little bit different because there, for a federal district judgeship, you, you're being vetted by the U.S. senators. Back then, our two U.S. senators were Senator J. Bennett Johnston and Senator John Breaux. And, you know, they, you know, they received letters of support from people, you know, suggesting my name for the vacancy and, and others. And the first time that I was up for the federal judgeship, I didn't get it. It went to a law partner of mine, a former law partner of mine with the old law firm, Douglas, Nabonne and Wilkerson [New Orleans, Louisiana], Okla Jones--Okla Jones II. Okla, Okla was a brilliant lawyer, had been out for a little bit longer than I was, former city attorney. And he was a state court judge, and so with District Court in Orleans Parish [Orleans Parish Civil District Court] when he got it. And Okla, unfortunately, died thirteen months after getting the federal judgeship. And, you know, I'm--we're all in shock over his death. I mean, he was brilliant. And I get a phone call saying, "Well, you want to apply again or what?" And again, I wasn't thinking about it, and maybe I'm slow. I, I--and, again, I'm coming on the heels of, you know, one of my best friends who had just died. And, you know, that, that was difficult. So, I said okay, give it another shot, you know. I'm already a magistrate judge. I'm enjoying the work. If I don't get it, fine, I, I still got a job. And this time around, it all came into place. And by the time I got it, J. Bennett Johnston, who was one of my big supporters originally, was moving on. And Senator Landrieu [Mary Landrieu] was elected, so, you know, she wanted to get to know more about me 'cause it was--she wasn't going to rubber stamp what her predecessor did. She wanted to find out--well, should I endorse you, too? And then, luckily, you know, she did, and one, one of my best supporters, and she's still a sitting U.S. senator. John Breaux has moved on. Story_ID: 619456 Speaker 1: But that's, that's the process. The process formally really is--for the district judgeships historically you get vetted by the U.S. senators. They will then make recommendations to the White House, the president, White House counsel, the attorney general of the United States. They'll vet you if they deem you, you know, qualified in their opinion. And you go to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], you're interviewed by bunch of lawyers, a lot of them younger than you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's--I want you to tell, tell, tell me about that process because that, that had to be an experience. Speaker 1: It, it was. Really, it's like what, what my good friend and classmate from law school [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana], who's also a federal judge, Carl Stewart [Carl E. Stewart], you know said, he described the process as a living autopsy. And what he meant by that was you're, you're being interviewed by a bunch of people that you don't even know. And, you know, you may misspeak and say something, maybe I'm doing something here as well, misspeaking, but in that whole process, in going through it, there's no date when a decision has to be made. In other words, there's no election date, like when you're running for judicial office or what- elected. You don't know who's cutting up on you, who's saying good things about you, who's saying bad things about you. You don't know. You don't have a candidate really you're running against. Oh, yeah, there's other people you know who are interested. But at this stage, once the U.S. senators are recommending you, and you go into the vetting adjustors, White House counsel, et cetera, and eventually, U.S. Senate, if you're lucky enough to be nominated in getting a Senate confirmation hearing, you really don't know what's going behind the scenes. You're not in control of it at all. You have very little input. You're instructed: don't overreact to rumors, and every one of us, you'd always get a rumor about, well, you know, did you address this issue, that issue, you know? An issue I'm certain came up in mine, although no one really told me there was going to be a problem, I'm certain was my former mentor, Judge Collins [Robert Collins]. Speaker 2: So that was something that came up during-- Speaker 1: It didn't come up, but I felt as if, you know, that, you know, that somebody may question me about it, you know, as to, you know, well, you all didn't see this happening or something like that and, you know, and no, we didn't. But, again, you never know because you don't know what people are saying behind the scenes about you and your associations. And, and you don't know how to react. Do you bring it up? Do you initiate it? Do you, you know, offer explanations or what? Is that helpful or is it detrimental? So, again, living autopsy is a good word for it. Story_ID: 619457 Speaker 1: Continue telling me about your confirmation. Speaker 2: The living autopsy? Speaker 1: Yes (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. It, it, it didn't end with the actual nomination. Once I got word that the president, ju- President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was the president in office when I was nominated, he nominated me. I got word that he nominated me and I said, okay, this is downhill from here, right? You got the nomination. You just need Senate hearing and a confirmation by the [U.S.] Senate. Well, lo and behold, a colleague of mine--well, she was Judge Lemmon [Mary Ann Vial Lemmon]. She was up for Senate confirmation, and I was just nominated. She was getting her hearing before the Senate, before me, and the chief judge of the court appeared at her confirmation hearing before the Senate, and told them that she's well qualified. She'd be a great federal judge, but we really don't need her. Our docket, our caseload in his opinion, it didn't justify another judge, even though there was a vacancy. The Senate went on ahead and confirmed, but the chairman of the Senate judiciary committee [U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary] said at the time, and I could understand why--he said the next nominee coming from that court, my court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana], would have a problem getting confirmed--or getting a hearing for confirmation if the chief judge of the court still felt that way, or the court still felt that way. Well, guess who is the next nominee coming up? Moi. And it took about, almost a year, I think, for me after nomination to get a confirmation hearing. And the only thing that changed his mind--the chairman of the Senate judiciary committee back then, was the judges in my court said that, look, Judge Lemelle [HistoryMaker Ivan Lemelle] is already here as a magistrate judge, you know, he's going to hit the floor running. Let's bring him onboard and, and they said that another vacancy that we had at the time--there was two vacancies. I was up for one. Nobody is up for the other one yet. And they were going to transfer that vacancy to Baton Rouge, middle district of Baton Rouge [U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Louisiana]. So, a combination of factors then, then got me that confirmation hearing. And after all that, that wait, the confirmation hearing lasted maybe--it wasn't even an hour in my estimation. There was four of us, four judicial nomina- nominees that were appearing for the hearing before the Senate. It was myself, a judge from Los Angeles, California and two nominees from Michigan--Detroit, Michigan, I think. And like I said, not even an hour, and that went well. About, I, I say, it was just a week later, it might have been longer or short. I get a call from the senior U.S. senator from Louisiana, then John Breaux. And he says, "Ivan, the Senate has voted by unanimous consent, your nomination--confirmed you, and now, it's just a matter of the president signing it." I was having coffee at a local restaurant when I got the call. And they had trouble reaching me initially. They called my mother [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle] first in Opelousas [Louisiana], don't know how that happened, then they called me, and I got the word, so that process was interesting. And, again, educational, and I, you know, it, it gave me another appreciation for the position, and what it means 'cause it, it wasn't easy. Speaker 1: And, and this was in 1998? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], correct, when I was confirmed and sworn in. Story_ID: 619458 Speaker 1: So, what happens next? Speaker 2: What happens next? Judge Heebe [Frederick Heebe] who--these chambers that we're in right now [at the Hale Boggs Federal Building - Courthouse, New Orleans, Louisiana], he was the former chief judge of the court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana], not the one who made the opposition to this other judge. But Judge Heebe was on senior status, which is a form of semiretirement; federal judges after a certain number of years and reaching a certain age, can take what's called senior status, going from active to senior. Senior status judges can basically assist the court and do a vital role in assisting the court in cases. They have reduced docket, and depending upon their caseload, they don't always need the regular size courtroom. Well, this happens to be the chief judge's chambers and courtroom. And the current chief judge didn't want it. He said Judge Heebe has offered that I--you know, to me. I accepted. I had a chance to, to get Judge Collins' [Robert Collins] old, old chambers and courtroom, but opted not to, and, mainly because Judge Heebe called me, personally called me, and congratulated me. He was chief judge when I became a magistrate judge, and then for him to call me and say, "Well, look, I'm going to move out of my chambers, and give it to you." I couldn't tell him no, and that's how I'm here. Story_ID: 619459 Speaker 1: It's been an interesting ride, had some bumps in the road, but luckily, less bumps than bumps. Speaker 2: Well, let's talk about your first case-- Speaker 1: Sure (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that you tried as a federal-- Speaker 1: As a district judge? Speaker 2: --district judge, because now you're doing--it's, it's felony cases, right? Speaker 1: I'm doing--well, here in our court, Eastern District of Louisiana, each federal court in the country is designated as a district. We're the Eastern District of Louisiana, U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana. Our jurisdiction is a thirteen parish county area, including Orleans Parish [Louisiana], Jefferson [Jefferson Parish, Louisiana], and others. And, 10 percent of my docket, approximately 10 percent of my docket, my caseload, is criminal. It's much less than what people think, 'cause when they think sometimes federal court, they think, oh, big drug cases. And we do have big drug cases and big criminal cases, but here in this district, it's only about 10, 15 percent of my docket. Most of my cases, most of my docket caseload consists of civil cases; people suing for damages, money relief, you name it. And my first case as a district judge, to be honest with you, I don't remember what it was. I could tell you my first life sentence I gave to somebody for district judge. I can tell you, maybe my, you know, some cases that people say are most significant, but as a cri- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Well let's do-- Speaker 1: --as a, the life sentence material? The life sentence case, difficult, but made easy if I could use that expression, which seems to be a bit of a, kind of a-- Speaker 2: What type of a-- Speaker 1: --insult. Speaker 2: --case was it? Give me some background. Speaker 1: It was a drug case, it was a drug case that a fellow was found guilty after trial of conspiracy and distribution, cocaine, heroin, some other drugs. And, and there were some, what we call gun counts with it, too, I believe, and some, I think there was some violence associated, too. I, I may be misstating it to some extent, but there was, there was a lot more than just drug dealing. And he was facing a life sentence, not a mandatory life sentence. I had discretion to do less than life. And his mother came for sentencing. And I always allow a member of the family, of the defendant, as well as the victim, if the victim, a victim's family, they had to say something prior to sentencing. And the mother basically said, and I gave her an opportunity to speak, that she'd rather see him live serving a life sentence than dead on the streets; something to that effect. And I said, "Ma'am, you've, you've just eased my load a bit," but still, it's going to be difficult for me because I was really considering any number of possible sentences, including life to something even lesser, any other life sentence, in part because of what she said. And that's unusual. You don't see a mother's love go that far. I call that tough love. I understand the individual had obtained his GED [General Educational Development] while in prison. Apparently is doing well, had the usual kind of altercations, I think, prisoners have in prison--fights, whatever. Disciplinary proceedings, and I don't normally keep up with defendants after I sentence them, particularly a long term sentence. Normally, we keep up with prisoners when they get out of jail, and on what we call supervisory release, a period of time after they serve their prison part of the sentence. But they--we're trying to make certain, readjust back into society. But in the context of someone on a life sentence, I guess that was more interesting to me because, I guess, because of the mother, and what she said. Story_ID: 619460 Speaker 1: A number of factors go into sentencing someone, and we have sentencing guidelines that seek to assist us in that regards, and they help with it to some extent. We, you know, we--I guess in the federal court system, more so than in the state court system because of the resources that the feds have. The prisons, by and large, have a bit more to offer in terms of rehabilitation than the state courts, which, you know, like the state prisons, state courts have not funded as well in, in most instance--at least here in Louisiana for a number of reasons. But, yeah, that's the most difficult part of the job. On the civil side of it, it's still difficult, particularly if a judge tried a case where you're the one making the findings of fact, conclusions of law; where you're still choosing who wins, who loses. I personally prefer having jury trials. They're exciting. It gives me an opportunity to meet people that are not lawyers (laughter) and, and talk to them in, in our screening of who's going to be on the jury, and not voir dires, what we call it, V-O-I D-I-R-E [sic.]. It means to tell the truth basically. And, in fact, I just had one that, when you were setting up, that eventually settled. The jury doesn't know that, 'cause I discharged them before finding out later on after talking with the lawyers and the clients that it settled. I enjoy civil cases much more than I do criminal cases, but it's my job and I do it. And, and, you know, it, it's one that I would think that if I ever did anything wrong in a civil or a criminal case that I would learn from that experience, and I have. Story_ID: 619461 Speaker 1: I've been reversed, knock on wood, a few times by the appellate courts. Some reversals I agree with, some I disagree with, but I respect (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you remember what the case was about? Speaker 1: --I respect their decision. Speaker 2: Do you remember-- Speaker 1: I respect their decision. Speaker 2: Do you remember what the case was about? Speaker 1: The ones where I reversed on? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Ah, not really. There are some that I remember that, that I didn't necessarily agree with because sometimes I feel as if--and they'll tell you on the circuit court level. They're looking at what's called a cold record. They don't see the witnesses like we do. They don't see the actions in court like we do. One of the ways on judging credibility is watching a person's demeanor as they testify, how they testify, and not just what they say, but how they testify; their actions in court, their, the tenor of their voice, the reflection, inflection, a number of factors. And the circuit judges, not their fault, they get a cold record. They don't see what we see. They'll tell you that immediately and, and their, their decisions are based upon whether or not we made a reversible error of law. Sometimes, but rarely, they reverse you on factual findings, or a jurist's finding, and saying the juror had no basis for that verdict or no, you know, no reasonable person should have reached that verdict; number of issues. And I think that when they get a case from the trial court on the circuit court, they try to keep that in mind, that they're getting a cold record, as they put it. When I sat on the fifth circuit court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit] by designation, federal district judges can, upon invitation from the circuit court of appeals, sit on certain, at certain times, on appeals where there's a need, where, where one of the circuit judges on a, on a three judge panel is--on the circuit level when they're hearing appeals, usually by three judge panels, three judges on one panel hearing a case. And so, on two occasions I sat on the fifth circuit court of appeals, different times, different set of cases, and it's very interesting to see what they go through. And it's very refreshing to see and hear them acknowledge, both in conferences and deciding the case on appeal, after we hear all the arguments, as well as in the public seminar, say that they believe the most important judicial position in the country is a district judgeship. And I think they respect that, and I think they--where they can give us the benefit of a doubt, they do. And at the same time, we'll not always agree on the result, but we, we, and at the end of the day, we respect each other's decisions. Story_ID: 619462 Speaker 1: What was, I guess, the most celebrated, or if there's more than one, what do you remember? Which one do you remember? Speaker 2: In terms of cases in general? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Oh, I can't comment upon pending cases, other than saying that the more challenging cases that I have pending now, because of the complexity of the issues, fine lawyers in all of them. There's a case that I have involving the housing developments, public housing developments after Hurricane Katrina. A decades old desegregation case out of one of our local parishes within our jurisdiction [Moore v. Tangipahoa Parish School Board] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was forty-five years and you just signed-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that case-- Speaker 1: --that case-- Speaker 2: --started with a judge [Alvin Benjamin Rubin] in the '60s [1960s]. And several judges succeeded that--I think I'm the fourth or fifth federal judge on the case. Yeah, Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] said desegregation with all deliberate speed. And it's taken plus forty some odd years to attain that, that issue, that, and, but, but to put it in perspective, there was a consent decree issued early on, relatively early on in the case. The problem, though, was that it, it kind of went into what I call a dormant stage. And I've said this on public record--I'm not speaking out of school. And it was revived by certain things that occurred, and it just happened to revive when I got it. And we--the, the work, great work of all the lawyers on both sides, as well as a great compliance officer who helps the court in, in enforcing the desegregation orders of the court and others, people of the school board, people in the community I think all came together to try to work on some things. There are still some disagreements. There are still some things pending. Again, I, I prefer not to comment further other than that. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, this, this county was which county? Speaker 2: St. Tammany Parish--I'm sorry, St.--Tangipahoa Parish [Louisiana]. Tangipahoa Parish is across, it's what we call the Northshore side of Lake Pontchartrain. And it's really even northern from the shores, not really, it's, it's near the shore, but it's, it's a thriving community. At one time rural, but more progressive now, it's a site of a university that's there in Hammond, Louisiana, and several public schools there and very interesting community. They, they're well known for their, their horse racing, horse ranches, strawberries, and other things. Story_ID: 619463 Speaker 1: I know you have a case now that you probably cannot talk about, the Jefferson case [United States v. Jefferson, 2009]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that case is pending. It's going to trial in October, I believe. And, yeah, that, that's an interesting case in- involving some members and, and friends of the former congressman for our area [HistoryMaker William Jefferson]. And, yeah, I, I couldn't comment on that. Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine. Well, are there any other cases that you'd like to talk about? What, what was a case that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you know, the-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: You know, people, people ask me that a lot, and my wife [Patricia Waddell Lemelle] asks me a lot, too, she says, "What's some of the more interesting things that you have around there?" Not just me, but other judges. I guess in terms of publicity, I, I think that the press picks up on what I would call our post-Katrina related cases, the housing cases, one that I told you about [Moore v. Tangipahoa Parish School Board]. The voting rights case that I had after--a series of cases that I had after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] where-- Speaker 1: Voting rights? Speaker 2: --citizens were filing a lawsuit over when to conduct, and how to conduct elections after Katrina, 'cause so many of our citizens had evacuated--well, located all over the United States. So, lawsuits were brought under the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] to basically change the way we vote after Katrina for people who were mostly affected, the evacuees who haven't returned yet to the city. We had major elections coming up, the mayor's election, and some other things. So, that was a major case, and that was three sets of cases, three sets of plaintiffs, and making similar allegations. And we had hearings, proceedings on that. It eventually turned out that in reaction, at least I'm told, the reaction to some rulings that I made, the state changed its voting procedures to help accommodate the evacuees. They didn't do everything that the plaintiffs wanted them to do. One of the things they didn't do, and probably the, the one more major thing that the state did not do was to set up voting machines outside the state for local elections for reasons that I gave in an opinion, found that to be problematic, and not required by the [U.S.] Constitution. It would not be valid through the Voting Rights Act, to not do that. But, but the state made other concessions as a result of some rulings that I made, that made it easier still for, not easier, but more reasonable for evacuees to vote. And I think as a result of publicity on the case, there was a tremendous effort by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League [National Urban League], national leaders, you name it, to immobilize the evacuees to vote, either voting under the new procedures, by mail, absentee ballot, as well as coming, actually busing people from Houston [Texas], Atlanta [Georgia], you name it, to New Orleans [Louisiana] to vote here. And, you know, again, I, I think that everyone worked really hard and well to get that done. And, and I'm, I was told that the percentage of voters in that mayor's election was comparable to what it was in terms of turnout prior to the election. So, I, you know, that, that--and it wasn't really through anything I did. I, I think it was simply, you know, I guess, the, the publicity surrounded it. So, people think that was an important case. It was, in the sense that the system worked, in my opinion, and we had a fairly good election, in terms of turnout. The, the Katrina cases for this court [U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana] had been significant. It was never, in the history of this court did we have to deal with the type of misery that people were forced to endure, being evacuated from their homes. You saw the publicity of what was going on at the convention center [New Orleans Convention Center; New Orleans Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, New Orleans, Louisiana]. You saw the misery of the Superdome [Louisiana Superdome; Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana]. You saw the plight, the worst conditions that someone could--you'd never imagine living under. And, and we also had, and I can't comment on it, but we had some allegations and facts and convictions, some police are guilty--by police officers for criminal wrongdoing, serious criminal wrongdoings. I've got one now pending and, again, I can't comment upon it. Story_ID: 619464 Speaker 1: But personally, tell me about you personally during Katrina. Speaker 2: Interesting. When Katrina was in the Gulf of Mexico, Hurricane Katrina was in the Gulf of Mexico, and everybody was saying, oh, it's going to veer off to go to Florida or the Mississippi Gulf Coast, and not really affect us that much. My wife [Patricia Waddell Lemelle] and I discussed it. And I was set to go to California for a judicial seminar that I was invited to attend, and she wasn't coming with me. She, you know--my wife does not like to fly long distances. And, and she stayed behind, and we both agreed, after some convincing that as this thing approached the Gulf Coast, that they would evacuate, particularly if it was a Category 3 or above. My wife didn't want to evacuate. We lived in New Orleans East [Eastern New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] in, in a community, a subdivision called Lake Willow. Raising the kids [Christopher Lemelle, Marc Lemelle and Tricia Lemelle] there practically, it's on a private lake and fish on the dock, and it was just great, fantastic. And Lake Willow, as a result of that hurricane, got six feet of water in it. I had a two story house, but still had major damage. But my wife decided, agreed with me to evacuate prior to it hitting the Gulf Coast--well before. So, she evacuated to my mother [Cecilia Comeaux Lemelle]--my parents' home in Opelousas [Louisiana]. And my mo- my dad [Clifford Lemelle] had died already in 1994, my mother was still there. So, they evacuated there. I'm in California. I--following the storm, talking to her, and the storm passes. We hear word: New Orleans [Louisiana] is, is okay. A few hours later, we start hearing word: a levee breached. I think they said the London Avenue Canal levee, which is an area away from New Orleans East. I said, okay, sorry for 'em, but thank the lord, looks like New Orleans East, no levee breaches. Couple more hours passed. We're getting water in New Orleans East from levee breaches and overtopping. Eventually, neighbors of ours who were there, eventually communicated with my wife and I: we all got flooded. Man, I eventually rejoined them in Opelousas, flying back from California, could not fly into New Orleans, could not fly into Baton Rouge [Louisiana]; had to fly to Houston [Texas], rent a car, and drive from Houston to Opelousas to team up with my family. And, luckily, we were all safe. And, luckily, I had sufficient insurance to, you know, deal with my damages. But, but the physical damages--nothing to still do with the emotional damages. We still have the home in New Orleans East, and we enjoy going there. We don't enjoy leaving it. We always feel guilt when we leave it. We're maintaining it, you know, keeping it up, but we have not renovated it completely yet and move back in yet. We're thinking about it. At the same time, one of my kids might have an interest in buying it, so I'm holding on to it for them. We live right now across the river, across the Mississippi River in an area of New Orleans called Algiers, another subdivision. And very quiet community, even a shorter commute from there to here than it was in New Orleans East, to my job [at the Hale Boggs Federal Building - Courthouse, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Story_ID: 619465 Speaker 1: I think we all still have some effects. It's difficult for me even now to talk about it. And I've talked about it quite a number of times, go out to Seattle, Washington, Washington, D.C., you know, people want to hear about Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]. What are we doing and what are the aftereffects? At, at, at judges meetings, lawyers meetings, community forums, you name it that I've been to. And it's so difficult. Speaker 2: When, when you went back to that home for the first time, what did you, what was your-- Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: --overwhelming feeling? Speaker 1: Shock. Never, you know, my most traumatic moment in my life, I think, bad moment, was the death of my dad [Clifford Lemelle] in '94 [1994]. This is definitely the second worst traumatic event in my life. And I purposely went without my wife [Patricia Waddell Lemelle]. I wanted to take pictures and other things. And, luckily, our marshal service--because then, there was a curfew and, and (unclear) sort of a blockade. You just couldn't come into New Orleans [Louisiana] then. And when we got word after about two weeks that the flooding had ended, and we can go to our homes to check them out, I went with one of my marshals and one of my assistants, and--to my home. And we literally had to break into my house 'cause the locks were corroded and couldn't work, and broke in, and things everywhere. The pictures would describe it--I, I couldn't--and showed my wife the pictures. And for her, it was very, very disturbing--first, grief, then anger--grief then anger. Speaker 2: And the anger was towards, why didn't the, the city do something about the levees? Or what, what was the anger about? Speaker 1: The anger came much later. It was, in part, related to the maintenance of the levees, but it was, for me, it was short term anger. And, and I was able to deal with it, I think, impartially. For my wife, though, it's, it's lingering. This is, after all, her home city. She was born and raised here, and she survived Hurricane Betsy, where they also had flooding. And for her, it was--it's still more difficult. Story_ID: 619466 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about any civic or social organizations or foundations that you're affiliated with. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's a long list. I'll, I'll guess I'll touch on some of the ones that maybe are more current and, and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --perhaps of interest to your viewers. The one that I'm really glad to be a part of is--it's called Just the Beginning Foundation, JTBF. It was founded in Chicago, Illinois through the inspiration of Judge Ann Claire Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Claire Williams], who's a circuit, federal circuit judge in Chicago. And it's a non-profit organization that honors diversity in the federal judiciary. That's basically African Americans, Hispanic, women; minorities in the federal judiciary. And I've been a member of that since its founding and--as a magistrate judge and then as a district judge [on the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana], and we do quite a bit. And through Ann's leadership, quite a bit of work with high school students, mentoring, mock trials, assistance in various aspects of counseling, as well as with law students, as well as amongst ourselves, educational programs. We have a convention coming up in September in Atlanta [Georgia], and we're looking forward to that. Judge Horace Ward is one of the cohosts for that event. And Judge Ward is, as I say, a legend for everyone, very active in the civil rights struggle, from Atlanta, federal judge, one of the first African American federal judges, I think, in Atlanta, might have been the first. So that's coming up. And we're looking forward to working with some schools there--high school, middle school, law schools, and educational workshops as well for the judges. Story_ID: 619467 Speaker 1: I enjoy my work with the, what we call R- RNO. RNO, Inc. is a parent organization, nonprofit that operates a series of programs to benefit poor children, disadvantaged or at risk kids in the New Orleans [Louisiana] area. We operate a restaurant called Cafe Reconcile [New Orleans, Louisiana], which trains youngs- young, young people, at risk, poor, disadvantaged into the restaurant business, and learning business in general as well as construction, which is a separate program that it also operates to help train children and kids. I say, children--these are young adults, in different forms of business, including construction, restaurant management, you name it. And I love that work as a board member, and now, on the advisory board for it over--got up, and associated with them, I think, over ten years. Excellent program, recognized nationally for its work in the community. Story_ID: 619468 Speaker 1: The other one that I'm really proud of, too, is legal related with our, what we call the Loyola Law School Thomas More inn of court [Thomas More Loyola Law School American Inn of Court]. Inns of court were organized really in England, and it dealt with promoting and mentoring professionals in, in law, particularly on being respectful and professional in our daily affairs and conduct. And we have a great chapter of that program here at, in New Orleans [Louisiana]. As a former president of the local chapter here. I also enjoyed the work that I've done with other organizations, whether it's with the school system [Orleans Parish School Board], where we're mentoring middle and high school students in what we call the world--World of Work Academy, and that was a summer program. We would bring high school students here to chambers [at the Hale Boggs Federal Building - Courthouse, New Orleans, Louisiana]. And I got other colleagues to participate in it where they would let middle and high school students in effect shadow us in what we do. I'll never forget one of our first sets of students that we, we mentored--that my chambers mentored. We got to the point, I guess, you get so close to kids where you see the plight that they're going through, and you wonder how did they, how they're making it. The kids that we help, for example, that we've mentored over the years--public schools went into a, a (air quotes) uniform, clothed uniform for its middle schools and high schools. A lot of kids couldn't afford those uniforms and, you know, they didn't tell us about it. We just found out about it just in conversation with them. And we bring them and buy them some uniforms, and, you know, they, they--you would think that we bought them the world in doing that. And I, I don't want to get into a situation where, you know, I'm encouraging charity for charity's sake, which is good, but you know, I think that seeing how they react to it, and how well they've done later, a minor aspect of contribution from us, but just to show them that people care about them. I think it's important and that program did that. Story_ID: 619469 Speaker 1: We have other bar groups that do similar things. I'm on the board for the Federal Bar Association and we do mock trials, we do things to promote respect for the law within the community, young lawyers we mentor. We have them come to chambers [at the Hale Boggs Federal Building - Courthouse, New Orleans, Louisiana] for lunch, and lunch at the court programs, again, mentoring young lawyers, catch them while they're young to, you know, say, hey, look, you don't have to be a pit bull, pit bull, to be an effective lawyer, be respectful of your colleagues. If there's one criticism of my profession which I think the public has, and it has a right to make that opinion, is that we tend to be viewed--people in the law as a, as, I guess, I won't use the word, disrespectful, but people think that the best lawyer to get is one who's going to cut the other side off at the knees. And there's some lawyers who feel that way; that that's what they need to do. I never thought that as a practicing lawyer, and I lectured against that as a judge to young lawyers and old lawyers, who I think are in, falling into that mode 'cause I see too often what happens. A person who leads that kind of life isn't a happy person, and if there's one thing that I think that I'd like to do with our profession is say to people, you can enjoy this profession without being mean to people. Again, that's me. People disagree with me. They say that nothing good come from doing good. Every, you know, good deed, they say, you know, you're punished for it, but, hey, I'm not going to give up. Story_ID: 619470 Speaker 1: Because you, you work with, with youth, and this is going to be for generations to come. If you had to send a message to the future generations, what would you say? Speaker 2: No matter how difficult it, it's going to be in life, there's always hope. Even when it's hopeless, there's always hope. Turn to somebody, something that you'll find hope, there's hope everywhere. You just got to look for it; it's not going to come to you all the time. And that could be from within family. It could be from without family. People are surprised just how accessible, how accessible some people are in, what they would call I guess important positions like mine. And I don't claim to be a miracle worker, and have the answers, or can inspire hope every time you contact me, but if I give you access, you're going to get access if you ask for it. I'll reach out to the extent that I can reach out. So, the message is, reach out for that hope, even when it's hopeless, reach out for it. Story_ID: 619471 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there something that you would change? Speaker 2: Oh, wow, you hit me with that one. What would I change? Speaker 1: If anything? Speaker 2: I think I would want to have the endurance of long patience. I think I, I have, I'm a patient person, but I think it's difficult for me sometimes, even though I, I do it to restrain myself when I see wrongdoing. I tell law students, and I tell young people, middle, high school students that the law does not always lead to a fair result. And that's one of the things I wish I could do as a judge, but I'm restrained. I can't be a policy maker. I can't enact laws. I can interpret, I can administer, enforce laws in my rulings, but I can't, I can't require certain laws to lead to fair results. A good example of that was the case I mentioned earlier, the voting rights case. If I saw a basis in the law to say that there was a violation of the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], or the [U.S.] Constitution, to require the setting up of voting machines in every location in the country where my evacuees [of Hurricane Katrina] were, I'd have done that. I didn't see that in the law. That lead to me to an unfair result 'cause that's what I wanted to do, but, personally, I couldn't because I felt restrained by the law. Now, people disagree with that, say, oh, yeah, you could have. Okay, and I would have done that. And then it goes up on appeal, which meant further delays, the loss of momentum and interest in the voting because of appeals. I mean, let's face it--I mean, you go through appeals in the process, trial court level, appellate level, there's going to be the inherent delays in, in that process. So, I think that, even though it didn't lead to the result that I would have personally wanted, 'cause of what I said about restraints in the law, I think that in the end, given the numbers that are heard and the voter turnout, I'd like to think I played some little minor role in that. And so, that, to that extent, I got satisfaction, but not total satisfaction. So, yeah, the law does not always lead to a fair result and, unfortunately, you know, it was one of my cases. Story_ID: 619472 Speaker 1: Is there something that you have not done that you would like to do? Speaker 2: Personally or professionally? Speaker 1: Both--or either (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, I'm, I'm, I'm questioning the interviewer, sorry about that. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Travel more; I love traveling. I have never been to Europe. I've been to the Pacific Rim countries: China, Vietnam. I've been to South American countries, Trinidad, Tobago [Trinidad and Tobago], you know, Mexico, I've been to South Africa, Malawi, Africa, but I've never been to Europe. And I think experiencing that is one of the things I'd like to do before I'm unable to do it. And meeting new people, I like diversity. I promote diversity in my personal life and my profession. And that, to me, would be an--because I hear so many great things about, about that. I mean, it's, it's where we supposedly based our laws from, you know, the, the English, the French influence, particularly in Louisiana, the Napoleonic influence of the French code. So, yeah, I'd like to do that. Story_ID: 619473 Speaker 1: Tell me, what do you--what would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: That he was fair. Yeah. If not fair, and they always say good intentions don't mean much, but tried his utmost to be fair, even under the restraints that he operates under in his profession. But, but may, may--more so than just being fair, which may be part of it, is that he always wanted people to get along. Maybe I'm naive--so much discourse, so much disagreement. And, I guess, as a judge, I always see disagreement, and I just wish people could, you know, come together more often, and if that happens, we could settle like today. We had a settlement on a major case. And, again, I, I get certain satisfaction from that. Maybe that's selfishness in seeing people resolve their differences. Sometimes they don't always like to settle, but I like seeing agreements of disputes resolved, as opposed to going to the mat and, and all. And, and that's being naive to a certain extent. Some cases deserve to be tried. And, in this case, deserved to have trial proceedings where everybody got together, saw how it was going, and decided that it was in their mutual best interests to settle it. Sometimes a trial helps to do that, even though it didn't go all the way to the end. So, yeah. Speaker 1: So, your legacy-- Speaker 2: So, just get along, and, and, and, and saying to people that--and, and especially young people, and they see adults always in disagreement. You know, they see wars, they see pestilence, they see, you know, environmental problems and, you know, they see the worst out there, you know, the media, you know. I wish the media sometimes would, would portray a little bit more the good side instead of the bad side for--of human existence, but I understand. They, they do the best they can. They're human, too, but the, the young people need more inspiration and hope, and we need to be the examples for that. Story_ID: 619474 Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you'd like to talk about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just thanks to, to you guys, thehistorymakers.com [thehistorymakers.org], and your organization for taking on this massive project. As I told you before we began that when I was on the board for the Amistad Research Center [New Orleans, Louisiana], which is a major African American archival repository for our history that, that, you know, I always viewed that as important, and one of those things that we don't hear much about. I was glad to, you know, hear that your organization is carrying that to a, a--what I call the, probably the best preservatory of it all, oral video histories. It's hard to maintain paper, physical documents that the, that the archives maintain, but when you put it on a computer disc, it, that has a little more permanence, say, than what we've done, and I'm glad to see you guys doing it. Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much for taking time out of your busy schedule. We kept you way after hours-- Speaker 2: I enjoyed it. Speaker 1: --to get this done and we enjoyed it, and I'm sure the future generations will be inspired by your story. Speaker 2: Well, you're too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, thanks for sharing. Speaker 2: You're too kind, thank you...