 Story_ID: 618518 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Dorie, D-O-R-I-E, Ann, A-N-N, L-A-D-N-E-R, Dorie Ann Ladner [HistoryMaker Dorie Ladner]. Speaker 1: Okay. And--now, you had--there was a name on our, our forms. Do you have another last name, or a married last name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My ex-husband. Speaker 1: Okay, that's you ex-husband's name. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 28, 1942. Speaker 1: Okay. And where were you born? Speaker 2: Hattiesburg, Mississippi, H-A-T-T-I-E-S-B-U-R-G, Mississippi, Forrest County [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. Is it more important in Mississippi to say what county you're from? I know that people always do that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's important, it's important from most places, if you're doing research, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, Forrest County. Was that named after Nathan Bedford Forrest? Speaker 2: It could have been; I'm not sure. Speaker 1: F-O-R-R-E-S-T? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, no doubt it is--no doubt it is. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired clinical social worker. Speaker 1: And you were like very involved with Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] back in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was involved with the civil rights struggle--the struggle for human rights for all mankind, and it started probably at the age of eleven or twelve years old in Palmers Crossing [Mississippi], P-A-L-M-E-E-R-S, Crossing, which is a black community right outside of Hattiesburg, which is the all-black town where I grew up, where the church--the school where I attended from elementary to high school, and there was only one white family in the community--Mr. Hudson [H.C. Hudson]; he owned a store, so we were sort of insulated from whites for the most part. We would go downtown on the bus and the bus driver was very prejudiced. And we couldn't sit at the lunch counters at Kress [S.H. Kress and Co.] and Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company], and I start noticing the college because there are two colleges in Hattiesburg, the University of Southern Mississippi and William Carey College [William Carey University], and I knew that we couldn't attend those schools--well, that was later on, but having the earliest memories was in my all-black community. Speaker 1: At Palmers Crossing. Speaker 2: Palmers Crossing. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I'm gonna get to all that-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --but I just wanted to establish that you, you were involved in the Civil Rights Movement-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) human rights movement. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is May 2, 2008. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: 1650 Harvard Street, Northwest, Washington, D.C., my apartment where I reside with my daughter Yodit [Yodit Churnet], Y-O-D-I-T. I have one child, Yodit. Story_ID: 618519 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as a warm up sort of, so I'll ask those now. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I like southern cooking, and I usually don't get that very often. I can't cook, so when I get it, it's a treat. I used to like brownies but I don't get them very often because the stores don't bake them the way that I like them, and I'm sort of shut out. I'm not really a big food person. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I may say bright colors--red. I don't like a lot of dark colors; I like light movement, activity--bright yellows, reds, greens. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Springtime, and winter--spring and winter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Freedom is a constant struggle. Speaker 1: Okay. That's in the song, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and we who want freedom cannot rest. Those are two that I live by. Story_ID: 618520 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and your father's [Eunice Ladner] side. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we'll start with your mother's side first. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Ann--my mother's name was Annie Ruth Perryman [Annie Woullard Perryman], P-E- I'm sorry, Woullard, W-O-U-L-L-A-R-D was her maiden name. She was born May 14, 1921, and she died January 23, 1995, Forrest County, Mississippi. She was born in Wayne County, Mississippi. Speaker 1: She was born in Wayne County, Mississippi, okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and died in Forrest County. Speaker 1: Now, Wayne County is closer to the Gulf [Gulf of Mexico], is it? Speaker 2: No, it's closer to Mobile, Alabama. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, Mobile is--Mobile, Alabama, or Mobile-- Speaker 2: Well, it's inland-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but if you keep going maybe sixty-seven miles, you get to Mobile. (Background noise) She's not really on the water. Hattiesburg [Mississippi] is closer to the water in New Orleans [Louisiana] than I would say Mobile--than Wayne County is to Mobile. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Now, what do you know about your mother's ancestors? How far back--can you trace her family back to slavery? Speaker 2: I can trace my mother's family back to the 1700s. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Well, tell us some of the stories on that side. Speaker 2: Well, I have documentation. My mother's--the family name was W-O-O-L-A-R-D, and as far as I know, they came from England and settled around--out of Wight [Isle of Wight, England], W-E-I-G-H-T [sic.], and that would be North Carolina, I would think. And my great-great-great-grandfather's name was Simeon Woolard. If I may refer these papers, is it okay? Speaker 1: Yeah, but you shouldn't try to read off of it or anything, just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I was just going to get the date correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, it was--he was born in like the 1700s. My great-great-grandfather was born in 1805. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His name was Benjamin Woulard. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did they do? Do you--are there any stories about what they were doing? Speaker 2: Farmers. Speaker 1: Farmers? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And Benjamin Woulard and my great-great-grandmother, Mary Woulard, who was described as a black Creek Indian woman who was also born in 1805 in North Carolina, migrated to the Alabama-Mississippi territory around 1819 or 1820. Speaker 1: Okay, so she migrated to the-- Speaker 2: With him, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay--to Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Territory. Uh-huh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. In 18-- Speaker 2: In 1819 or 1820. Speaker 1: Eighteen nineteen [1819] or 1820, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Now-- Speaker 2: And they had five children. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what--now how did they--I mean were they--you said--were they free, or were they enslaved (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's listed as a mulatto in the census. I have no record of her being enslaved. And they had five children. Speaker 1: Okay, so they moved on--of their own accord, as far as you know, to-- Speaker 2: His, his--some of his--I know his brother John [John Woulard] moved, and his mother Elizabeth [Elizabeth Woolard] moved. I, I've seen them in the census. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think they must have died early on--his--you know, his parents. Speaker 1: Now, where did they go again exactly? This is Wayne--to, to Wayne County, Mississippi? Speaker 2: They came from Rockingham, North Carolina-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --to--it was the Mississippi territory-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Alabama and Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. This--yeah, at one time, I guess, that, that area had just--had belonged to the Spanish, I think, up to a certain-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to--up to, I guess, around the turn off the--well, around 1800 or so. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, and the Native Americans. Story_ID: 618521 Speaker 1: And so they [Ladner's maternal great-great-grandparents, Mary Woulard and Benjamin Woulard] had five children, the oldest of which was Frank [ph.], Martha [ph.], Frances [ph.], Thomas [ph.], Jerry--I think that's five. And my line is Jerry's line. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jerry was the youngest of the five. Speaker 2: So his name was Jerry Woulard? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, and he would have been born what? Speaker 1: Around 1865. Speaker 2: Okay. He's your--he'd be your-- Speaker 1: Great-grandfather. Speaker 2: Great-grandfather, okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: All right, okay. Speaker 1: And he married Rhoda Dean [Rhoda Dean Woulard], D-E-A-N-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they begat eleven children. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And my grandfather, Joseph Woullard, was the eldest of their children, and he was my grandfather. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We referred to him as Papa. Speaker 2: And he, he grew up--well, he made his home in-- Speaker 1: All of them live in Wayne County [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Wayne County, okay. Speaker 1: And all of them had homestead exemption--homestead certificates, and I found a deed where Benjamin Woulard had bought land, in the amount of maybe two hundred acres, for Thomas that was not to--that was paid for outright, and that was like 18--late 1860s. Speaker 2: That was during Reconstruction, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. So by--when you say they had homestead certificates, does that mean that they--the family had, had-- Speaker 1: All of them had land. Speaker 2: --settled that land when it was territory? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I did find this bill of sales where Benjamin had bought Thomas land also, and Thomas in turn sold some of the land to my grandfather Jerry--great-great-grandfather Jerry, and in that community, they were very--the family became very large. The Woullard family is extremely large, extremely large. Speaker 2: And from--my Grandfather Joe married my Grandmother Martha Gates [Martha Gates Woullard]. She was born around 1892 in Wayne County to Charlotte Powe [Charlotte Powe Gates] and Prince Gates. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Prince Gates' father, whose name was Phillip Gates [ph.], and he was born around 1820s in South Carolina, and they migrated to the northern part of Mississippi. I found them in the census the late 1800s--early 1800s, and my Grandmother Martha and--was the second of two children born to Prince and to Charlotte, and my Grandmother Martha and my Grandfather Joe had eleven children, which my mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] was the fifth of the eleven, and all of them are deceased except one aunt, and her name is Mary [Mary Woullard Thompkins]; she's seventy-nine years old. And my mother was a mother of nine children, and one is deceased. But the family is very, very large--very large. I had one uncle, who is deceased now, but he was a father of fifteen by his wife, and the family is very, very potent--very, very large. Doing the research and trying to track everybody down, it's, it's, it's a monumental task. Story_ID: 618522 Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories from--about what some of the people did in the Woullard family? Speaker 2: Well, one thing that Mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] and my uncles told me, that they tried to force my Grandfather Joe [Joseph Woullard] to go to Oklahoma when they were rounding up the Indians [Native American] to go to Oklahoma, and he resisted because he had his land and he had firepower and had a fiery temper, and he refused to go, and that's one thing, but all of them were very, very independent minded, (background noise) and my grandfather taught them not to work for anybody but themselves. I mean that was the motto in the family, only work for yourself. Speaker 1: So, as far as you know, your--you say your Grandfather Joseph was not a--he was not a--well, he was born after slavery, you were saying--after-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --slavery anyway--yeah, okay, and-- Speaker 2: But the story also goes is that Benjamin Woulard refused to enslave any of his children because he said he didn't want his blood spilled all over the country, so they were never enslaved by him. Speaker 1: Okay. So, Benjamin Woulard was white, or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is his--I have his picture right here. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. And this is--that's--is unusual in some ways, because a lot of the--because we read about [President] Thomas Jefferson and other people who did enslave their own children and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and later freed them, but they, they were enslaved for a while. Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 618523 Speaker 1: Your mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] grew up in-- Speaker 2: In Wayne County [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Wayne County. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And did--was, was she able to go to school there, and everything? Speaker 2: Mother probably completed the fifth grade. The family was extremely large, and they had meager earnings--they were farmers. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she ever talk to you about, about growing up--what it was like for her (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: What are the kind of things would she tell you? Speaker 2: They had a huge extended family, and they all relied on each other in the community because all were related in some way or another, and when they--their crops didn't grow, they depended on each other, and it was in the woods--the wooded area. And my grandfather was a baseball player and he traveled a lot, and he was well educated. Speaker 1: This is Joseph Woullard? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he liked to travel, and he was gone for periods of time playing baseball, and he would do independent jobs and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. So, what did your mother--did she get married early, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mother, mother had one child when she was eighteen years old, and my grandmother [Martha Gates Woullard] raised him, and she later married my father [Eunice Ladner] and had two children, my sister Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] and me. And they stayed together, maybe three years, and they were divorced, and she remarried my stepfather [William Perryman] and they begat six children. Speaker 1: Now did she--what did she do for a living before she met your father (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Mother worked during the World--during the--I think--I guess it was World War II [WWII]; she worked at Camp Shelby [Mississippi] and I think she worked in a canning factory, and I think that's the extent of it because after she married my stepfather, she didn't work anymore; she stayed at home. He was a auto mechanic and she was a housewife. Story_ID: 618524 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My mother was very strong willed and she spent a great deal of time teaching us and, and telling us how we should live and how we should grow up what we should accomplish. She had a tremendous influence on our lives to this day. For instance, never allow anyone to trample on you; always fight back. Stand up straight, stand up for your rights. And see, the type of community that she grew up in, segregation was not segregation because they were all living together, and so they would fight each other, and that was it in their community. Speaker 2: Okay, but black and white people (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and they were-- Speaker 2: Now, you were saying--before we started the interview, you were saying that, that this is truthful where your mother grew up, Wayne County [Mississippi], that, that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the South in general. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The South is one of the most integrated places in the country. Speaker 2: In a sense, though, because there was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you will find more mulattoes in the southern part of the country. Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but you also found like white water fountains, black water fountains, white schools, black schools. And all that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's true--this, this schizophrenia. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: There's a saying I read that in the South, you can get as close as you want, as long as you don't get too big, but in the North, you can get as big as you want, as long as you don't get too close. Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's, it's, it's weird--it's very weird, and I guess you would have to live there to understand it. You were asking me about Jefferson Davis' nephew having a special place in society. I remember my mother's brother telling me that they had cut pulpwood, you know, the timber? And a man had promised to pay them, and when they finished--they had worked all day. When they finished, the man offered them a bucket of syrup, and so (laugher), they picked up pieces of wood to start fighting him, and so he sent for the deputy sheriff and he--my uncle say he didn't give a so and so about the deputy sheriff coming; he didn't care. So they put them in the--put them in the car, took them to the justice of the peace, and the justice of the peace asked, "What are you doing?" He said, "I brought them in here; they were insulting Mr. So and So, and so wanted to fight him," and said the justice of the peace got his pistol and ran that deputy out, and told him as long as he live, he better not ever come there with Martha's [Martha Gates Woullard] children anymore; those are his kin people and don't ever bother them again. Speaker 2: Now, this is something that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the South. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, very true. Speaker 1: Now, you were talking about preference--that's, that's the way the inside part runs. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And there are other stories like that-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --in this collection that we heard. Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a--yeah, the, the relationships are--don't--they defy a, a straight up logical explanation. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But--yeah, the family--kin and color, and all kinds of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When we were growing up, the white relatives used to come and visit my mother, Cousin Annie Ruth [Annie Woullard Perryman], so--but don't you come from the outside and say anything about it. It's a closed society. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So, that, that's a good description of what that is. Story_ID: 618525 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His name was Eunice [Eunice Ladner], E-U-N-I-C-E, Stafford, S-T-A-F-F-O-R-D. Speaker 1: His first name, I'm sorry, was-- Speaker 2: Eunice, E-U-N-I-C-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Stafford, S-T-A-F-F-O-R-D, Ladner, L-A-D-N-E-R. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: He was born June 13, 1913 in Pearl River County, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Pearl River County. Speaker 2: His father's name was Thomas Ladner; he was also born in Pearl River County. In the late 1880s he married my grandmother Della McLeod [Della McLeod Ladner], who was born in 1892 in Hahira, Georgia, H-A-I-H-A-R-A [sic.], Georgia. Speaker 1: What's the name of it again? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: H-A-I-H-A-R-A, Hahira, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, Hahira, Georgia, okay. Speaker 2: And she was the oldest of five. No, she was--more than five--maybe seven siblings, born to Duncan Adams McLeod [Duncan McLeod]. Speaker 1: So this would be your great-great-grandfather. Speaker 2: My great-grandfather. Speaker 1: Great-grandfather, Duncan (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Adams McLeod. Speaker 1: --Adams McLeod. Speaker 2: He was born in Aberdeen, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Now, tell me when they change colors, okay--from black to white and vice versa, okay? Speaker 2: Okay. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, he's black. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Laura Lawson [Laura Lawson McLeod], who was born in Hahira, Georgia. Speaker 1: That's your great-grandmother. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Laura's father, Pete Lawson [Peter Lawson]--there's a picture over there I'm, I'm not certain about his lineage. And I was told that his wife, my great-great-grandmother, Cresey Lawson, was from Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They migrated from Georgia to Ovis- O-V-I-S-B-U-R-G, Mississippi [sic. Orvisburg, Mississippi] around 1910, which is Pearl River County. Story_ID: 618526 Speaker 1: Now, is there a reason why--now, when we read, you know, our history books today, and this great--they would talk about the Great Migration--people trying to get outta Mississippi to go someplace else because of the harsh treatment and what's going on there-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and then--but yet you're talking about people moving to Mississippi at the early part of the century. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, there was a work--Mississippi was like an open territory; they had timber. Blanche Bruce, the senator from Mississippi, came there delivering it because it was an open market. He thought he could succeed in, in politics, and he was born (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Blanche K. Bruce, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was born in Kentucky [sic. Virginia], I think, and so he went there. And they went there for job opportunities, and that's where I--where I was told that my--that Adams McLeod [Ladner's paternal great-grandfather, Duncan McLeod] from--they were from North Carolina, but they moved there for economic reasons. Speaker 1: Okay, so there were opportunities there-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and if you could--okay. Speaker 2: And he was described as being a very prosperous man, but also a very, very harsh man. Speaker 1: So, if you had some means, you might have an economic opportunity to make more-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's their picture (points) right back there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I guess what I was trying to say, if you didn't have anything to begin with, it wasn't a good place to stay. Speaker 2: Well, I guess you had to forge your own path. Story_ID: 618527 Speaker 1: Now, your father [Eunice Ladner]--we were talking about his side of the family and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, they were all from Pearl River County [Mississippi] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hancock County. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: My grandfather, my grandfather was born in Han- no, no, my father's father was Thomas Ladner, and he married Della McLeod [Della McLeod Ladner] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: Thomas Ladner's father, Abram Ladner, was born in Hancock County, Mississippi--my great-grandfather-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Abram Ladner. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Abram Ladner married Mary Henry [Mary Henry Ladner], who was born in Gulfport, Mississippi. Her mother, Elmira Gillen [ph.], was born in Illinois, and her father was born in Alabama. That's as far back as I can go. I don't know the--her father is not clear, nor is her mother. I haven't been able to, to do the research. Speaker 1: Well, what you describe, though, with all the different places they were born, you're describing mobility on a level which is not necessarily true with a lot of families in Mississippi from that era. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: A lot of people stayed in the same town, the same county generation after generation, and didn't move anywhere but you describe people coming from different states and different (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But--Illinois to--Illinois to Mississippi, and from Mobile [Alabama]. So--see, that whole San Domingo [ph.] trail from France was very active at that time, too. Speaker 1: Now, what is that? Speaker 2: France, you know, was probably dominating Louisiana. You know, Louisiana was under French and the Spanish at different points-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and so it depended on the time, but de Costa [Mathieu de Costa], like du Sable [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable], went to Chicago [Illinois], much the same pathway, and coming from Illinois would be along the same pathway. That, that river--the Mississippi and--because there were--already were traveling was by water coming from the Caribbean or Haiti, France--that was France's territory. Speaker 1: Right. I'm just saying just as recent, and just in a couple of generations back, you got keep people coming from Alabama and different places-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and it seems, you know, one grandparent or a great-grandparent meets somebody from another whole part of the country, you know, so it means there's a lot of mobility going on. Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanna find out more about the Illinois connection. I--you know, it takes a lot of time and, and resources to do the actual genealogy-- Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: --a lot of work. I, I started in 1992. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, if you could give us, you know, give some of the--some copies of some of the documents that would be something that we could put on file in the office (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 618528 Speaker 1: What I'd like to know, I guess, for this interview is, you know, what were your ancestors doing, you know, and, you know, some of the dynamics around what they were doing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, a--the, the Ladners all--a Ladner, a Ladnier, L-A-D-N-I-E-R, under the domination of the French-- Speaker 1: Oh, 'cause--so, so the name is a French name really. Speaker 2: It could be Ladner-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --or Ladnier, but they were all grouped in--under the same grouping, and Santiago Jacques Mathurin [Jacques Mathurin Ladner] under the Spanish, but it's all in, in the Ladner category; it depend on who was ruling at the time. Speaker 1: Now, your father's name, Eunice [Eunice Ladner], is a name we typically assign to women in this country. Speaker 2: But if you look in the French connection, you'll see it's a, a French name, too. Speaker 1: Okay, so there's French derivation and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and just like his last name. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He has a brother name Valois [Valois Ladner]--had a brother name Valois, V-A-L-O-I-S-E [sic.], he had one name Charles [Charles Ladner], my Uncle Fontaine [Fontaine Ladner], Aunt Christina [Christina Ladner Dixon]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Aunt Christina is the only one left. And my father's family is very interesting in the sense that his, his grandfather's [sic. great-grandfather] name was Morris [ph.], and Morris was born like 1811, and he had children by Ellen, E-L-L-E-N. Speaker 1: Now, Morris would be a--would Morris be a Ladner or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My great-great-grandfather. I--the reason I know his na- his date of birth is because I have the homestead certificate, and it has his age on it-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --at the time that he acquired the land, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is now--so that means that they were free; they weren't slaves or-- Speaker 2: I've tried to find the plantation, but we haven't been able to find it. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, they acquired land, they had to be free, I would imagine, yeah. Speaker 2: I begged to find the plantation but I wasn't able--we, we weren't successful. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were they--do they have a--would any of them consider themselves Creoles or anything, you know, with the French? Speaker 2: You can stop right there with my family. That's the end of it. We are the only--there may be one other identifiable black Ladner group in the country--those who identify themselves as black. Speaker 1: Really? Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. My father's family spun off from the gene pool, and that was it. If you meet anybody else with the name Ladner, they'll tell you they white-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and so that's why I stopped doing the genealogy because my daddy had a salty tongue and he just said, "Leave them SOBs alone 'cause all of 'em crazy as hell," and I, I stopped. Like Brett Favre has three Ladners--three Ladner parents, and one Favre, and that's the way they kept it going. Story_ID: 618529 Speaker 1: So, now, did your father [Eunice Ladner] talk about growing up--what it was like for him? Now did he grow up in a-- Speaker 2: He--they moved from Pearl River County [Mississippi]--the town that they grew up in was Hillsdale [Mississippi], H-I-L-L-S-D-A-L-E, which is in Pearl River County, and they moved to Hattiesburg [Mississippi] when my father was probably--maybe seven or eight years old. They moved to Hattiesburg for opportunities because they couldn't go to school down there, but they owned over a thousand acres of land. My Grandfather Abram [Abram Ladner] was poisoned in a--with--in a cup of coffee, and after he died, the lands--they start selling the land. Speaker 1: Now, he was poisoned. What, what, what--tell us that story. How did they know he was poisoned, and who do you think poisoned him, and why? Speaker 2: They said this woman was trying to poison some--her boyfriend, somebody else, but my grand- great-grandfather [sic.] got the cup of coffee. Now, if you mention it to any Ladner, they will say the same thing, because my cousin and I went to meet Jasper Homer Ladner; he's--was in his eighties year old, white male, Jasper Ladner, in '95 [1995]; that's when my mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] passed. And Jasper start telling us about Abe--my Grandfather Abe dying and how all them cried after he drank the cup of coffee and got poisoned. So it's a true story, it's handed down. And they owned maybe twelve hundred acres of land. Story_ID: 618530 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, there's a significant part to this Ladner tree in, in my family because you had not only Abram [Ladner's paternal great-grandfather, Abram Ladner], you had James Mitchell, John [ph.], Mary Ann [ph.], and George [ph.]; they were sister and brothers, and out of that family be--came from James Mitchell--came Thomas Ladnier, who is described as the second most famous trumpet player in the United States of America aside from Louis Armstrong. He left Louisiana and went to Chicago [Illinois]. He was born in 1900 and went to Chicago in 1919, and traveled throughout Europe with Fletcher Henderson, Wooding [Sam Wooding], and many other musicians, returned to the states, and he and Sidney Bechet opened up a tailoring shop and they started a little band, and a Frenchman named Passear [ph.]--I have a book in here that describes that scene. But he died in 1939 at the age of thirty-nine. Now, what is significant about that is that some of the white Ladners are trying to make him white, and after I told Randall Ladnier that I was going to research it and find out--so I was sending out Tommy's passport application, and his father's death certificate, his grandfather's death certificate--his father's name was Alfred [Alfred Ladnier]. And Tommy was born--was buried at Frederick Douglass cemetery [Frederick Douglass Memorial Park] in Staten Island [New York], and he died in Mezz Mezzrow's home there at 125th [Street] and Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] in New York [New York], and I sent that to Randall Ladnier down there in Sarasota, Florida. And then I started receiving these weird letters saying that I was holding up a book and I wouldn't cooperate, but I never--no one ever asked me for anything, but Randall told me that Tommy was an Indian, and I said, "I don't know; I'll have to do the research." But I hadn't really paid him any attention 'til Randall mentioned it, and so once Randall mentioned it, I start doing the research and found out oh, my god! His grandfather and my grandfather were first cousins. James Mitchell Ladner [James Ladnier]. And what happened (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he'd be a great uncle. Thomas Ladnier is a great uncle then. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, he would be my father's [Eunice Ladner] cousin. See, Abram Ladner and James Mitchell Ladner were brothers. Speaker 2: Okay, so he'd be your father's first cousin? Speaker 1: Second. Speaker 2: Oh, second cousin, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. And so James Mitchell was a very prosperous man, and they claimed that they surveyed his land wrong and that he had to pay, and he moved over to St. Tammany Parish, and that's where Tommy end up being born, in St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana. And his mother's name was Willa Mae [Willie Williams Ladnier], and she was killed in Chicago. But these people who are doing this research are the ones who is helping us do work that we don't have to do, but they--somehow, he's the most famous Ladner in the world, and so they determined to make him anything but black. Speaker 2: Hm. Speaker 1: And I'm saying this for the record because I'm sick of them, and they're disrespectful and very rude. Story_ID: 618531 Speaker 1: What did your father [Eunice Ladner] say about growing up? How was it for him-- Speaker 2: My father was a--what would you call him? A debonair--and he weighed about 118 pounds, 5'6". A sporting life type individual who was favored by his parents who adored him. And he was educated; so was my grandfather [Thomas Ladner] and my grandmother [Della McLeod Ladner] his, his parents. Speaker 1: Um-hm. I mean far did he go--get in school? Speaker 2: He went to probably like eleventh grade. He went to Piney Woods [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi], but he ran away; he was restless-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he went into the [U.S.] military, I think, for like two years, but he was stationed at Camp Shelby [Mississippi], I think, there in Hattiesburg [Mississippi], whereas my uncle Valois [Valois Ladner] went to France. Then, he got to France and he was treated--elevated status because of his name. Valois is a--an esteemed name in France, so--and my Uncle Fontaine [Fontaine Ladner] didn't go to the military. During the '30s [1930s] it was very, very hard, so Uncle Fontaine migrated to Cincinnati [Ohio] and settled in Chicago [Illinois] and stayed there until his demise--it was late '30s [1930s]. And Aunt Christina [Christina Ladner Dixon] lives in Oakland, California and my uncle, her husband, went to dental school after coming out of the military, on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] in San Francisco [California], and he practiced dentistry until he developed Parkinson's and expired maybe ten or fifteen years ago. And Aunt Chrissy's close to ninety years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, she's the only one left. Story_ID: 618532 Speaker 1: Did your father [Eunice Ladner] have any stories about Piney Woods [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi] that he ever told you? Speaker 2: He didn't wanna be there. My daddy talked--my daddy is the one who stopped me from doing the Ladner research. I'll tell you what happened. My cousin David [David Ladner (ph.)] and I were down on the Gulf Coast trying to find the Ladners--the black Ladners, and everywhere we went--this was in '95 [1995]--we asked people, "Do you know any black Ladners?" Everybody would look at us and, and say, "No." And so we were in Long Beach [Mississippi], went to this restaurant, asked this man, an owner, "Do you know any black Ladners?" He went in the kitchen, got the cook, brought the black cook out there and the cook looked at us and burst out laughing and went back in the kitchen, so, we weren't successful. And I told--called my dad and told him, he said, "Leave those crazy SOBs alone--all of them are GD crazy," and so forth; that--he talked that way. So, after he told me that, I left it alone because there are too many secrets. If you look in the baptismal records, you'll see where they have married each other, and my father has, I know, two first cousins who married each other, and maybe two more. And so it's really not kosher, so I--when I was down there the last time, before the hurricane [Hurricane Katrina], they had--NIH [National Institutes of Health] had sent a geneticist down there to try to teach them to stop because it, it was too much deformity. Story_ID: 618533 Speaker 1: Now, what I'm asking is--well, I was asking about your father [Eunice Ladner]. You said he went to Piney Woods [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I'm going off on that but this is just a, aside--you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, it'll be of value to somebody. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But your father went to Piney Woods, then he dropped out, he ran away (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. He came--went back to Hattiesburg [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Pause tape. Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You have speed. Speaker 2: Okay. So you said your father was very literate? That's what you--yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 2: He could--he, he didn't have a chance to go to college or anything? Or did he go (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, he didn't go to college; no, he was sporty. Speaker 2: So, what did he do for a living? Speaker 1: He--well, he did work--dry cleaners and--what else did he do? I'm not quite sure, but it wasn't anything that was too pressing (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay (laughter), all right. Now, is there, is there a story about how your parents met? Now, your father is older than your mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] by about seven years, I guess, right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Mother was--as you can see, was very attractive, and her brother Jerry [Jerry Woullard] was in Hattiesburg. Mother came to stay with him, and my father had been married before, and met my mother and liked her, and they got married, but they didn't stay together long. They had different temperaments, too. My mother was very strong willed, and they were living with my grandparents, and he was spoiled. Speaker 2: Okay. So how long did the marriage last? Speaker 1: I was born in 1942; they broke up, they went back together, Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] was born in 1943, and they divorced after then. Speaker 2: Okay. So, did you stay in contact with your father through the years, or-- Speaker 1: Sporadically. I only saw my father maybe like five times. Speaker 2: Did he live in the area? Speaker 1: He lived in California. Speaker 2: Okay, so that's it--okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So he was--he moved out there, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --it's hard to--yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So he would come back and visit, or-- Speaker 1: I went out there what, three times, and he came--I remember him coming to my grandfather's funeral and I was maybe four and a half or five years old, and he came with my Uncle Valois [Valois Ladner] when we were like in the ninth grade, but Daddy was into horses and he was not really family oriented; he, he married--this is my stepbrother over here, but married his, his mother, and after him, him and my mother divorced, he never remarried again; he was free, so he just lived the life of a bachelor for over sixty years. Story_ID: 618534 Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities and their, their talents or their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Both. And the reason I say that is I observed my father [Eunice Ladner] once. I was visiting Oroville, California where my father's mother [Della McLeod Ladner] moved to; it's up in Northern California, and his gestures and his manner and his facial expressions--I saw myself. And I sat there and it was like, "Oh, my god!" But then people tell me I look like my mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] and I look like my father, but I have both of their personalities. I'm very blunt like my father; his family is very direct. My mother was no nonsense and very straightforward as well, but I think I take a lot after my father from being very, very direct. Story_ID: 618535 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes. After my parents [Annie Woullard Perryman and Eunice Ladner] separated, my earliest memory was living with my mother's mother [Martha Gates Woullard] and her sibling--my mother's siblings--my sister Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] and I and my brother. And we were all very happy. I was very happy around these teenagers, and--very good times, very good times. And when I started school, I enjoyed school--I loved school. And Joyce--I was--I had turned five, Joyce was three; she would've been four that October, and she started crying, and Mother went and asked Mr. Travillion [Earl Travillion], the principal, if she could come and sit in the classroom with me because she was carrying on so bad, and he said, "Bring me a cigar." And so Joyce came (laughter) and sat in the class with me and she stayed, because we were never separated. And that was--that, that was a very happy period, the early childhood memories. But I loved my, my family--my mother's family? I loved them. Story_ID: 618536 Speaker 1: You said the area that you grew up in was called Palmers Crossing [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, two words. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that was like a area set up for the GIs to have recreation for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a black community incorporated and--but it was--it accommodated GIs. Speaker 1: Black GIs, basically, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and whites, too. Speaker 1: Really? Okay. Now that's different 'cause-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: I know sometimes the [U.S.] Army tried to segregate the recreation of the soldiers. I know my father has told me about that. Speaker 2: Right, right. But-- Speaker 1: But white GIs would come--I mean--well, needless to say, probably any, any white area town would have the recreation (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See, where--see, where the music is being played, you know, artists have different temperaments. You understand what I'm saying? Speaker 1: Explain further. Speaker 2: Music, music--a lot of music was going on--Louis Jordan--I can remember Louis Jordan; I was a little child, but I know who he is now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he in town? Speaker 2: Yeah, he would come to play--all these band players because, you know, they were on the Chitlin' Circuit. They had--well, they had--you know, they didn't have the big venues, and anybody, I guess anybody that you could think of would come. It was a place called the Embassy Club [Hattiesburg, Mississippi], and it was a song called (singing), "Ain't nobody here but us chickens" ['Ain't Nobody Here But Us Chickens'], and I had to be about four and a half or five years old, and as I got older, the Embassy Club burned down, but James Brown, the sportscaster here in Washington [D.C.], and who, who does sportscasting for--what, football, or--is it football? Speaker 1: Right, right--yeah, James Brown, right. Speaker 2: Yeah. My father [Eunice Ladner] used to work for him; he had a--he was a entrepreneur, he owned cleaners and, and nightclubs. Speaker 1: His father--James Brown's father? Speaker 2: Grandfather. Speaker 1: Grandfather, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Mr. Milton Barnes [Milton Barnes, Sr.]. And Mr. Barnes owned the Hi-Hat club [Hattiesburg, Mississippi], and all these acts would come to his club, the Hi-Hat. And one name that I hated, and didn't know the man, was [HistoryMaker] B. B. King, because when B. B. King would come, look like he would come too often, and there were two sets of prostitutes on the street that lived on the same street we lived--everybody--lived on. Everybody on the street sold liquor but us--bootleg liquor. And the sheriff would come every--once every Monday, Sheriff Finch [ph.] with one eye and driving a old black Packard, would put his and out the window, drive up one side--one side of the street and down the other, and they would put money in his hand and he would go on back uptown. But B. B. King would come to town, and there were these two sisters, Miss May [ph.] and Miss Lee [ph.]--oh, Lord, they, they do have descendants--but I, I'll just cut the names out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he, he would sleep with each one; he would rotate with these beautiful cousins and sisters, and whoever he slept with would get beaten. Speaker 1: Oh, he would beat them? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: They would fight the one he slept with. It was all night long, and I would cover my head up and cry and carry on, "I hate B. B. King! I hate him! I hate him!" I didn't know who he was; I had to be about ten or eleven years old. And I met Mr. King, Memphis Slim and Bobby Blue Bland [Bobby Bland] at the Museum of Natural History [National Museum of Natural History] here at Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] (laughter), maybe eighteen years ago. I said, "Mr. King, my name is [HistoryMaker] Dorie Ladner, and I'm from Palmers Crossing. Do you remember the goats?" They, they called them the goats. And he laughed, and I wanted to tell him about himself because I hated him. It was because I couldn't get any sleep, and they would call his name up and down the streets, up and down the streets. (Makes sound) But I learned to love music because see, the jukeboxes would blast Big Maybelle, Big Momma Thornton, Joe Turner [Big Joe Turner], Johnny Ace. I can't think of all of them at that period--during that particular period, but Arthur Prysock--you could hear them, them singing because the music would be blasting like around 47th Street, up and down the streets. Now, today is Friday. All right, the eagle flies on Friday, and everybody will go out to play. And up and down my street, they played all night long until late Sunday night, and then everything got quiet, everybody got up and went to work Sunday--Monday. Story_ID: 618537 Speaker 1: Now you've been talking about them anyway, but I've got to ask this question because it's in the script. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The sights were looking at the sisters in the church with the hats on and the beautiful dresses--colorful dresses, and watching my aunts and uncles get dressed to go to the nightclubs, and the sounds were always the music. You said sight, sound and--sights and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Smells, yeah. Speaker 2: Smell. The good cooking, especially on Friday evenings. Now, this time of aft- evening, Fri- which is Friday, the fish trucks would come from the coast and--with all the fresh fish, and we would get that--Mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] would cook the fish. And on Sunday we would have a family dinner, which I enjoyed, and I have a--I, I love soul food, but at the time, as a child growing up, I really didn't like it, but now I appreciate it more, but I loved the seafood--the smell--and the coast wasn't--it was about forty--just forty-five miles from us, so we would get it. And my grandmother [Martha Gates Woullard]--my mother's mother--used to cook chicken and rice--a hen cooked in the rice--and I enjoy that more--that's another dish that I enjoyed. And a pound cake and chocolate cake I would look forward to at Christmastime--pound cake and chocolate cake; I didn't care about anything else. And I would eat some of the potato salad, but the rest of the stuff I didn't, I didn't care for. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the peppermint candy, which was good, and apple--you know, the fruit--as a child. Speaker 1: Okay. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And brownies. Speaker 1: Oh, brownies, right. So, you--who made the homemade brownies? Was it your mother? Speaker 2: My stepfather's mother [Ida Perryman] would make them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she made the best. Speaker 1: Now, when did your father--I mean your mother get married again? How old were you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mother, mother married probably around '45 [1945]. Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't that long after your father [Eunice Ladner] left that she married again. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And how was your relationship with your stepfather [William Perryman]? Speaker 2: It was--distant. I, I would describe it as distant--at times strained. Speaker 1: Did he have any other children? Speaker 2: Mother--they had six. Speaker 1: Oh, they had six after, after (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was the old--I was the oldest, Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] was the second, and then there were, there were eight of us in the house, so eight in all. Story_ID: 618538 Speaker 1: Tell us about school now. Where did you start school? Speaker 2: De Priest [De Priest School, Hattiesburg, Mississippi]--named for Oscar De Priest [Oscar Stanton De Priest]. Speaker 1: Chicago's-- Speaker 2: Yes, Chicago's Oscar De Priest-- Speaker 1: --first black congressman (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Congressman, congressman from Chicago. Speaker 1: Yeah, the first black congressman since Reconstruction, Oscar De Priest. Speaker 2: Right, from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, De Priest. We (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, was he from around that region? Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge. Now, I don't know where his roots are. I do know from the history I've read about Chicago; I don't know where his lineage began. Speaker 1: Be interesting to find out 'cause he's got a French sounding name-- Speaker 2: You're right. Speaker 1: --and most people in Chicago are from Mississippi anyway, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna look it on the Internet and see. Speaker 1: It could, could be. Speaker 2: And we--De Priest was rich in the sense that the teachers were very involved with us; they wanted us to learn, they taught us, and they didn't have much--many tools to work with because we were using second and third-hand books from the white schools, and Mrs. Ola Jackson [ph.], our primary teacher, would save a little money and buy books for us to read. And the school fell on such disrepair until the county built a new school, Earl Travillion [Earl Travillion High School, Hattiesburg, Mississippi], which was named for the principal who allowed Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] to come to school. He, he expired, so the school was named for him, and I think I must--we must have transferred there from eighth grade from De Priest to Travillion--probably around eighth grade-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and graduated from Earl Travillion in 1960. Speaker 1: Okay. So, Earl Travillion went all the way up through high school and-- Speaker 2: From, from eighth--well, a- De Priest closed, yeah. We started out at De Priest, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So, Travillion went--took you all the way from eighth grade to twelfth grade. Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and De Priest--and, and Travillion became first through twelfth after that. Speaker 1: And, and you graduated in 1960. Speaker 2: Yes, Joyce and I both. Speaker 1: Okay, same time. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now--okay. So--well, how did you like--were there any teachers that served as like a mentor to you, or a role model to you at De Priest? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mentioned Miss Jackson-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Miss Travillion, Mr. Ratliff [James Ratliff] who was the choir director. We traveled with the glee club in singing contests. I used to be able to sing some opera, but I lost that. Our teachers were engaging and stimulating; they wanted us to learn. Story_ID: 618539 Speaker 1: Until the death of Emmett Till--I was what, fourteen years old, and Mr. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You were about the same age as Emmett Till. Speaker 1: And--yeah. Mr. Clark [ph.], who was a social studies teacher, who graduated from Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi], was our social studies teacher. And I remember reading the new--the Hattiesburg American every day; Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] and I would run and get the paper and read, and get scared to death because we thought the same thing would happen to us, and I, I asked Mr. Clark what did Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments mean. He say, "Oh, they had something to do with the [U.S.] Constitution." And so I went and found a copy of the Constitution and memorized the--those amendments, and the Preamble, the--America's Creed [American's Creed], and all of it. And it gave me some sense of empowerment because after I found out that Milam [J.W. Milam] and Bryant [Roy Bryant] were guilty and they weren't punished, I felt very helpless, and by me memorizing this, I said, "Well, these amendments apply to us as black people, and maybe they'll be useful." And at that juncture, I decided I wanted to be a lawyer. Speaker 2: Now, let me just go back a minute-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and--now the article that appeared in the paper then--whoever wrote the article talked about the Thirteenth or Fourteenth Amendment and our rights in this country. Is that--was that, was that what hap- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had been violated-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: --or some reference to it. Story_ID: 618540 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Also, Dr. McCobb [ph.], a medicine man from North Carolina, would come through maybe--he belonged to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--who would come once a week or once every two weeks, and he'd bring the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] and the Jet magazine. Speaker 2: So you called him the medicine man. What, what do you mean? Speaker 1: He made a root medicine. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So he would come, he would come basically selling his medicines? Speaker 1: Not necessarily, but he would come and talk to us, and Mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] would--was happy to see him, and we would talk to him, ask him questions, and he would tell us about our rights, and he would bring reading material because we were deprived; we had no outside resources, no--at that time television wasn't--we--I don't think we had a television; we had a radio. And so when he'd bring the Pittsburgh Courier and the Chicago Defender and Jet magazine. I mean that was like heaven to us because it opened our eyes up to another part of the world that we were not visiting. Speaker 2: Okay, so there wasn't a--there was no store around there that sold Jet magazine on a regular basis. Speaker 1: There was a store, and oftentimes we didn't have money to buy them, and they weren't that available. When Dr. McCobb was bringing them, I don't remember them being there, but they did start putting them out, and we didn't have the money, and I do remember one--I was twelve years old, and Mr. Patton [ph.], who was a cashier, and his fingers were cut off, and the black women said that when they were at the cash register, he would put his finger--his hand down their breasts. And so I was--I had bought a bag of donuts and I was standing and looking at one of the, the black magazines; he passed by and slapped me on the behind and I just automatically hit him with my donuts, and hit him again. And then I went on home and I told Mother and she said, "You should've killed the bastard." So, he didn't bother me anymore. Speaker 2: Was there a relationship between his fingers being cut off and him trying to put his hand down women's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I don't know; it may have been. Speaker 2: (Laughter). It just made me think of their--putting two things together and (unclear). Speaker 1: I never thought about it, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) seem like he--you know, you know the saying you'll draw back a nub if you mess with somebody--the wrong person? Speaker 1: Well, it's true, that's true; he didn't have them there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But he, he didn't bother me anymore. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And I was twelve. It was just a reflex. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it meant--your sister [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] mentioned that story. Speaker 1: She did? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: Well (laughter), that's--that was the temperament that I had at that time, and so-- Story_ID: 618541 Speaker 1: The Emmett Till story; now this is about 1955 or '6 [1956], I guess? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, the-- Speaker 2: Probably about '55 [1955]. Speaker 1: Fifty-five [1955]. You know, we don't hear a lot about what people--I--you know, people in the North who saw it were horrified and, you know it's the, the image-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of him in that casket has like been burned into the memory of so many people. But, but in Mississippi, I mean what were people saying about that? I mean what were people saying about it? Speaker 2: I really don't know; see, I was young and the Delta [Mississippi Delta] was way up there to me, and we were down here but I--it--but it still scared me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--yeah, that--that's Money, Mississippi, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It was up further--further up. Speaker 2: Yeah. We had all these stories about the plantations and, and people not being able to leave--we had heard stories. But we were still the same color, and we were the same--you know, the same people, and we thought that whatever happened to him could happen to us, and we so strongly identified with it. Now, everybody didn't think that way. Everybody wasn't in the Civil Rights Movement or the human rights movement--everybody wasn't in it. Speaker 1: When did you first become aware of a Civil Rights Movement? Is about that time? 'Cause I guess about that same time is when they had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was my awakening. Speaker 1: Okay--the, the, the Emmett Till-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --case. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the awake- now, see the Montgomery Bus Boycott had gone on, but I was younger, and there wasn't that much information about it. And, you know, we may have heard something about it but we--it didn't register. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a long distance away from us. Speaker 1: Yeah, you said earlier, I think--off camera, too, that--it may have been off camera, it may have been on, I'm not sure, but you said that the television--you got Lawrence Welk and Perry Como; you didn't get a lot of news about what was going on down there. Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: It was the same with the newspaper? You didn't--so people didn't know? Speaker 2: Well, they knew, but we were still living in a closed society, and it was something like--people would whisper about, probably, but I was, I was taking it in; I was very emotional about it. Very emotional about it, and wanted to know more--what could be done to right this wrong. Speaker 1: Did, did people discuss slavery or lynchings, or an- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --or the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], or that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Were you aware of the Klan in those days? Know what that--did you know what that was (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No; I do remember Mack Charles Parker. That had to be probably around that same time; it was in the '50s [1950s], '55 [1955], or something [sic. 1959]. He was taken outta the jail in Pearl River County [Mississippi] and thrown into the river. Speaker 1: Right. There's a book about him that someone in Chicago [Illinois] had something to do with, I remember. It's called something that has blood in the title of it ['Blood Justice: The Lynching of Mack Charles Parker,' Howard Smead]. It was a book about the Mack Charles Parker case. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: I've seen--yeah, we used to sell it in the bookstore in Chicago. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, I remember that. I was probably about twelve, or something; I remember that and, and hearing people whisper about it, but--and there was another case, Willie McGee case. Speaker 1: Oh (unclear). Speaker 2: He was from Laurel, Mississippi, and a lot of people from the North came down to help defend him, but I was young, and I don't really have a handle on that; that's something I've got to go back and study, but I heard--used to hear the older people whispering about it. Story_ID: 618542 Speaker 1: But down there where we lived, it, it--people had jobs as domestics, or mechanics, or--you know, those type jobs. There was no farming on indentured type job situations; there was nothing growing around there, and we live--didn't live that far from the coast. See, the, the crops were growing up in the Delta [Mississippi Delta] part of the northern part, so down there where we were, it was little--not that much agriculture, but people may have had gardens or something, but-- Speaker 2: Probably--they probably did have gar- I mean I would guess in Mississippi. Seem like everybody down there had a garden when I went (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they had a garden, but I'm saying as far as your earn- your paycheck would be from picking cotton. Well, we, we didn't have that system down there. Speaker 2: 'Cause you didn't have the system where the guy would bring a truck into town and load up the people and take them out and take them out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no. One--I think once or twice, Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] and I got on a cotton truck. We were like, what, ten, eleven, eleven and twelve? And I'm not sure where it came from; it wasn't too far, but I--all I remember is that I was picking and Joyce was standing there and she wasn't putting anything in her sack, and standing around looking (laughter). And I ended up--well, we made enough to buy some little dresses, but we only went maybe two or three times. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Now, now, Joyce--now, she's like four years behind you, or three years? Speaker 1: No, I was born June 28, '42 [1942], she was born October 12th (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, just a year. Speaker 1: --October 12, '43 [1943]. Speaker 2: Okay, just a year behind you. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, okay, all right. Story_ID: 618543 Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: History. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was it about history that, that you liked? Speaker 2: Studying other cultures of other parts of the world; it was like an escape, wanting to know what other people were doing--always wanting to know more. Speaker 1: Was there any African American history taught in school? Speaker 2: No. We, we knew 'Lift Every Voice and Sing.' We knew about Paul (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did--would you sing it in school? Speaker 2: Yeah, we knew about Paul Laurence Dunbar, and black--Richard Wright. See, we had black teachers, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Richard Wright's from Mississippi. Speaker 2: Yeah, but there was--it was--some things were introduced to us, but as far as the whole curriculum was concerned, it wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Was it--you know, I mean I know you were, you were just a kid then, but did you have a sense that the state was actually controlling the curriculum of the school, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no (background noise). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All I knew that we were getting inferior books, and there was a brand new school not far from our house, and we were getting their old textbooks--second hand, third hand textbooks, and that made us very angry, and also De Priest's chemistry lab was dysfunctional, and the sewer at De Priest [De Priest School, Hattiesburg, Mississippi] started running out in--into the yard, and it, it was, it was really, really bad for us. So that--I knew that we were being treated unfairly. I didn't know anything about--we're paying our taxes and why shouldn't we get better? I wasn't--I didn't know anything about all of that; all I knew is that we weren't getting the same thing. Story_ID: 618544 Speaker 1: By the time--you start high school [Earl Travillion High School, Hattiesburg, Mississippi] around the time that Emmett Till--Emmett Till--so, what are you, thirteen, twelve (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I started high school-- Speaker 1: In '56 [1956], right? Speaker 2: Oh, high school? Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, in '56 [1956], right--I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, I--yeah, I was five when I started, so I had to been like, what? Eighth or ninth grade? About ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. So--now, when you were in high school, were you involved in any--did you all have activities or clubs and things (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Tri Hi Y, which was the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], the glee club, the 4-H club, and we went outside and joined the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Speaker 1: How did that happen? How did you manage to join the NAACP? Speaker 2: Mr. Vernon Dahmer; you heard of him, right? His sister belonged to our church. Speaker 1: What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: Church of God [ph.]. That was about the fourth one that my parents had joined probably. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was his sister's name-Vernon Dahmer sister? Speaker 2: E-I-L-E-E-N, Eileen-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Beard, B-E-A-R-D [Eileen Dahmer Beard]. Speaker 1: Okay. So she recruited you, too? Speaker 2: Yeah. She would go to Jackson [Mississippi] to the NAACP meetings when Roy Wilkins, Medgar Evers would have the--maybe they would have them annual, or twice a year or something--We'd ride to Jackson with them. And Mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] would let us go because she belonged to our church and she played the piano. And so we were intrigued--wanted to know more (laughter). Speaker 1: That's quite a group you're talking about here-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Vernon Dahmer-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Medgar Evers. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You said Roy Wilkins would come down? Speaker 2: Clyde Kennard. Speaker 1: Clyde Kennard. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Clyde Kennard was our youth chapter [NAACP Youth Council] advisor. Speaker 1: Was, was Amzie Moore involved in those days (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Amzie was way up in the north; I met him later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: The doctor--was the doctor from the gulf involved, or some-- Speaker 2: Mason? Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Mason--Gilbert Mason [HistoryMaker Dr. Gilbert R. Mason, Sr.] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He--we--I met him after the Freedom Rides-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but there was a Dr. Murphy [ph.] from Laurel, Mississippi who was involved. Speaker 1: And there's another doctor who had to move to Chicago [Illinois] to esca- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) T.R.M. Howard from Mound Bayou [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Howard, Dr. Howard from Mound Bayou, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to read about him; I never met him--read about him in Jet and the Chicago Defender. He was quite a man. Speaker 1: Right. That's right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, there were quite a group of people in Mississippi then-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --looking at this problem-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and so--so, how many people would come to the NAACP meeting--the annual meeting? Speaker 2: It's--have you seen the Masonic temple in Jackson? I used to think it was one of the largest buildings I'd been in; it probably holds about 250 or close to three hundred people. But it seemed like it would be filled when we would go to the meetings. Speaker 1: Now, was the, was the meeting ever threatened by the--did the local-- Speaker 2: No, not to my knowledge. Speaker 1: --the whites disliked the idea of you all meeting, and--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was never any overt threats to the direct body. I don't know what Medgar was encountering. Speaker 1: Now, I have heard of stories from people that I've interviewed who, who tell N- people who tried to form NAACP in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s] who were actually killed, run out of town, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, Reverend Lee [George W. Lee] in Belzoni [Mississippi] was killed in his car; I remember reading about that in Jet magazine, but-- Speaker 1: Now, that, that was while you all were members? Speaker 2: No, I was a small child--smaller child (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you--okay. Speaker 2: But we would go to the meetings and, and come back home, and Clyde Kennard--we would, we would meet in the church, and one of the teachers, Miss Thigpen [ph.], English teacher, went and told the parents of the students about the NAACP and why they shouldn't be going, and so forth. A lot of parents (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why they shouldn't be going? Speaker 2: (Nods head) A lot of the parents became intimidated and scared, and so it broke the chapter up. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother refused to let you--I mean she--did she say you couldn't go (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She didn't go to my mother-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but Sister Beard was, you know, taking us to the meetings. But, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you all would go, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but see, Clyde Kennard with the youth chapter, we would, with Laurel and Hattiesburg [Mississippi], join together, and she was able to effectively break that part up, but we would still go to Jackson to the NAACP meetings. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, something now--am I jumping the gun? But something happened to Clyde Kennard, right? He was jailed on a phony charge (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're jumping the gun. Speaker 1: I'm jumping-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so we'll let that go. Story_ID: 618545 Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Earl Travillion High School, Hattiesburg, Mississippi], were you a--were you considered a good student? In high school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So-- Speaker 2: I was always eager to learn, and wanting to know more, but I didn't apply myself as hard as I could have, and I was salutatorian and Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] was valedictorian. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is a cla- you all graduated in 1960, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we went to Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University] that fall. Speaker 1: Okay, Jackson State. Now it was in the capital, Jackson, Mississippi. Speaker 2: Yes, ninety miles north, because we couldn't attend William Carey College [William Carey University] nor Mississippi Southern [Mississippi Southern College; University of Southern Mississippi] -- Speaker 1: Did, did those (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) which were both in Hattiesburg [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Now, did the presence of those colleges have any effect on you that you know? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. We would go downtown when we were probably in ninth grade, tenth grade. We would see these students walking around from Latin America who were our color, and they were speaking a foreign language which we didn't understand, and we were curious about that, but they built them separate dorms to live in--the state did. And we felt that we should've been able to go to school there, but we had to go (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause these are--well, let me just get this straight. Now, these are other black people that live in--you know, as far as you're concerned they never--they were Hispanic, but they were black people. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. They were--they didn't allow them to live in the dorm with the others; they built dorms for them. Speaker 1: But they allowed them to go to school there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it probably had something to do with the state department or something, you would think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and they paid--they had to pay, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I thought then that some--I knew that something was wrong 'cause we couldn't go to school there but they would build special dorms for people from out of the country to go to school. And it was piling up, you know, the death of Emmett Till, Mack Charles Parker, and looking around in the school system, and these things were accumulating. And reading in the Chicago Defender, the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], and Jet magazine, you just started taking inventory and putting it in your data bank, and so when I got to Jackson State, Medgar Evers' office was across the street from Jackson State, and James Meredith was on campus; he had just got out of the [U.S.] Army with--and his wife [Mary June Wiggins Meredith] were both students there, and we would go to Medgar's office every Wednesday. We had a half day off on Wednesdays so we could spend our time at his office talking to him about freedom (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Hold on. Story_ID: 618546 Speaker 1: So, you were talking about Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] office of Medgar Evers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On Wednesday, every Wednesday. Speaker 1: It was right across the street Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --from the school-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and you would meet? Speaker 2: We would go over there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You'd go over there-- Speaker 2: --and spend our free time with him, which was like two hours, talking to him about freedom, and it was really not structured, but we just wanted to talk about freedom. And it was, it, it was am- it was a big picture; we couldn't define it, but we knew that what I told you earlier, I had accumulated in my mind the whole notion about the ba- the poor schools, the Mack Charles Parker, Emmett Till--these were the images, so that was all that I had to go on, but I knew it wasn't right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so-- Speaker 1: This is 1960. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Fall of '60 [1960]? Speaker 2: Yes. And so we were --that, that was our treat. And my Aunt Christy [Christina Ladner Dixon]--my father's brother-in-law, which was my aunt's husband's father lived in Jackson [Mississippi] and they belonged to the NAACP, and they would take us to meetings in Jackson. So we were always anxious to go. We were not interested in partying and dressing and so forth; we were interested in acquiring knowledge and learning more about other people and places, and we, we, we, we had different outlooks on life. Story_ID: 618547 Speaker 1: No, we started complaining about the food in the cafeteria. Speaker 2: At Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]? Speaker 1: Yeah; they served us bologna and pork and beans, and I grew to dislike them. And James Meredith was there. But also, we had no freedom on the campus. You could go--every Sunday you had to go to vesper services, and the matron would get a broom and go in the bed to see if you were under the bed. Everybody had to be in the vesper services, and on Sunday after you came from vesper services, you could run across the street for ten minutes and get you a ice cream cone and run back. You couldn't be out of your room after ten o'clock at night--not, not ten, after nine; you had to be in your room in the dorm aft- at nine. And I was president of the dorm council, and I prayed a prayer. Coming from Priest Creek Baptist Church [Hattiesburg, Mississippi] and Palmers Crossing [Mississippi], and I said something about, "Lord, let there be peace in the world." And she went and told the, the dean of students that I had prayed this prayer, and we were called into the dean's office--Dean Gill's [ph.] office, and asked about the prayer. And so we got into a heated discussion and said, "Anybody who questions a prayer, we don't wanna be around them," and he said that, "Y'all better tighten up," or, or "shape up." And then we were referred to the dean of students--Dean Oscar Rogers [Oscar A. Rogers, Jr.]. I called Dean Rogers last week and asked him why, but Dean Rogers said, "Miss Ladner [HistoryMaker Dorie Ladner], I'm gonna hip you before I ship you," and that meant that we were going to be expelled from school. And so-- Speaker 2: For-- Speaker 1: --I asked Dean Rogers. He's, he's sick in Natchez, Mississippi right now. He, he studied at Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi], he worked--he got his master's [degree] from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], his doctorate from University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas], and he was worse--as worse as Ross Barnett, the governor of Mississippi. (Background noise) And I said to him--this is parenthesis in the context of this because I wanted to find out--I said, "Dean Rogers, why do you treat us like that? What did we do?" I say, "I came from Palmers Crossing and we, we didn't know anything about anything." He say, "You all were just terrible." I say, "Well, what did we do?" "It was just something about you all that just--that was just wrong," said, "You were just, just terrible." And said, "I'll never forget the day the president passed by, and you all looked at him like he was dirt, and I just felt humiliated for that poor man." I said, "Looked at him?" He said, "Yes." He said, "You two were just awful!" But he could never define, but he say it was something about us that just wasn't right; it challenged the, the way of life that they were living and we were a challenge to the status quo. Poor Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] and me. And we came from Palmers Crossing. So-- Speaker 2: This is a, this is a--and I've heard other stor- you know, there's a story from down at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] where the president [Felton Grandison Clark] expelled the-- Speaker 1: At Baton Rouge [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Yeah, expelled his students for demonstrating and it really ate him up; it destroyed him from the inside out. He, he didn't wanna do it and they put pressure on him to do it. They said that he would lose his job--his father [Joseph S. Clark] had been the president, you know-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and they--so much pressure was on him, and people down there defended him, said he was a good man but he, he was so intimidated by the state, and everybody would lose their job, all the staff would be fired. I mean that's what he was threatened with, you know, and--but--and the thing would be reconstituted. But they didn't--so Dean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But this was after--this was during demonstrations 'cause you had a lot of students-- Speaker 2: --but Dean--Dean Rogers didn't, didn't--y'all, y'all didn't demonstrate or anything, did you? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: You didn't? Speaker 1: No. He said we were terrible (laughter). Speaker 2: Your attitude--he just didn't like your disposition, or-- Speaker 1: No. The matron went and told them that I had prayed this prayer, yes. Speaker 2: About world peace? Speaker 1: That there be peace in the world. Speaker 2: That's something that if you were running for Miss America they'd want you to say, and it gets you expelled from-- Story_ID: 618548 Speaker 1: Well, that was the beginning of it. And so, (laughter) after that, the students from Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] sat in--attempt to sit in to the public library, and we joined the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Jackson [Mississippi]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Now Tougaloo's just ten miles north of Jackson, right? From what I understand. Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: It's, it's been incorporated now, so-- Speaker 2: And then, just maybe for the sake of history, just kind of explain the difference between Tougaloo and Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], Jackson State being a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jackson State was a state supported school. Speaker 2: Supported by the State of Mississippi-- Speaker 1: Of Mississippi. Speaker 2: --with their lips dripping with the words of--as Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--yeah, (laughter) okay, all right. Speaker 1: It was a state supported school-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and the teachers were state paid; paid by the state, where as Tougaloo was founded by the United Church of Christ and the Congregational church during Reconstruction-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --along with Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], and many other black private schools [HBCUs]. Speaker 2: Now the, the dynamic of that--now, I don't think a lot of people know that the president of Tougaloo in those days was white. Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Beittel [A.D. Beittel]. Speaker 2: Dr. Beittel, and he was a very liberal left-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --but he represented a, a church that-- Speaker 1: United Church of Christ. Speaker 2: Yeah, that--and--but, but the whole--which represents a lot of money back east, and power which, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. And Tougaloo was on several hundred acres of land; it was founded for the freedmen by the missionaries from the North who came down. It was--it started out as a, a high school, and it elevated to a college level, and it was like on a plantation and the--have you been on the campus? It's a big mansion sitting there; it's called, the Boddie mansion [Robert O. Wilder Building], and the land there, probably about two hundred acres of land, and there--when I was a student there, there were like five hundred students--maybe three hundred on campus and two hundred off campus. Story_ID: 618549 Speaker 1: But the way we got there was when the students from Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] attempted to sit in the public library, which was just news to everybody--just hit the news like that, and we said, "Oh, we wanna be part of that." And (laughter) we went to Tougaloo College one Sunday, and went to the president's mansion-- Speaker 2: Now, had you been expelled at this point? Speaker 1: No, no, no. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Emmett Burns [Emmett C. Burns, Jr.], who is in the state legislature here in Maryland, was a student at Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]. He's from Jackson [Mississippi], he's also a minister; Walter Williams from Chicago [Illinois]--and I was told--Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] told me that he may be a judge in Chicago; myself, and some others; I can't--whose names I can't remember. We went out to Tougaloo and met with the president and some more faculty and students, and one professor from Mississippi State [Mississippi State University, Starkville, Mississippi], Dr. Rider [ph.], said, "What you all can do to help," he said, "have a prayer meeting." And we said, "Okay." So, that Monday, after dinner, we all started circling around the reflecting pool right in front of the library. And we weren't singing anything; we, we were standing there and Emmett Burns was going to pray, and here comes President Reddix, Jacob L. Reddix, the president, R-E-D-D-I-X, the president, swinging his arms, flailing his arms, and running around and around the circle. He knocked Joyce's roommate Eunice [ph.] down; she was from Pass Christian [Mississippi], and she had to leave, and he sent word up to the dorm to tell her that she had to get off campus, but the police came on campus, brought the canine dogs from Vicksburg [Mississippi], and we had no idea that all this was going to take place. So, the next day, we said, "Okay, we will march downtown." And we left the campus, turned up main street going towards downtown and I--we saw a blockade had formed across the street. So then we decided to go over to the residential district, and all hell broke loose. The police came with the tear gas and the dogs, and tear gases and I, I, I had tear gas all over my head, my back, and one guy had tear gas right in his face; (background noise) we ran and grabbed him and took him to safety. And the people were nice to us, and the lady whose house I ran in, she said, "Come in and wash your face and go and sit out on the porch." And I sat on the porch, and the dogs were going up and down the alley looking for us, and I said, "I--now I know how a runaway slave felt." Speaker 2: Was this a white lady, or-- Speaker 1: No, a black woman. Speaker 2: A black woman, okay. Speaker 1: And so the, the dog--they had the canine dogs chasing trying to find us. And I was sitting on the porch like I lived there. And so when darkness came, I went back to the campus. And two days later, the president broke for early spring break, and shortly after that, school was out for the summer and we went to Chicago to work at Spiegel's mail order house [Spiegel Inc.], and had the nerve to ask our father [Eunice Ladner] if we could go on the Freedom Rides and he said, "No." And I said, "It's the last time I'll ask anything." (Laughter) So that was it. Story_ID: 618550 Speaker 1: And we returned that fall to Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi]. We transferred. And hallelujah, when we got back to Jackson [Mississippi], all the Freedom Riders were there who had remained in Mississippi, who decided they were gonna do organizing--James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel], Diane Nash, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry, Tom Hayden, his wife Casey [Casey Cason Hayden], [HistoryMaker] John Lewis--just a whole--Paul Brooks--a host of--that remained there--Dion Diamond. Dion went down to Baton Rouge's Southern campus [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]; he's caused--wanted to cause, Dave Dennis was the cause of the man having a stomach problems too. I met all of them--Will Derougio [ph.] (laughter). But I was so happy because it was like I had been--you heard of Saul Bellow's book, 'The Dangling Man' [sic. 'Dangling Man']? It was like I had been dangling, and then when I saw these young people like me, I said, "Oh, my god! I didn't think anyone thought like I did, and here they are, in the flesh!" It was, it was, it was something that--it was something that I can't describe, it was such a joy. Speaker 2: So this is the fall of '61 [1961], then, right? Speaker 1: Yes, it was a joy that I had been looking for all my life, and it was there, right in that room at the Masonic temple upstairs. And they were--a lot of them were getting ready to leave, but many of them remained. Speaker 2: So they were organizing the Freedom Ride from--from Jackson, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) These were Freedom--these--no, these were Freedom Riders who had been released from Parchman [Mississippi State Penitentiary, Parchman, Mississippi]-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --and some who remained in Jackson, and some were leaving. But when we got up to the room, they were all in the room, and there they were. I had no idea; I said, "Oh, my god!" Speaker 2: And Parchman, for those who are listening to this and don't know what this is, it's a famous prison, famous for its harsh treatment (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Parchman is a state peniten- Mississippi State Penitentiary up in the Delta [Mississippi Delta] on a plantation that was used by Senators Eastland [James Eastland]--the late Senators Eastland and Stennis [John Stennis], as their own farms; they used inmates to farm for them, and also they were getting subsidies from the federal government. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's known colloquially as Parchman Farm. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. And so when I saw them, it was like, "I been looking for you all my life," and there they were--young people just like us. And so once I got to campus, the campus was free, and open; you could walk around unencumbered, you'd go in a dorm and you could sit on the grass and, and guy--you know, girls and guys would come in and out of the dorm, and-- Speaker 2: This is a Tougaloo. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: Whereas, Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] you had to be in your room at nine [o'clock]. And so it was, it was freedom, freedom. Speaker 2: Now, I've heard people say that, and outside of Tougaloo it was dangerous to be talking to white people, you know. I mean you couldn't have a meeting with white people back then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, that was, that was, that was Jackson, yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, you couldn't do that in Jackson, but in Tougaloo you could, you could-- Speaker 1: No, it was a private campus. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was a private campus, yeah. And the state threatened to revoke the charter many a time, and they got to the point, I recently learned, not too long ago, that they got rid of Dr. Beittel [A.D. Beittel], the president of the college, because he had housed the Freedom Riders on the campus, and he said they told him that they would not certify the teachers from Tougaloo if he remained there-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --so, the board of trustees saw fit, and they let him go, and President Owens [George A. Owens], who was the bursar at the time, took over--he was black. And that was our--the two of its first black presidents, and that had to be like '62 [1962], '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: But after I got onto Tougaloo's campus and met all these people, and there was a Freedom House in Jackson (laughter). Have you heard of Freedom Houses? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, tell us what the--tell (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A Freedom House is where a group of dedicated--I call them warriors or zealots--lived in a, a communal system, males and females, who weren't necessarily intimate, but had a common interest, and that being one of trying to bring about political change in the community, and it was a social enterprise, meaning that all food was shared, and you would sleep wherever you could--sometimes with whomever you could, but that didn't mean that you were intimate with them. So, I--the Freedom House was on Rose Street in Jackson, and we would go there, and every weekend we couldn't wait to--for Friday evening or Saturday to ride into Jackson and go to the office to do (background noise) volunteer work sort of because they had two components--SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] had two components, direct action and voter registration. Story_ID: 618551 Speaker 1: And that came up in McComb. See, I, I didn't go back into the McComb part because I wasn't part of that. The Freedom Riders first went into McComb, Mississippi, down around Amite County [Mississippi]--that part. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: They had men there, and Herbert Lee had been killed by State Representative Hurst [E.H. Hurst] in the town square. Speaker 2: Now, this was in McComb? Speaker 1: In Liberty, Mississippi. Speaker 2: Liberty, Mississippi (unclear), okay. Speaker 1: That's a historic (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the Freedom Riders had--that summer before you got back down there-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --had gone through-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --those, those changes (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To southwest, yes. Speaker 2: That's the same summer you're saying that Herbert Lee was killed? Speaker 1: Yes, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And by a state rep, and-- Speaker 1: --and Brenda Travis, she was probably about fifteen years old, was sent to a reformatory school-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and so they had organized a lot of the students down there and had recruited young people from that area. Speaker 2: Now, now, what did Brenda Travis do? What, what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was a student leader. Speaker 2: In a--at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], or Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]? Speaker 1: No, no, she was in high school. Speaker 2: High school, okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm, she was sent to reform school from high school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so that had happened before I returned from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Now, now, Herbert Lee was actually shot in the head by a, a friend of his--a guy he grew up with, who was a state senator, that knew him--simply because he was associating with the freedom movement. Speaker 1: Because he was trying to register to vote. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Right in town square. Speaker 2: And in broad daylight, right? Speaker 1: Yes. And Mr. Louis Allen, who witnessed it, was murdered also. Mr. Allen came and told Bob in '64 [1964] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses], right? Speaker 1: Bob Moses, and came to the COFO [Council of Federated Organizations] office in Jackson [Mississippi], told Bob that he was--had been receiving threats and he was getting more frightened for his life, and he was planning to leave. And he left Jackson and it was like dust dark; they got home and got out to open his gate, and he was killed. So, he, he had been a witness to that. Speaker 2: Okay, so--so, this is 1961 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Four [1964], '64 [1964]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's '64 [1964], that story is '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But you all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But getting back to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, getting back to where we were now, did you--at that time, were you a member of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or SNCC, or--'cause a lot of the figures--some of the figures like Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel], he's a, he's a SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. Or, or did he consider himself that then (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. See, Bevel--Bevel was still with SNCC at the time. Speaker 2: He was with SNCC then, okay. Speaker 1: At the time, yeah. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Now, we weren't necessarily with any group. See, I came in--was infused in this group of young radical students, and I started working for SNCC the summer of '62 [1962]. Okay, '61 [1961], I had come back from Chicago and, and went to Tougaloo. That next summer, '62 [1962], I went home for the summer and I was there a few days, and I told Mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] that I was going to Jackson and I was gonna work with Bob Moses to get my freedom, and I was on my way out of the door; I had my little suitcase, little orange suitcase packed, and ran out the door and ran to the Greyhound bus station and went to Jackson and joined up with Bob. I was the only female at the time, with [HistoryMaker] Lawrence Guyot, Curtis Hayes, Hollis Watkins and all, but I was the only girl. And Colia Liddell, who married Bernard Lafayette, was working for Medgar Evers at the time, and she started working with us and staying, cooking at the Freedom House for us so--because I don't really know how to cook that well, and they--I didn't learn how to cook because I was older and I had to take care of the children at the house. And so we worked around Jackson, and that--COFO was organized around the time James Meredith tried to enroll in Old--in the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Now, COFO was a combination of organizations? Speaker 1: SCL--Southern Christian Leadership Conference, Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] organization, NAACP, which was Medgar Evers, SNCC, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, CORE, the Congress of Racial Equality. Dave Dennis represented CORE, and these four organizations came together to form an alliance to bring young people to the State of Mississippi to do volunteer work to bring outside world into Mississippi because we were not making any traction in Mississippi. What we were doing, we were doing it but we weren't really making any great strides-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --meaning that the outside world was not aware of what was going on; it, it was shut off. Speaker 2: So, if somebody got--well, like the people that were killed you just named--Herbert Lee and other people (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: Did anybody else, I mean, know about--even know about it? In any other-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --places. And did the local people even know that it happened? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: 'Cause it wasn't on the news, or anything, or in the-- Speaker 1: No. (Singing) "Another man done gone" ['Anther Man Done Gone']. Story_ID: 618552 Speaker 1: So, there was a lot of discussion; I'm sure you're familiar with it--should we or should we not bring summer volunteers into Mississippi? Should whites come to Mississippi or not? That was a big debate that went back and forth. Speaker 2: Yeah, now--yeah, I heard about it. Now, how did that--was that a collective decision there by--I guess everybody had to come up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes, it was a collective decision from the--those of us in Mississippi, and we reached a consensus that we would do it. There was some opposition, but it wasn't confirmed--I mean opposition to the point that didn't change, and we--so we went to--I'm ahead of myself. We went to Clarksdale, Mississippi. Dr. Aaron Henry was there; we drove there to found COFO [Council of Federated Organizations], and when we got--once we got there--we'd been there about an hour. A fire truck came and said that they had come to put a fire out, and there was no fire in the church. And the meeting lasted around twelve [o'clock], but we had no idea they had a curfew on black people. You couldn't be on the streets after twelve. Speaker 2: In--where is this at, in-- Speaker 1: Clarksdale, Mississippi (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Clarksdale, Mississippi? Speaker 1: Yeah. So, several people got arrested. Dave Dennis, who was driving the car that we were in, there was Mattie Bivens, Colia Liddell and Lester McKinney and I who were in the car, and they--the police officer drove up behind him. We were trying to make it to Mound Bayou [Mississippi], but we didn't make it--got--stopped us before we got to Mound Bayou; made Dave get in the car with him, and kept him back there almost an hour, and Dave say, "This man is crazy; he's asking me where I got my blue eyes from," and say, "He say he's gonna take me to jail." Say, "And you all follow me on back." And so, we followed him back to the jail. Once we got to the jail they say--they yelled, "Get the F out of Clarksdale!" And here we were; we had never been to the Delta [Mississippi Delta], didn't know where we were, and it was blacker than a thousand midnights. Have you ever been to the Delta? Speaker 2: I've been out in Mississippi at night. Speaker 1: Up in the Delta? It's nothing but rows and rows of--there are no street lights. It's a plantation; they have no lights other than the stars and the moon, and you can't see anything. And we were wandering around there; I mean lost as sheep. And it took us 'til like almost six o'clock in the morning to find Amzie Moore's house. And James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel] and Diane [Diane Nash] were staying with Amzie at the time, and their first child was--had been born. And so we decided--but before we got to Clarksdale, we had to go through Ruleville [Mississippi], and we had heard that the night watchman in Ruleville was Milam [J.W. Milam], one of the brothers who had killed Emmett Till. And blacks had to be off the streets there at ten o'clock at night. And so when we got to Ruleville--Lester Mc- was driving. I say, "Lester, don't go twenty and don't go under twenty." I mean you're talking about being frightened to death. How do you explain it? I mean--so we got out of Ruleville, got on into Cleveland [Mississippi], went to Amzie's house, and we sat down and we met, and we decided that this is where we need to work. They have curfews up here, and have a lot of other things going on that need to be changed. Speaker 2: So that was--you consider that the worst part of Mississippi, or the hardest part, the toughest part (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Well, down there in Natchez [Mississippi], that was--well, it had a different flavor. It was--up in the Delta was tough in that it was strange, and a place that was for bidding, and it had been known to be a plantation for slaves, and they had a whole history of a lot of stuff. Emmett Till had been murdered up there, and people were working on plantations, they couldn't leave, sharecroppers, and so forth. So, some of the guys--Charlie Cobb and Hollis Watkins and Curtis [Curtis Hayes], and some of the other guys, would go out in the mornings and dress up like the sharecroppers and get on the buses and go to the fields to do organizing, and--to talk to people about voting, and so they found Miss Hamer [Fannie Lou Hamer]; she was in the group. Story_ID: 618553 Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You were talking about going to the plantations. Speaker 1: Yeah, to meet Fannie Lou Hamer. And that's when she--yeah. Speaker 2: Miss Hamer was among a group of sharecroppers who were working on the plantation, Milo [Dave Milo], M-I-L-O's plantation. And it was decided that a group would attempt to go to Indianola, Mississippi to try to register to vote, and--now, this was a very brave act, now that I'm sixty-five years old and thinking about it; I was nineteen, probably nineteen at the time, and they made the decision that they wanted to register to vote, and that morning, we all--I think we--I went in a car; they took a yellow school bus full of people to the courthouse in Indianola, Mississippi, and we stayed there all day long, and they did not let anyone vote--register rather. Nor did they attempt to strike anyone physically. Well, we went and knocked on doors--Charles McLaurin, Sam Block, myself, [HistoryMaker] Lawrence Guyot and others, knocked on doors trying to get people to come out, and we stayed there all day, and got ready to leave. We would go back to Ruleville [Mississippi], probably around 3:30 or 4:00. Got on the bus, and the police stopped the bus, said that it was the wrong color bus, and they wanted to fine it because they say it was a school bus. So monies had to be collected to pay, and we got back to Ruleville (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Said the bus--now, wait a minute; you said the bus was the wrong color for a school bus? Speaker 2: It was a yellow--the bus was yellow in color, and they say it was the wrong--the police say it was the wrong color bus, and fined the driver. We went on back to Ruleville and we were in the community. Before we went to the church, and as we formed in the church, Miss Hamer came running in the church crying, and everybody was wondering what was wrong, and she said that she had been kicked off the plantation, say Milo told her that she had to leave if she didn't take her name off the books, and she told him she didn't go to register for him, she went to register for herself. And so he told her either she take her name off the books or she was gonna have to leave, and he say, "But Pap [Perry Hamer]," her husband, "has to stay there and work to finish the crop out." So, she left, and she came to the church, and we all start singing a freedom song; of course we had a song for everything; that was, that was, that was what kept us going. Speaker 1: Where did the songs come from? Who was generating the songs? Speaker 2: We, we did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. "I woke up this morning--my mind--I'm free and I ain't scared of your jail because I want my freedom." "This little light o' mine, I'm gonna let it shine," whatever the occasion was at that particular time, we started singing the songs to match what was going on. Speaker 1: Okay, so a lot of these tunes are traditional black songs (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, some--but we-- Speaker 1: --but you would change the words. Speaker 2: Yes--they came out of the church. And so we all hugged around Miss Hamer and, and tried to lift her spirits, and she spent the night with the McDonalds [Rebecca McDonald and Joe McDonald], and stayed there for a good while. Speaker 1: Now, now, this is what year? This is '63 [1963] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-two [1962]. Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962], '2 [1962] okay. Speaker 2: The summer of '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Summer of '62 [1962], okay. Speaker 2: And so she never went back. Miss Hamer was very bright; she was the timekeeper-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --she weighed the cotton and kept the measurements, and was a gifted singer, gifted speaker-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, beautiful voice. Speaker 2: Yes, and she would rare back and sing and, and just a charismatic person--just plainspoken, plainspoken, and didn't meet any strangers. Story_ID: 618554 Speaker 1: And now that I'm looking at it, I'm thinking, would I follow someone nineteen years old at this time? Would I? Speaker 2: Well, it depends on if they--well, you know, I guess you'd have to ask yourself what they were bringing you. Speaker 1: Yeah. And what, what I think about and marvel over, is that I'm so happy and pleased that we had a message to take to them that they understood, and we were the bearer of good news that--of liberation that they had been waiting for. Speaker 2: Is that the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Sit back please. Speaker 2: Well, is that what you think is the reason why she, she would listen to you at, at--you know, young people in a--especially in a place like the South, that you've described. You described how Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]--how old timey it was, and how afraid the administration was, the curfews, and tried to limit the freedom of the students, I guess, to get them ready for real life (laughter). They wouldn't have any freedom. But, but here is, here is Fannie Lou Hamer who was willing to listen to nineteen year old kids. Speaker 1: Yes. And these people had nothing; they were living in shacks, working from sunup to sundown, and they were not vested in the system. And when you have nothing, you have nothing to lose, according to one of the blues singers. So, this is my first time saying it the way I've just said it to you, that the message that we brought them, the message of liberation that we brought them, was something that they had been waiting to hear, in my mind. 'Cause I pondered quite often, and I posed the question to you, would I, myself follow a nineteen year old student? We were all nineteen, twenty. [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was like twenty-five, maybe--he was old. But we, we had a message, and they--their ancestors had gone on, and we were the messengers who brought them the message that had been passed on that they were waiting for. Spiritually, that's the only way I can under--I can describe it because we had nothing but ourselves, and we lived in their homes and lived in the community, and ate what they ate. We had no money. Amzie Moore had one big old Packard car; I mean we were poor ourselves. We had nothing--we didn't have big shiny cars, and we only had a message, and the message was one of liberation for all of us. That's the best that I can explain it. Speaker 2: So--okay, now, sixty--this is 1962, you know. Speaker 1: Um-hm, and that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did Miss Hamer ever get back with her husband [Perry Hamer]? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: After he finished--I think he--someone told me he stayed there like four or five months. Story_ID: 618555 Speaker 1: And this was the same year James Meredith was trying to enroll in Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], so you had a lot going on. And one of the most troubling times of my--that--of my life was one Sunday we had gone back to Jackson [Mississippi], and one of the students who--I had joined Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, and Marylene Burks and her cousin, I think, had gone to Ruleville [Mississippi], and someone shot in the house, and they sustained gunshot wounds to the head, and so forth, and I heard that Marylene, who had been a good friend of mine on campus at Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]--I went to the hospital to visit her, and her mother hurled such insults at me until it devastated me. She said, "If it hadn't been for you, my daughter wouldn't have been shot; you should have been killed." I mean she really, really blamed me for everything that happened, and I had no idea that they were gonna shoot in the house, but she said, "If it hadn't been for you all, my daughter wouldn't be shot; you were the ones responsible--you should've been in the house," and just kept going on and on. So I had to leave the hospital; I was in tears, in tears--it was very devastating. So--and with Meredith trying to enroll in, in Ole Miss, there was a lot of upbeat, overt racism, you know; the flags--the rebel flags were flying, and the--on the radio, you know, had everything being played, and so forth. So, it was, it was a very dangerous time. And we--one Sunday (laughter), we went to Jackson--another Sunday we went to Jackson--we decided we want a root beer. And now that I look at older cars, they are larger, because I'm trying to figure out how did all of us get in those cars? And I was looking at a Chevrolet or something yesterday; the seats are quite expanded, right? And I said, "Eight people could ride in that car," because all of us would get in the car. And we went to A&W Root Beer [A&W Restaurant] in Jackson; we said, "We want a root beer." Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] gets out of the car to go into the A&W Root Beer place; here comes a man in a white shirt waving a pistol, waving a pistol, and telling us to leave, get away, and we said, "Come on, Bob! Come on, Bob!" And Bob said, "We're going to leave, but you're not gonna shoot us." And we said, "Come on, Bob! Come on, Bob!" Man just waving a pistol. Bob took his time and walked on back to the car, got in the car and drove away, and we were--we weren't really scared, but we didn't want the man to start shooting; we didn't know whether he was gonna shoot or not, but it was a chance you had to take. And I'm saying that to say that we never thought about fear or death, or dying that, that--throughout that whole period; it-- Speaker 2: How did you--what--the things that you describe, how did you deal with those? I mean how did, how did you--where could you find comfort or, or, or-- Speaker 1: I found comfort in going out seeing if someone wanted to register to vote. And, and we, ourselves made, made each other comfortable--singing, and going to a restaurant eating fried chicken, or listening to WLAC [WLAC Radio] out of Nashville, Tennessee at night. Speaker 2: Oh, the Hossman [Bill "Hoss" Allen], and all that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You remember that? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Night Train,' and all--yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so--and we-- Speaker 2: We, we could hear it in the North, you know-- Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: We could get it late at night. Speaker 1: Yeah, and we were young so, you know, we didn't--it didn't take that much for us, and death was not in our minds. Fear? No, no--no, we never thought about being scared. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, maybe the older people saw that and felt that, too--that, that we were not afraid. And it's easy to hook up with someone who doesn't manifest that fear, and you have confidence in them that they will do what they say they're going to do, and they will help me get to the next step. Story_ID: 618556 Speaker 1: Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] is almost--and he--when you read the books about the period, he almost sounds like a mystical figure. Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I would sit and stare at him for days on end trying to figure out his mind, but I never could. (Laughter) I never knew what he was thinking. Speaker 1: Now, he was a math and philosophy major-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --from New York City [New York, New York]. Raised and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Hamilton College [Clinton, New York] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And went to Hamilton College where he was the only black student. Speaker 2: And Harvard. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I--we didn't know what he was thinking either. But I told my mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] that I was going to Jackson [Mississippi] to work with Bob Moses and get my freedom, and ran out the door. So, there was something there about him that I knew that if I worked with him, I would get my freedom. Speaker 1: Now, this is--it's interesting 'cause, you know, everybody, you know, can relate to the charisma of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], hearing the I Have a Dream speech-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing. But, yeah, it seemed to be something about Bob Moses that people talk about that was--which is compelling, too, but not--it doesn't manifest itself in any large way; it's like a quiet kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, he never--he spoke very--he didn't speak very often, and when he did, what he had to say was important so you would stop and listen. Everybody would stop whenever he had something to say. And it wouldn't be long speeches, but whenever he spoke, you would listen. It would have been well thought out. Story_ID: 618557 Speaker 1: So, this is '62 [1962]? We're still in '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that fall of '62 [1962], I decided that--that's when I went to Nashville, Tennessee. Miss Hamer [Fannie Lou Hamer]--Charles McLaurin from Jackson [Mississippi], a local young guy who had joined up with Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses]--he was from Lanier High School [William H. Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi]--James Jones, Landy McNair, Jimmy Travis, Curtis Hayes, Hollis Watkins, [HistoryMaker] Frank Smith--and I can't think of the others right now. But we went to Nashville, Tennessee to join in solidarity with the students at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] who were sitting in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And on our way--they--Miss Hamer was in the car. Miss Hamer was picked up by Charles McLaurin, and brought to Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] where they picked me up and some more people, and we went up to Natchez Trace [Natchez Trace Parkway]. And I remember falling asleep and waking up and the car was veering off the Natchez Trace--I don't fall asleep on any moving vehicle now. And Landy had fallen asleep and I grabbed the steering wheel. He was trying to go in one direction but we were saved, and the car broke down and we had to stop on the highway, go to some mechanic's shop, but we had a lot of problems. And we fin- but we finally got to Nashville, and we stayed there maybe a day or so, demonstrated, and came on back, and I decided that I was going to join up with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and (laughter) I dropped out of school. I had dropped in school, dropped out, and went to Coronea Farm [sic. Koinonia Farm, Sumter County, Georgia]. President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]--I can't think of the--his associate, who worked for him at the time. His father [James Earl Carter, Sr.] may have owned Coronea Farm in Georgia. We had a retreat there. It was like the fall of '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: But what--what's the name of this? Speaker 2: Coronea, Coronea Farm. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: C-O-R-O-N-E-A, or maybe (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, Coronea Fa- okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Joe--Joe--not Jody Powell, but the other one. There were two who were from Georgia who came with President Carter. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: Jody Powell and--he had cancer but he, he's doing all right--now. But anyway, his family owned it, and we were at a re- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not Hodding Carter [Hodding Carter III]. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we stayed there, and so after the retreat was over, I went on to Atlanta, Georgia and stayed there for a while, and decided that I was going to stay with SNCC, and I went to Chicago [Illinois] maybe that January of '63 [1963]? Story_ID: 618558 Speaker 1: And Clyde Kennard had just been released from Parchman penitentiary [Mississippi State Penitentiary, Parchman, Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Now what--tell us about that. Now, why did he--now, he's the person that was in charge of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna tell you--yeah, I'm gonna tell you this now. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 1: Okay. He had been released from Parchman penitentiary and he was being treated at Billingsley Hospital [ph.] for his cancer of the stomach. And he described the whole ordeal as being one of being framed. He had attended the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and had gone back home to help his sick mother; his father had passed, and he made two attempts to enroll in Mississippi Southern [Mississippi Southern College; University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, Mississippi]--that was like '57 [1957], '58 [1958]. And the first time he went on campus, they say he had several gallons of moonshine in his car and was arrested, and they released him. R. Jess Brown--Attorney R. Jess Brown was, was his lawyer, one of the, the two black lawyers--maybe two or three black lawyers in the state. And the second time he attempted to enroll, they had this--are you coming up? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes Speaker 1: This illiterate black man--young, young guy--to sit--who worked for the chicken--for--Clyde owned a chicken farm factory--not factory, chicken farm, and the young guy worked as a--worked at the chicken feed factory, and he told the authorities that he had sold Clyde Kennard five sacks of stolen chicken feed for his chickens, and as a result, he received seven years of hard labor at Parchman penitentiary for it. He stayed in the Forrest County Jail [Hattiesburg, Mississippi] over a year and--before he was sent to prison. And he became ill with his stomach, and the University of Southern--University of Mississippi Medical Center [Jackson, Mississippi] doctors, upon discharge, indicated that he should be released from prison because of his medical condition. The state refused, and he told me that they made him work, and he was--you know, they wore these big brogan shoes, and the mud was so thick it pulled the soles off the shoes that he had on, and he would fall in the mud. I mean he was a frail man, a very gentle man, a very kind hearted person who bore no ill will towards anyone--a, a good spirit. And so he said that he was treated very badly and he couldn't get the medication. Story_ID: 618559 Speaker 1: So he was released, according to what I was told, by the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration after the young man had been kidnapped by Johnson Publishing Company in Mississippi and flown to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Wait a minute. What, what happened now? Now, you've got a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The, the young man who worked for the chicken feed factory-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --was taken to Chicago, and a deposition was extracted from him. Speaker 2: Now, how did he get there? You said he was kidnapped? Speaker 1: Well, he was taken to Chicago. Speaker 2: Taken to Chicago, okay-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --by the--by somebody from Jet magazine, or what? Speaker 1: I was told that they were involved. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he gave a deposition stating that he had lied. And this was turned over to then Attorney General Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], who in turn put pressure on Governor Ross Barnett and some of the businessmen in the state of--who owned property, or whatever in the State of Mississippi, and that's how he was released. And he was released like January; he died on July 4th of that year--of '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: So, basically--really, you think he, he was--all this happened because he was organizing NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth and was involved in some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, he, he was trying to finish school-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --at the University of Southern Mississippi [Mississippi Southern College; University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Two attempts were made--first was the moonshine they claimed they found in his car; second time he was framed for receiving stolen chicken feed. And I think he may have had like a year or so to finish college, because he had attended University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and they didn't want him in school; he, he couldn't go, so they framed him and put him in the penitentiary [Mississippi State Penitentiary, Parchman, Mississippi]. Speaker 2: What was the difference between what happened to him and what happened to James Meredith? I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) James Meredith was enrolled in University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --by the federal government. Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: And the Kennedy administration told Governor Ross Barnett that he would be personally fined so many thousands of dollars a day if he interfered, so that's why there were no problems. Speaker 2: Okay. But Charles Kennard [sic. Clyde Kennard] didn't have that kind of protection. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No. Well, he was the, the same one who was our youth chapter advisor-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and that was a horrible thing to witness. So, I saw him and I'll, I'll, I will never forget that and, and that was in January, and on June 12th of '63 [1963], Medgar was killed--Medgar Evers was killed. Story_ID: 618560 Speaker 1: The March on Washington was August 28th, and September, the church [16th Street Baptist Church] was blown up in Birmingham [Alabama]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --so you had all these things going on. Speaker 2: So you were working for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] that whole summer--full-time? Speaker 1: I had gone back to Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] the fall of sixty--'63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: When the church was blown up, I was in school. Speaker 2: Well, that summer they were de--that summer of '63 [1963], there were demonstrators all over the Unites States. I recently had to go write something about a Dayton [Ohio] civil rights leader and I just--all the papers were filled with things going on in every city in the U.S. Demonstrating (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In '63 [1963]? Speaker 2: Yeah, '63 [1963], there was something every day. Speaker 1: As a result of the March on Washington? Speaker 2: No. Leading, leading up to it, before, after, you know--during it, you know. People in the North like laying down in front of businesses and stuff-- Speaker 1: (Makes sound). Speaker 2: --and, and restaurants, and all kinds of things were going on all--yeah, every day there was something. Speaker 1: That's good. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a hot summer; they called it a hot--long, hot summer, and all that. But yeah, I think--well, a lot of activity going on that summer. Story_ID: 618561 Speaker 1: You know, we were with Medgar [Medgar Evers] that night because the boycott had been going on in Jackson [Mississippi], and we had been demonstrating the whole day, and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--Ruby Hurley had put a moratorium on demonstrations, and it was like you can't do this. Lena Horne and her son [Ted Jones] and Billy Strayhorn had come down, and [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte's first wife [Marguerite Belafonte] was there; Floyd Patterson came, and Dr. Jeanne Noble [Jeanne L. Noble], who was president of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority at the time. (Background noise) You--let us know when you're ready because you're interfering. And shortly after Lena Horne left--[HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory was there, too. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead and speed. Speaker 2: Yes. We were demonstrating against Jackson because we wanted black police officers on the force; we wanted to be able to try clothes on in the downtown stores, we wanted blacks to be hired in certain positions in downtown, and wanted to be treated like human beings. So, that particular night, we--plus, we were holding rallies every night at the different churches--and that particular night, we'd been to the Elks club [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World] and had dinner, and so Medgar said, "Well, I'll see you all in the morning." We said, "Okay, we'll see you tomorrow." And I went home with Dave Dennis, his wife, and this girl Anne Moody, and I had never had such a restless sleep; it felt like the doors were opening and closing and just, just restless. And so Mattie [Mattie Bivins] came and knocked on the door; she said, "Dorie [HistoryMaker Dorie Ladner], Medgar is dead." I said, "I knew it." And it was like three or four in the morning, and so about five [o'clock], you know, we had gotten up and were getting dressed, and it was the same time that George Wallace stood in the doorway of the school, "Segregation now, segregation forever," and-- Speaker 1: He was doing that that same per- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) day. Speaker 1: --day? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. So, we got dressed, went on over to the Masonic temple--Medgar's offices--there with these two uniform--white uniform police officers sitting in front of the office across the street; the office is here (gesture), and they were across the street. So, I went up to the-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: I said, "Shoot! Shoot! Shoot us in the back like you did Medgar Evers! Why are you sitting here now?" I, I was furious. "Where were you last night? Why are you here now? Why are you here now? Why don't you shoot us all now, and kill us all now, like you did him last night? You shouldn't be here!" Just went berserk. And they sat there with no response; they never responded. And so we went to Jackson State campus [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], and me having been a student there, went there to try to get students organized. I spoke to some of the administrators and told them what had happened, and by them working for the state, it was the same state school I had described earlier, of course, you know, you didn't get any response, and came back to the office--the NAACP office across the street which was Lynch Street [John R. Lynch Street], named after J.R. Lynch [John R. Lynch]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Do you know his history? Speaker 1: Yeah, John Roy Lynch, the good, the good--well, the good--yeah, he's a--he was a black congressman, John Roy Lynch. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He ended up living the balance of his life in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: He did? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. He lived on King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], which is no- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he wasn't from Mississippi either. Story_ID: 618562 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about John Roy Lynch Street [John R. Lynch Street], you know, which is the street--John Roy Lynch [John R. Lynch] being a black congressman, Reconstruction congressman who-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I was--I'm very happy to get this history--more history about it because I got a, a little from 'The Senator and The Socialite' ['The Senator and the Socialite: The True Story of America's First Black Dynasty,' Lawrence Otis Graham]--chronicling the lives of a Senator Blanche K. Bruce and his wife [Josephine Willson Bruce], from Mississippi. And I was in Jackson [Mississippi] the end of March, and the streets are still named John R. Lynch, and I learned that John R. Lynch was not a native of Mississippi, but he came there--he and Senator Bruce came there for opportunities, and they were quite successful. Speaker 1: I think Bruce is from Missouri I know; he was from Missouri (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, quite successful. Story_ID: 618563 Speaker 1: But getting back to Medgar Evers and the day that he, he was killed. We decided that instead of him having a nice, quiet, big funeral, that a story had to be told, and it be told in a, a very activist way, with drama. And so Diane Nash, James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel], Lester McKinney, Paul Brooks, myself, and I can't recall who else, but the, the same guys who I named earlier--Curtis [Curtis Hayes] and Hollis [Hollis Watkins] and all of us were leading, and saying that something had to be done because that very idea of the police force leading the procession and taking him--the funeral was in the Masonic temple, and they were leading the procession, and they were taking him to Farish Street, which is the black street in, in Jackson [Mississippi], like the Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] or 47th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue]? Speaker 2: It's like the business--black business strip? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. And that was a very wealthy street, owned by the Redmond family. Farish Street has a--quite a history, but when we got to Farish Street, they made the left turn to go to the Hall and Collins--name was Hall and Collins Funeral Home [Collins Funeral Home, Inc.], and stopped the hearse, and we said, "Oh, no, no. A story has to be told." So, I started singing, "This little light of mine, I'm gonna let it shine," all along North Capitol Street. See, the state capitol is right on North Capitol [Mississippi State Capitol, Jackson, Mississippi], and it's just a few steps over from Farish Street, and I start singing and started running, and other people started coming (background noise) behind me, and when we got to Farish and North Capitol, the--they had deputized the sanitation workers, and they threw a blockade across the street and backed a pickup truck there to use as a paddy wagon. Speaker 2: Now, these are other black people, right--the sanitation workers (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, these--they were white. Speaker 2: They're not? All the sanitation workers were white? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right. Speaker 1: So, we said--when it turned--they brought the dogs out. I'm scared of dogs, so I jumped over in a little pickup truck, and there was a old white man standing there with a switchblade knife, which was unusual for me to see a white man with switchblade knives, like he was gonna cut himself. And he was shaking, and Mr. Withers--I don't know if you heard of Mr. Withers; he was a freelance photographer? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ernest Withers from, from Memphis [Tennessee], right? Yeah that's right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes. They had beaten Mr. Withers' face black and blue, and he was bleeding all over because he had taken a lot of photographs. Story_ID: 618564 Speaker 1: And so several of us were thrown into the little pickup truck, and many people were incarcerated on the fairgrounds [Mississippi State Fairgrounds] there in Jackson [Mississippi] because--as a result of the demonstration that had been going on, and so when we got to the fairgrounds, Mr. Withers [HistoryMaker Ernest Withers] said, "What am I gonna do with these film?" I was wearing these lace up orthopedic shoes at the time. I say, "Well, I'll keep them for you." And I took the film and put them in the side of my shoe, and so they called Mr. Withers out--it was so hot, and Mr. Withers said--they said, "What--we want that film." He said, "I don't have any film." And so they opened the truck door and said, "We're gonna take you all out one by one, and search, and whoever got the film is gonna go in the sweat box." So, I say, "Oh, hell!" Because Jesse Harris had been on the county farm--had been in the sweatbox. You know what the sweatbox is? Speaker 2: Tell us. I saw a--I seen it in a movie, but you tell me what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The sweatbox is like what they call, torture water boarding. They raise the temperature up to such a level that you will automatically faint from the heat exhaustion, and they will revive you, and then sweat you out again--I mean make you unconscious from the heat, and don't give you any water. And so I say, "It's not worth that." And so I took the film. I said, "Here." And they said, "That old gal there's got them." Said, "Now, you know you ought to be ashamed. Here, letting these old outsiders get you in trouble; I know your mama and daddy ashamed of you." And so we had to stand outside with our arms up on the fence, in this 110 degree heat, for about thirty minutes, and finally they let us go inside, and all the rest of the people were inside the fairground. And within ten minutes, "Dorie Ann Ladner [HistoryMaker Dorie Ladner], fall out!" I say, "Oh, my god! Where am I going?" I had been to jail one time by myself. I had demonstrated that December of '62 [1962], and Medgar [Medgar Evers] had us demonstrating against Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company], Charles Brace [ph.] and I, and I stayed in there a few hours and got out. But Jailer Miller [ph.] had asked me, while I was in there by myself, "During that Civil Rights Movement, did they teach you how to go with white men?" I say, "No, sir, they teach you we all sisters and brothers, we supposed to love each other." And he said, "Okay, Meg [ph.] will come and get you out." But that was that time. So, this time I'm going back, and there were two women from Baton Rouge [Louisiana], whose names I can't remember; they made them come out, and so they put three of us in the backseat of the car, and the two white officers were sitting in the front and not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse. And so they drove us to the jail, and we--you had to get on a elevator to go upstairs. I got upstairs, I say, "How you, Jailer Miller? How you, Captain Ray [John Lee Ray]?" He was a friendly police captain, who would speak to you downtown, and so forth. They weren't saying a word. I say, "Whoa." So, went on into the cell block, then they, they start bringing more people in, and then it started getting dark. And I'm still waiting to go to Parchman [Mississippi State Penitentiary, Parchman, Mississippi] or to county farm , or--I didn't know where I was going; it was very uncertain and very unsettling. But, the point had to be made that Medgar was not gonna be taken in a nice, quiet way, and nothing happen. He was killed, and everybody just stood by and watched and wept. No. Make some noise--be rude. I believe in raising hell. So, they came in late that night looking for a woman with a flashlight, and they said that she had beaten up a police officer, and they were looking for her and they didn't see her, and so finally daybreak came, and maybe about three o'clock, John Doar from the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] came and got us out and took us back to the Masonic temple, and we had another rally there. But I was charged with inciting to riot, and several other people--but I didn't realize that a riot had occurred. When I jumped in that little pickup truck, you know, they drove us on off there. They said people just went off--just started throwing everything they could and just--I mean just bedlam broke loose. Story_ID: 618565 Speaker 1: It was such a painful, painful time. Your, your mentor--the individual who had nurtured you and who had taught you, and who had taken time to teach you, and to see him gunned down like that, and you'd been with them the night before and said, "We'll see you tomorrow." And I went to both the trials, and Byron De La Beckwith, the murderer, came into the courtroom, they say he had already shot his wife [Mary Williams Beckwith] in the buttocks when he came to court. And his son [Byron De La Beckwith, Jr.] was there. The first judge was moderate; he said, "You could sit wherever you wanna sit." And it was quiet in the courtroom, so we'd come in and sit down; we'd come from Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] every day and observe. But one day I came, and this white man put his foot up on the seat to keep me from sitting down and I said, "The judge said we could sit wherever we wanna sit. Move your foot!" And he took his foot down. So, my buddy (laughter), Thomas Armstrong, who was with me--looked for Armstrong--Armstrong was sitting back there acting as if, if he didn't know me, but it didn't matter. The next day I came to court, these same men would say, "Here she comes; what she gonna do this time?" I said, "The same thing I did yesterday." 'Cause Mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] always told us, "Don't you back down; once you get into it, you stay in." And so, they found--they had a--but the way the jury was selected, William Waller who later became judge--the DA [district attorney] at that time, said--would say, when they selected a jury, "Medgar Evers was a nigger, he lived over in nigger town, I didn't agree with what he did, and I know you don't either, but it's my job to uphold the law. Do you think it's wrong for a white man to kill a nigger?" And some of them said--would say, "No," some indifferent, and so that's how he selected the first jury. The second trial--that was mistrial. The second trial, the Klu Klux Klan [sic. Ku Klux Klan, KKK] came, and they dominated the whole courtroom. The jailer--the bailiff had a big thick cane and made us go up to the balcony, and we had to sit in the balcony. But see, we had to time it just right because if we were there by the time they got out of court, we would get beaten, so we would leave and run down those marble steps. You know, in these courthouses, they had these marble steps and those old raggedy elevators? We would run down the steps and get away from the courthouse, and Farish Street [Jackson, Mississippi] was like--almost a mile from where we were; you had the courthouse and the jail right together, so we would (makes sound) run. And the second mis- this--Beckwith would come in for the Klan, they would give him a standing ovation, he would take his bow, and make his little speech and thank them, and they would applaud him and he would have his seat. And so, another mistrial was declared, and this time they--we got caught; they had let out so fast, we weren't able to get away, but Jesse Morris drove up (laughter) in one of those VW [Volkswagen] wagons, and said, "Do y'all need a ride?" And we said, "Yes," and we jumped in and flew, and that was divine intervention because they were very angry, very angry--you know, the Klan, 'cause they were there, and so we got away safely. Story_ID: 618566 Speaker 1: I must say that throughout this--all these ordeals that I'm describing to you, I was never struck. I was never hurt physically, I was never assaulted; the closest I came to that was I was in Brookhaven, Mississippi at the Greyhound bus station, on my way to McComb, Mississippi, and the bus stopped, and I got off and I went to the bathroom. When I came out, on either side of the door, these two men who looked like Hulk Hogan were standing there. They said, "Black bitch, don't you know where your bathroom is?" And I didn't say anything--it was dark. And they said--they started flailing their arms over my head and said, "Your bathroom is back there," and they kept pointing their heads and leading me to the back of the building, and they said, "That's your bathroom right there," and I nodded. And there was one black man sitting there working, he--and he was observing. And so the bus came, I got on the bus, and I left. That's the one--only time that I really, really felt encroached upon. And I would've really been out numbered at that time 'cause I, I couldn't have fought both of them. So they, they didn't bother me. Story_ID: 618567 Speaker 1: But getting back to Medgar's [Medgar Evers] death, it took its toll on me being a twenty year old female who had learned from this man, who had the greatest confidence in this man who was like a father figure, a, a tutor, a mentor, and so forth, and who had the, the, the--not only the feel for black people, but for all mankind, white and black; there was no respective person. See, I told Dr. Kazim, K-A-Z-I-M at Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.]--I spoke to his class a few weeks ago, that I'm glad I'm not bitter and angry. I've had enough experiences to really make me a hateful and mean person, from the experiences that I've had and witnessed, but somehow a higher power has prevailed spiritually and has taken charge and has kept me on an even keel, and that's the only way I've been able to function. And when we went to the funeral in Birmingham [Alabama], I had that American flag. The, the National Guard had been ordered by the government to stand charge, but they had the Dixie flag sewn on their uniforms, and I held this American flag, and when the funeral procession was about to leave the church, we were gonna march behind the cortege, and Diane Nash came running and said, "No, no, you can't march, you can't march. Look at them, they're all on top of the building; they gonna shoot you in the street, they're gonna shoot us. Don't march! Don't march!" And pointing up there (gesture), the rifles were trained down on us right there at the church in Birmingham. So, we didn't, and we were--Reverend Ed King, who was chaplain at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]--he was white--and Jeannine Herron, white female, Joan Trumpauer [Joan Trumpauer Mulholland], a white student from Tougaloo, and myself and one young black man from Birmingham, we were about to leave and go back to Jackson [Mississippi], but the police stopped us just as we were about to leave the outskirts of town, and drove us up into the parking lot and someone went and got Jeannine's husband; he worked for Life magazine--Look magazine, and one black man whose name I can't remember who worked for the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]. And so they came running and said, "What are you--what, what are you doing with them?" They said, "They look suspicion, they look like the bombers; we're gonna take them in and, and hold them." And he said, "No, you can't hold them, they are not the bombers." And that would've been seventy-two hours, right? For us? And so we--they let us go, we went back to Gaston Motel [A.G. Gaston Motel, Birmingham, Alabama], we had to spend the night. Those police officers kept coming through there, circling through the motel, and looking at us, so we went inside because they were intimidating, and we went inside and got out of their eyesight--left early the next morning, and went back to Jackson. I, I found it astounding that we looked like the bombers. I, I couldn't fathom the idea that--well, there were three whites and two blacks in the VW--Beetle bug--Volkswagen bus--minibus, so that's the only reason I could think, other than them just being crazy. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean Birmingham was famous for--well, the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] bombing black churches and black people back (unclear). Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Now, Vernon Dahmer's home was firebombed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hattiesburg [Mississippi], Hattiesburg. Speaker 2: Hattiesburg, that's Mississippi, right? Speaker 1: (Nods yes). Speaker 2: Is he still alive at this point--in this juncture in the story? This is nine- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: You think? Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. He, he was killed in like '67 [sic. 1966]. Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 618568 Speaker 1: Another thing that I did--see, I went to work in Natchez [Mississippi], but I told you the southwest part was off limits for--and Chuck McDew [Charles McDew], who was the second chairman of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], after [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry; George Greene, a young man from Greenwood, Mississippi whose father was very active with the movement--his whole family and I went in to southwest Mississippi; we said, "They're not going to tell us what to do." I mean we waited and waited and waited--the hell with it. If we can go into the Delta [Mississippi Delta], and go to all parts of Mississippi, we can go on into Natchez. So, we went and we were met by the local police, and-- Speaker 2: Now this is in the--in--still in '63 [1963] we're talking about? Speaker 1: I'm going to '64 [1964] now. Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964], okay. This is the--early '64 [1964] then--January? Speaker 1: No. Okay, I'm skipping here. Okay, early part of '64 [1964], I--where was I? I was in--school. Speaker 2: Okay. so you were back at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]? Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But one thing I was going to say about that period that was really dumb on my part, and my life was saved by the same mean bus driver. I didn't tell you anything about Natchez, right? Other than it was a tran- it was a town that was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's more interaction-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: --and it was an easier interaction (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it was very hard to organize. And Charles Evers came in, and he was--it was--not a good person, not a nice person. Speaker 2: Was he trying to organize it, too? Speaker 1: He came there and--to work. He stayed there and he became mayor of Fayette, Mississippi, which is not far from Natchez-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and started dating one of the local ladies who owned a lot of property in Fayette. And SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]--Hosea Williams had been there. Reverend Sampson [HistoryMaker Albert Richard Sampson] from Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Al Sampson? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was there. And quite a few people came through there. But I got arrested in Natchez because we were passing out flyers for citizenship classes, and they took us to jail, put sugar in the tank of my car, tore up our citizen band radios, took my eleven dollars and my little diamond ring, and kept us overnight. And I kept going back down to the police station demanding my money and my little ring, and one day I went down there they had a big sign on the wall, "Come to the baseball--come to the park; nigger--bring your bat, niggers' heads will be batted in the park this weekend." We hadn't planned to go to the park. And so--I wasn't scared; I would go down there because I wanted my money, and I would go by myself. And I'm sitting here--as I'm talking to you, I'm think--all these things are coming back to me. And Charles Evers had led a group of people on a demonstration--we, we did things, but we weren't crazy. And these were older people, and they had been--he said that--it was at night, and I never marched at night. They got locked up, taken to the National Guard armory there in Natchez, and before they knew it, they had brought some buses there and taken them all the way to Parchman [Mississippi State Penitentiary, Parchman, Mississippi], way up north, and Charles was sitting on the porch with the chief of police at Mamie Lee's [Mamie Lee Mazique] house drinking coffee, and these people up in Parchman two hundred miles away. And we were running around there trying to get their bond signed; you had to get a chief of police and a property owner to sign the bond before it would be honored, and the chief of police made himself unavailable. And I got so frustrated. I asked one of the police officers, "Where is the chief of police," J.T. Robinson, "where is Mr. Robinson?" "Oh, he's, he's at the Holiday Inn." I got in a cab, went out there and stood in the middle of the floor and had them to page him, and he didn't respond, so, I got back in the cab and I left. But, it was a hour on the highway, it was segregated, I'm by myself, I'm so goddamn mad, I'm thinking, you're gonna sign these bonds; I'm sick of you. And nothing happened to me. So--but we were able to get everybody out. Story_ID: 618569 Speaker 1: And did I describe to you how they attempt to bomb our office? I told you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is in, in-- Speaker 1: In Natchez [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: In Natchez? No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, well, the--we got word that our office had been bombed. It was one night, and so we went running--it was in a alley, and we went running over there with some local guys, and when we got there, every white person in Natchez was there in this alley, and we looking around, and this tavern belonged to Jake Fishman [ph.] who--and this black woman he lived with. The chief of police said he'd been living--he'd known him all his life, since she was a little boy; she was black as a Ace of Spade. And they had this little tavern, and the people who came up from the back, they threw gasoline in the back, and the place was exploded, and a child saw them--saw the place burn, so everybody was able to get out. And so when we got there, we were looking around, and I said to the fire chief--he had this white shirt on. I said, "Who's house is that?" It was a Freedom House, our house, with all these signs, "Freedom Now," and so forth. He said, "That bomb wasn't meant for that house," (gesture). "That bomb was meant for that house" (gesture). I say, "Oh, my god!" In the meantime, this girl, Jessie Bernard [Jessie Bernard Williams] from Natchez had the nerve to faint right there in front a all those people. And I walked over and stepped over her 'cause it was no time to faint. And so we went on back to George Metcalf house. George Metcalf was the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and he owned a boarding house, and we were renting rooms from him. And the phone started ringing, and--, "Dorie [HistoryMaker Dorie Ladner], telephone." I go to the phone. "Hello Dorie, you SOB." And finally I got that woman to stop calling me. I say, "You know what? Little Richard is coming to town." I say, "If you don't call me no more I'll get you a ticket and you can go see him." She say, "You promise Dorie?" I say, "Yes." I said, "I will get you a ticket." She say, "Oh, thank you, Dorie, thank you, Dorie." The woman didn't call me anymore. Speaker 2: Now this is somebody you don't know, or you don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's somebody that I didn't know. She may have known me, but I didn't know her. But when I told her Little Richard was coming, she was happy. But every night--every evening, because people go to bed early in the South--about this time a day. They would ring the phone, and leave the phone off the hook. And we had no outside communication. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The phone would ring in my hand. I'm holding the phone, it's still ringing. So, we were cut off. I mean--and I would go to bed scared to death, and I wake up the next morning--oh! Speaker 2: So, so the office was separate from the Freedom House, you said. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. The office is separate, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All right. And then you went into Natchez in nineteen sixty-- Speaker 1: Four [1964]. Speaker 2: Four [1964], okay, early part of '64 [1964]. Now, did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, it was the later part of '64 [1964] because the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] had said it was off limits. Speaker 2: The later part of '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: We don't wanna skip the whole summer of '64 [1964] now. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay, so let's not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, up in Oxford, up in Oxford, Ohio, I was there. Speaker 2: Okay, that's the spring of '64 [1964], right? When you were organizing in Oxford? Speaker 1: No, it was like June, like--maybe like June when the volunteers start coming into Mississippi? Speaker 2: Yeah, but they organized in the spring in Oxford at, at the college, women's college up there [Western College for Women]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Oxford--Oxford, Ohio. Story_ID: 618570 Speaker 1: This photograph is my great-great-grandfather Benjamin Woulard, spelled W-O-O-L-A-R-D or W-O-U-L-A-R-D, W-O-L-L-A-R-D, from Rockingham, North Carolina, who settled in Mississippi Territory around 1820, '29 [1829] with my great-great-grandmother Mary [Mary Woulard], who was described as a black Indian, and they begat five children. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, describe this one? Speaker 1: That's my Grandfather Joseph Woullard's brother Fred Woullard, who was born in Wayne County, Mississippi to the parents of Jerry Woulard, my great-grandfather, and Rhoda Dean Woulard. He died in Wayne County, Mississippi; was born and raised in Wayne County, Mississippi. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next one--next. Okay, describe this one. Speaker 1: This is Tom Woullard [ph.], my grand- my grandfather's first cousin, who was born in Wayne County, Mississippi around the 1860s and died in Forrest County, Mississippi in the--I would say '20s, 1920s. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, photo number four. Speaker 1: These are some of my mother Annie Ruth Woullard's [Annie Woullard Perryman] children [sic. siblings]. Annie Ruth was the daughter of Joe Woullard and the granddaughter of Jerry Woulard. To your immediate left is my Uncle Eddie James [Edward Woullard], my mother's sister LeDrester [LeDrester Woullard Hayes] and my Uncle Charles [ph.], my mother's sister Mary [Mary Woullard Thompkins], my Grandmother Martha [Martha Gates Woullard], my Uncle Jerry Prince [Jerry Woullard], Aunt Allen [ph.], my mother's brother Luther [Luther Woullard], my mother--my Aunt Marjorie [Marjorie Woullard], my mother's brother Lon [Lon Woullard], and my Aunt Winnie [Winnie Woullard]. And that was made around 1950 in Hattiesburg, Mississippi at my grandmother's birthday party. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good. Number five. Speaker 1: Those are my mother's brothers and one sister; they're all deceased now. To your immediate left is my Uncle Luther, my Uncle Jerry Prince standing in the rear, my mother standing on the front row, Annie Ruth Woullard, my Uncle Lon standing directly behind her, my Aunt Lee Drester standing next to her, my Uncle Joseph Woullard, and my Uncle Prince Woullard. This was made at a family reunion picnic in Forrest County, Hattiesburg, Mississippi. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good. Photo number six. Speaker 1: This is my mother Annie Ruth Woullard; that picture was made in Hattiesburg, Mississippi somewhere around the 19--late 1940s or early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on, please. Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay? Speaker 1: That's my mother Annie Ruth Woullard; the picture was made around the 1980s. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on one second. Okay, we got it. All right. Speaker 1: That's my grandmother Martha Gates Woullard Battles; she was the daughter of Prince Woullard--Prince Gates, the great-granddaughter of Phillip Gates [ph.]. She was born in Wayne County, Mississippi July 4th, 19--1896 and died 1969 in Forrest County, Mississippi. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: She had one sister named Mary [ph.]. Speaker 2: That's, that's my mother's oldest brother Jerry Prince Woullard who was born in Wayne County, Mississippi, died in Forrest County, Mississippi. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's my mother's brother Lon Edward Woullard, born in Wayne County, Mississippi, died in DeLand, Florida and is buried in DeLand, Florida. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's my mother's youngest sister; she's the youngest of the eleven--name was Lucy Mae Woullard [Lucy Woullard Johnson] and she died in Forrest County, Mississippi in 2004-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on, please; hold on a second. Speaker 2: --died in Forrest--she died in Forrest County, Mississippi, 2004. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's one of the two of my great--of my Grandfather Joseph Woullard's cousins; his name was Floyd Woullard [ph.]. He died last year, 2007, in--he was born in, born in Vinegar Bend, Alabama, and died in Moss Point, Mississippi, 2007. He was the son of Eugene Woullard the--Eugene Woullard was the son of Jerry Woullard, my grandfather's brother. Speaker 1: That's my mother's Pri- brother Prince Woullard, who was born in Wayne County, and died in Forrest County, Mississippi. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's my mother's brother Luther Woullard who died two years ago, 2006, but he was born July 11th, 1919 and died 2006; born in Wayne County, Mississippi, died in Hattiesburg, Mississippi. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: That's my mother Annie Ruth Woullard. That photograph was made July 1944; Mother was around twenty-two years old. My sister Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] is about nine months old, I'm about a year and a half old on the photograph. Speaker 2: Which one is this? Is this (points)-- Speaker 1: That is me, [HistoryMaker] Dorie Ladner-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and Joyce Ladner. My mother Annie Ruth--Annie Ruth Woullard had married Eunice Ladner, my father. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Next? Speaker 1: Those photographs of my sisters and brothers. My mother remarried to William Perryman who's standing in the hat in the center. To your immediate--this was--picture was made on the occasion of Joyce receiving her Ph.D. in sociology at Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis] in St. Louis, Missouri, 1968. To my immediate left is my deceased brother Tommy Perryman [ph.], my sister Willa Perryman [Willa Perryman Tate], my mother, my brother Archie Perryman, my stepfather William Perryman, the--in the--on the front row my youngest sister Hazel Perryman [Hazel Perryman Mimbs] who was about eight years old, in the back my brother Freddie Perryman [Frederick Perryman], my sister Joyce Ladner, and to your right my sister Billie Perryman [Billie Perryman Collins]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That photograph was made at a farewell for Mayor Marion Barry [HistoryMaker Marion Barry], then mayor of Washington, D.C. My daughter Yodit [Yodit Churnet] and me at a very scrumptious occasion for the mayor, a very, very dear friend of mine; I've known him since the civil rights days, since I was about nineteen years old (laughter). Speaker 2: That is another early picture of me, and I appear to be about two years old. That picture was made in Hattiesburg, Mississippi. My aunt told me that they had tried to straighten my hair and it turned out looking like horns, and (laughter) they laugh about it, but that is me, Dorie Ladner (simultaneous). Story_ID: 618571 Speaker 1: To the left is [HistoryMaker] Dorie Ladner, in the middle is my father Eunice Stafford Ladner who was born July 13, 1914, and my daughter Yodit Churnet. We went to visit Daddy Christmas about 2003, and at that time we took a photograph together. Daddy has since expired--about three years ago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Photo number twenty? Speaker 1: He was born June 13th, 1914. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That is my mother Annie Ruth Woullard Ladner [Annie Woullard Perryman] at the time. She was around twenty-one years of age, born in Battles, Mississippi May 14th, 1921. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next? Speaker 1: This picture is of my father Eunice Ladner's maternal side. To the--sitting down to the immediate left is his mother, Della Ladner--Della McLeod [Della McLeod Ladner] at that time. Next to her is her sister, her sister, her sister and her brother--brother, and the man sitting in the chair is my great-great-grandfather Pete Lawson [Peter Lawson]. I don't have history on him; I'm researching him. Standing in the rear is my great-grandmother Nancy McLeod--Nancy Lawson McLeod; she married my great-grandfather Duncan Adams McLeod [Duncan McLeod] who was born in Aberdeen, North Carolina. My grand- great-grandmother was born in Hahira, Georgia, my grandmother was born in Hahira, Georgia, which is near Valdosta [Georgia], I was told, and my--standing next is my grandmother's brother, the young child, and the man standing in the rear is supposed to be my great-grandfather's son. I don't have much history on the Lawson family but I do have history on the McLeod family. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Well (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My Grandmother Della died in 2000--I'm sorry, 1985, around 1985. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This picture--starting at the top left, is my half-brother Woodrow Charles Ladner [Woodrow Ladner] who was a son of my father's first marriage. Next to him is my Uncle Thomas Fontaine Ladner [Fontaine Ladner], who would've been eighty-seven years old this year; he died in 1999. That's my father Eunice Stafford Ladner. The lady sitting down is my great- is my grandmother, Eunice's mother--the one you saw earlier. And my daughter Yodit Mabrat Churnet, who was born August 30, 1973, and that's a picture of Dorie Ladner sitting next to her. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Speaker 2: That picture was made in 1978 in Oroville, California. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That picture was made in St. Louis, Missouri in 1968--Dorie Ladner. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: My grandmother, Martha Gates Woullard, who was born in Wayne County, Mississippi to the--to Prince Gates, and Charlotte Powe [Charlotte Powe Gates], P-O-W-E, in 1896, died in Hattiesburg, Mississippi in 1969. She was the granddaughter of Phillip Gates [ph.]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. Okay. Speaker 2: This is the same grandmother, a different picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Go ahead (unclear). Speaker 1: Dorie Ladner, 1978 at the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] dinner, the Washington Hilton hotel, Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Afro day in the park in St. Louis, Missouri (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, this is-- Speaker 1: --contest. Speaker 2: Right her in D.C.? Speaker 1: No, the--St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 2: St. Louis, okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, now, a description of this? Speaker 1: This is--was a contest in St. Louis, Missouri, and I had the best African costume, and I won the contest. Percy Green [Percy Green II] is standing in the middle and, unfortunately, the name of the gentleman to the left escapes me. That was made around 1969. Speaker 2: That's the famous Percy Green who climbed the arch [Gateway Arch, St. Louis, Missouri] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Description? Speaker 2: That picture was a celebration my sister Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] receiving her Ph.D. at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri [Washington University in St. Louis] in 1968 at a friend's house, and we were celebrating. To the left is Joyce Ladner, who received her Ph.D., and that's Dorie Ladner to the right. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, photo twenty-eight. Speaker 2: Look on the back, look on the back there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh. Speaker 2: That was in the local paper. I had a photograph. That came from the St. Louis Post Dispatch--one of the best dressed. At the time when we were wearing African garb, I somehow managed to wear these sort of nice put together clothes, so that was made from the Afro--African put together uniform (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This picture was made in the Kiel Auditorium in St. Louis, Missouri at a George Wallace rally and I had the nerve to go in there along with a few other blacks, and Cal- Reverend Cal Thomp- Cal Stewart's [ph.] wife who's sitting there next to me--and as you can see, I'm sitting there trying to figure out how I'm going to get out of this place before they start beating heads, and-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: --and you can see how I'm looking to find an exit sign. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, let's put photo thirty up there. Speaker 2: We were always celebrating some African event. That was a good friend of ours, Charlie Thomas [ph.], I think it was, and--at an African American affair, at some occasion; I'm not sure what it was. Speaker 1: This picture was made in Washington, D.C. of my sister Joyce Ladner, Dorie Ladner, and Reginald Robinson [Reggie Robinson]. All of us were in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and we were at a special occasion where we all come together sometimes here in Washington, and talk and enjoy each other, so this is one of those special occasions. And those are photographs that I treasure. Story_ID: 618572 Speaker 1: This was going to the Poor People's Campaign. That's me standing there. Speaker 2: Hold on a second, hold on a second. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This bus was departing from St. Louis, Missouri to Washington, D.C. to the Poor People's Campaign march after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been murdered, and I was talking to the people in charge about the trip. So I'm standing there with the head wrap--African head wrap on, and about to get on the bus. And it took us several days to get there and it was an--it was not an enjoyable time because it was about to close and it was, it was very muddy and rainy, and the conditions were horrible, but-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you know who took that photograph? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay. Next? Speaker 2: Those are friends from St. Louis, Missouri. At that time, we were active with CORE, the Congress of Racial Equality. And to the left is Ross [ph.], [HistoryMaker] Dorie Ladner, Jimmy Rollins, and-- Speaker 1: Charlie Thomas [ph.]? Speaker 2: Charlie Thomas, yes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Now, these pictures were made when Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner] and I spoke at the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution] and--oh, this was 1991; the occasion was the Martin Luther King birthday at the Smithsonian, and it was called, Of Songs, Peace and Struggle: Freedom is a Constant Struggle, the birthday of Dr. Martin Luther King, an afternoon with Joyce and Dorie Ladner. I'm sorry, the date was Saturday, January 16th, 1992, Carmichael Auditorium, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution [Washington, D.C.]. At that time, we focused on our lives, and what brought us into the movement. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear) the same occasion. Now, this is, this is Victoria Gray Adams [HistoryMaker Victoria Adams]. Speaker 2: Right, yes, yes. Her aunt married my mother's brother, and she came up from Petersburg [Virginia] for the event, and I was so delighted to see her. Speaker 1: But she was active in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, she-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Say her name one more time. Speaker 2: Victoria Jackson Adam--Victoria Jackson Gray Adams-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: --who ran for [U.S.] Congress from Mississippi, along with Mrs. Fannie Lou Hamer--Mrs. Annie Devine, and with the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, and she died two years ago. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was interviewed (unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Is this a (unclear) here? A lot of people are moving on stage? Speaker 2: Those were people who part of the choir. Speaker 1: Choir? Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Joyce-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Dorie Ladner, Joyce Ladner at the Smithsonian Institution, Saturday, January 18, 1992 for the birthday celebration of Dr. Martin Luther King: Of Songs, Peace and Struggle. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This was a picture was made at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in 2003. To your immediate left is the current wife of [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, Dr. King's collaborator and right hand person who traveled and worked very closely with Dr. King, and that's me standing there facing you, and to your right is my daughter Yodit Churnet, Y-O-D-I-T, C-H-U-R-N-E-T. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, good. Speaker 2: This lady is my great-grandfather, my great-grandfather--Great-great-grandfather Benjamin Woulard whom you (unclear) first; that is his granddaughter, Minnie Lee Masters. He had two sets of children when he--after he arrived in the Mississippi Territory. He took on a wife Unity Wileford [Unity Wileford Woulard], and they had nine children; he had five by my Great-great-grandmother Mary [Mary Woulard]. Mary was born in 1805, and Unity Wileford was born in Alabama at very young age and--he married her at a very young age, and she died early. They had nine children and she is one of the offsprings from the marriage between Benjamin and Unity. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next? Speaker 1: This is a picture of Joyce Ladner to your left, and Dorie Ladner to your right. We were in the fourth grade and I was the homecoming queen, and that's all I can say about that (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my--my mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] had eleven sisters and brothers; this was her younger brother Arthur Neal Woullard [Arthur Woullard]. He died in 2003; he was born--I, I can't remember the date, but it was during the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my mother's sister; she's gone on, too--Aunt LeDrester Woullard Hayes, born in, in Wayne County [Mississippi], died in Forrest County, Mississippi. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. This is my cousin Tommy Ladnier [Thomas Ladnier], L-A-D-N-I-E-R. The reason it's pronounced Ladnier because it was--Louisiana was under French domination. He is the cousin of my father [Eunice Ladner], and my [paternal] great-grandfather [Abram Ladner]. My--his great--his grandfather's name was James Mitchell Ladnier [James Ladnier]; his father's name was Alfred Ladner--Ladnier [Alfred Ladnier], and his name was Thomas Ladnier. Tommy Ladnier went to Mid- to--from New Orleans [Louisiana] to Chicago [Illinois] at the age of around nineteen. He'd start traveling abroad playing jazz. He and Louis Armstrong went up to Chicago together, and he was known as a great trumpet player. He played with Sidney Bechet at--near the end of his life, but he played with Fletcher Henderson, Ma Rainey, Noble Sissle, and many other people that I can't think of, but it's all documented. And he was one of the best known trumpet players in the world, but unfortunately he died in 1939 at the age of thirty-nine, in the home of Mezz Mezzrow. Speaker 2: He was--also had a part in the tailor shop of Sidney Bechet? Speaker 1: Yes, he and Sidney Bechet had a tailoring shop, T-A-I-L-O-R-I-N-G, tailoring shop because when he returned from Europe, the bebop had taken over with Charlie Parker, and they had problems getting work, so Panacea [ph.], one of the artists from France, came over looking for him because he wanted him to record, so Tommy--they found Tommy, and Tommy recorded his last album, and he was found dead in Mezz Mezzrow's home shortly after they finished the album. Speaker 2: He was thirty-six years old. Speaker 1: He was thirty-nine. Story_ID: 618573 Speaker 1: This is a photograph made in Vancouver, British Columbia [Canada] in 2005, of my cousin David Lee Ladner [ph.] and me. We went to British Columbia; he was--he grew up in Seattle, Washington, and we went up there to do research and to vacation. David and I have been doing the research for our family--genealogical research since 1992, and we're still continuing to do the research, and I thought it was very important that I include him in this because he is such a vital part of what I'm doing. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a historic picture of--unfortunately, it was made on the occasion of John Wilson's funeral. John Wilson [John A. Wilson] was the next to last chairman of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and we had left his funeral; we're at James Smith's [ph.] home. To your left is Gloria Richardson who was the leader of the Cambridge movement, Cambridge, Maryland, and in the center is Jan Bailey; to your left is [HistoryMaker] Dorie Ladner, and in the hat is [HistoryMaker] Joyce Ladner sitting there talking. And we don't get very many pictures of Gloria. Gloria sent out a email saying that she had turned eighty-eight this month, and she's still working. Story_ID: 618574 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Today is July the 24th, 2008, and we are co- we are beginning to st- we are gonna start the second part of the interview we started last spring. This is roll number eight. Our videographer is Scott Stearns and, and you are-- Speaker 2: Dorie Ann Ladner [HistoryMaker Dorie Ladner]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And--so what we'll do, we'll just start with the summer of '64 [1964]. I think the prelude to it--we were talking about all the things that happened before the summer of '64 [1964]. We talked about you being a student at-- Speaker 2: Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Tougaloo. Speaker 2: In Jackson [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: First at Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], then Tougaloo working with Medgar Evers. We talked about the--you told us about a riot that ensued actually, or a, or a civil unrest ensued at his funeral, and some other incidents, but we, we had reached a point in the chronology where we were at 1964, which is the--this is the eve of Freedom Summer. So tell us--tell me what were the discussions that led to the Mississippi Freedom Summer project in 1964? Speaker 2: One of the prevailing things that precipitated it is this call for action for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Wait, hold on a second. Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: One of the prevailing things that--incidents that happened since we last talked, I've gone back over it and researched and, and thought about it. Mr. Louis Allen from Amite County [Mississippi] was murdered. Speaker 1: That's A-M-I-T-E (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) T-E. It's near McComb, Mississippi on the border of Louisiana. Mr. Louis Allen was a witness to the killing of Mr. Herbert Lee by a state representative, a white state representative who never served a day in the penitentiary and was not prosecuted, because Mr. Lee had tried to register to vote, and Mr. Allen was--observed the killing, and they knew that he had seen it, but he did tell them that he was not going to talk about it, but pressure still kept--they kept applying pressure to him, and I do remember the night that he came to Jackson, Mississippi to the COFO office, Council Of Federated Organizations office on Lynch Street in Jackson, Mississippi, and spoke to Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] and told Bob that the pressure was too great, and that he was leaving to go to Chicago [Illinois] because he could not take the pressure anymore, he was scared. And Mr. Allen drove probably sixty miles southwest back to his hometown, and as he got out of his truck to pull the piece of board across the gate, he was shot to death and that incident in itself was enough to bring everybody together to say, what can we do to stop this? We had no recourse statewide with the local authorities; the federal authorities were under the direction of then J. Edgar Hoover, so we really had no one to turn to. Speaker 1: Now, let me just go back a little bit on that story. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: When Herbert Lee was killed, he was killed by a man that he grew up with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hurst [E.H. Hurst], Hurst. Speaker 1: --a man named Hurst, and he was a congressman, right? From-- Speaker 2: A state representative. Speaker 1: State representative-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Hurst--what was his first name? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, but it was Hurst, and he was a man that--I heard that Herbert Lee had grown up with, and knew him quite well. He shot him in broad daylight. Speaker 2: In the town square. Speaker 1: In the town square-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --because he had dared to register to vote. Speaker 2: Right. And Mr. Allen was a witness-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and so-- Speaker 1: This horrible crime. Every--a lot of people saw it then, right? Not just Mr. Allen, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: But Mr. Allen was pressured, and he was killed. And so we knew that we had no one to turn to. Speaker 1: Now, just a point of clarification. Now, was he killed at the beginning of '64 [1964] or in '63 [1963]? Speaker 2: He was killed probably--I think it may have been kind of cool; maybe the end of '63 [sic. 1964]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can't--I, I can't remember the exact date. Story_ID: 618575 Speaker 1: So you go into '64 [1964] having these discussions about what can (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. What can we do to bring some attention to what's going on in Mississippi. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you got a movement that's committed to nonviolence, and yet the people you're organizing are being killed. Speaker 2: There were fifteen of us, and I was the only female at the time (laugher), so the question arose as to how would we get the outside world to start looking into Mississippi, and some people had been there. Barney Frank and several others had come there to--Allard Lowenstein [Allard K. Lowenstein] who was a professor; they were law students had come there to offer their help, and-- Speaker 1: Now, Barney Frank--this is the same Barney Frank that became the sena-(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Congressman, congressman-- Speaker 1: The congressman from Massachusetts? Speaker 2: Yes. Current congressman. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And so they went back to school, and I think that was the first outside engagement that we really had in a large forum, and the idea--I'm not sure who said that we wanted to get some people from the outside; I don't know who said those words, but when the idea surfaced, I was in agreement with it, Guyot was in agreement with it. [HistoryMaker] Lawrence Guyot is from Pass Christian, Mississippi, was (unclear), and many of us wanted it because we saw no way out because there was nowhere to turn to, and a few didn't, but their reasons were--people come--maybe come in and take over the projects or something, but there was nothing to take over, but fear of death and, you know, fear, anger and death; we--there was nothing. If you, if you are constantly being killed, constantly being harassed, constantly being deprived of your rights as a citizen, and unemployment is prevailing, what is there to give up? You need the help, right? So my idea was always to open up this closed society and to let people see, and I was all for it, and there have been different discussions about it, different articles written about it, but we who wanted freedom wanted the whole world to come in and do something. So the votes were taken, the consensus were taken, and the consensus was that we would allow and ask for help from the outside. Speaker 1: Okay, when you talk about asking for volunteers from outside of Mississippi (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Volunteers from, from across this country, yes. Speaker 1: And, and outside of the black community, too. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. You said when--now, just backing up a minute. When, when Barney Frank and Al Lowenstein came down, did--I mean did--they met with the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] staff and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --did they offer their help, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they came to offer legal help, but they, they didn't stay very long; this was a prerequisite to what we're talking about, and they went back. But we--I, I must back up. The Freedom Riders had already been there in '61 [1961], and this is--we're talking about '64 [1964]. Some of the Freedom Riders stayed, which really had some continuity, which enabled persons such as myself to be able to get a handle on how my life turned out, because if I had been left dangling there in Mississippi with no one to turn to and, and no direction, I would have been a lost soul, too. But fortunately, the Freedom Riders left people like [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry, James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel], Diane Nash, Paul Brooks and his wife Catherine [Catherine Burks Brooks], and others there too--Dion Diamond--to give direction and to talk about voter registration, to talk about nonviolence, to talk about equal rights--Bernard Lafayette and many others--to talk about direct action, to talk about, "You're a human being, and this is what we're going to do." These were young students from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] who had been taught under Dr. Lawson [James Lawson] and so forth, so they brought this to us and we had got a grasp of it, and when someone else mentioned the idea we need other people from across the country to come in, we said, "Of course." And I was for it. Story_ID: 618576 Speaker 1: Now, among w- among the people who were already there--I know Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] was from New York [New York]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and Miss Baker was from New York--Ella Baker, but-- Speaker 2: Well, she--North Carolina and, and New York, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. And were they, were they-- Speaker 2: Miss Baker was traveling across--she didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, but she didn't stay there-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: So she was--she came and went, depending on what she was-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] office was in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, at that time, was the staff mostly people from Mississippi or from the South (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. The (unclear) is that there were fifteen of us across the whole state, and we were students--students from Lanier High School [William H. Lanier High School, Jackson, Mississippi], students from Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi], who had banned together with Bob and decided that we wanted to bring about change. Speaker 1: So this is the core of, of SNCC and fifteen students, basically from those two schools-- Speaker 2: Right, and Dave Dennis from CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], who was from Louisiana-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and that was it. Speaker 1: All right. So, I just wanted to make that clear that the core--the--most of the group was actually from the South and-- Speaker 2: We were from Mississippi (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the black, the black members. Story_ID: 618577 Speaker 1: I know I heard--I saw an interview with Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] where they, they suggested that--well, his position was that you need a, a white body to protect a black body 'cause when black people are killed in Mississippi, nobody ever hears about it, nobody seems to care, but if a white person from the North comes down and gets killed or hurt, then the country knows about it. Speaker 2: Right, and that still happens today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's true. Speaker 1: Okay. so, what was it--so you, you agree with it 100 percent that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what was the process by which you attracted volunteers from the-- Speaker 2: Well, there was a network. See, we had friends of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], groups across the country in Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York], California, Ohio--many different states who were very active, and they sent--sending money and so forth, so when the idea surfaced about getting young volunteers to come in, they went to work across college campuses. Plus, we had the Freedom Singers who were singing freedom songs to raise money for the organization; they were recruiting. Plus, we had students who were actively going onto the college campuses talking to students; people such as Cleve Sellers [Cleveland Sellers], John Wilson [John A. Wilson]--late John Wilson, one of the chairmen of SNCC, and many others who would go and actively talk with students on Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] campus--many campuses. I remember going to University of Massachusetts, Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio], and Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts] and talking, and that had to be in nineteen sixty--maybe '62 [1962]; around '62 [1962] or '63 [1963], to talk about our plight in Mississippi, and to try and make people aware of what was going on, and that was the purpose of not only talking about what was going on, but to raise money. And we would get local press there, but that did not necessary transcend down into Mississippi where you had the Raineys [Lawrence Rainey], the Prices [Cecil Price], the Byron De La Beckwiths, and those others there; that didn't impact on them, so the people we were talking to were of good will, but it had nothing to do with what we were going back to. Story_ID: 618578 Speaker 1: I read Taylor Branch's book years ago, 'Parting the Waters,' ['Parting the Waters: America in the King Years 1954 - 63'] and he discussed a--there's a meeting that he outlined--where he covers in there between [HistoryMaker] John Lewis and some of the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people with Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], and it seemed to suggest--the meeting suggested that Bobby Kennedy really didn't understand what was going on-- Speaker 2: Well, SNCC filed a suit against the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] because they didn't understand what we were doing, and voter registration, I think, was probably the compromise for what we were doing. And as early as 1962 the suit had been filed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So what did--I mean, so the justice department--it--they-- Speaker 2: The justice department was in Washington, D.C., and we're still talking about an isolated area down south, and if the boat is not--you're not gonna rock the boat unless you have to, and you had Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] there who was from the South, and most of your powerful chair were from the South, the [U.S.] Congress and the [U.S.] Senate, so--and Washington, D.C., for the most part, was segregated, so you weren't gonna have people really rocking boats. And we were the one rocking boats and trying to--what they accused us of--Theodore White, I think, accused us of trying to overthrow the government of the United States of America (laughter) back in 1963? Si- yeah, and-- Speaker 1: Theodore White, yeah; he's the author of the book, 'The Making of a President'? Speaker 2: Yes, that one, um-hm. A violent putsch, P-U-T-S-C-H, I think. Speaker 1: A violent putsch, like the--like Hitler's [Adolf Hitler] beer hall putsch or something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. And we were college students. So it, it came out (unclear); we came to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for a meeting, and this article came out. So, I'm saying that to say that we had very little help; we had God and, and we, we were being guided by our ancestors. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, that's--now, I'm tempted to investigate that, but I'll let that go (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, the reason I said that because I, I can think of many--people like Frederick Douglass, Harriet Tubman, and Sojourner Truth and others, who did prevail in spite of what hap- was going on; they did make it. Harriet Tubman went back and forth many times, so the, the--Denmark Vesey and others, we did not face nearly as much as they did, but we continued in spite of; that's what I mean by our ancestors were guiding us. Speaker 1: So the example of our ancestors did in the face of similar odds, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Story_ID: 618579 Speaker 1: When was it decided that, that you would bring people down? I mean when did they officially decide? Do you remember what month it was in '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: It probably was in the early part, maybe January, February. And I, I can safely say that it was not very organized because the organization was not a bureaucracy, so it may have been around January or February, and people were working on different projects. I know Charlie Cobb worked on--did the Freedom Schools project, and that was separate and apart, and people had different projects that they worked on, but all the logistics that went into it were monumental. (Clears throat) We had the--people teaching the students how to protect themselves, their body, if they were being kicked, and how to--their most--in their stomachs and so forth; how to ball up in a knot. And that was being taught right there in Ohio once we got there. But I'm skipping, but you had all this coordinated, and I was in Chicago [Illinois] at the time; I had been doing other traveling. I'm not sure what all was going on, but-- Speaker 1: So, were you traveling to recruit people for Freedom Summer? Speaker 2: Raise money and propagandizing. Speaker 1: You were actually trying to recruit people--taking names and that sort of thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I say, recruit people, working, trying to get the message out about what was going on in Mississippi. See, see, we had the March on Washington, you had the deaths in Birmingham, Alabama of--Medgar Evers had been killed, Clyde Kennard had died, and we had several things to happen in '63 [1963], so--'64 [1964]--and James Allen [ph.] was killed, so you--'64 [1964] we're talking about the early part of it, so there was a lot going on. Plus, when Medgar died, there was a big boycott going on in Jackson [Mississippi] in '63 [1963], and I had gone to Chicago briefly, and I do remember riding from Chicago to Ohio and riding through the cornfields. I, I didn't realize that there was so much open space in, in Ohio until I kept riding and riding and riding--thought that I would never get out of the cornfields, and finally got to the college and saw all the students and media people and so forth, and I said, "Okay, this is what we need, this is what we need" (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, did you have a--did it surprise you? Did you have any sense there'd be that many students or, or-- Speaker 2: Yes, I was surprised, yes. Speaker 1: Did the media surprise you? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: How many students showed up in--now this was at Western College [Western College for Women] in Oxford, Ohio near Miami University [Oxford, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Right. I can't give you--in 2008, I think all together, there were several hundred; I'll say several hundred. I--over the years I've known how many but I--I'll say several hundred showed up, and predominantly white. And after the training, they all got on the buses and went to Jackson, Mississippi to COFO [Council of Federated Organizations] office, and then they were disbursed to different counties in Mississippi. Speaker 1: I want to back up a little bit more-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and--now what was the training like? You, you mentioned the training. I know I saw film of [HistoryMaker] James Forman training students--what to do if you get hit, and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: That's what I mentioned, yeah, protecting your body, and knowing what to do if you got arrested, don't give information. Telling the average young white person who's never been encountered with their basic rights being violated, how to act subservient to the law, because you would be faced with it because you're coming into their territory, and they're going to treat you very differently. And you can't be arrogant and boisterous with them, and to answer all the questions that were asked, and to be as polite as possible, and to go on--also, we had what was called the WATS, we had a Wide Area Telephone Service, which meant that you could call anywhere in the State of Mississippi and teach--told them that this was very important because when you go someplace, let somebody know where you're going, don't go alone, and call at certain times, and the WATS secretary would record the times that you called, and you would be--supposed to be back--and you were supposed to be back at five [o'clock], you were expected back at five; this was for your safety. And this is what happened to Mickey Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], James Chaney, and Andy Goodman [Andrew Goodman]. Story_ID: 618580 Speaker 1: Now those are the three civil rights workers that were killed in Mississippi while the training was going on, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They were killed while the training--now, how did they get there early? How did that happen? Speaker 2: They didn't get there early; they were lured into this whole scenario. The church was burned, and I--we later learned that they burned the church; they knew that the church was burned, that if Mickey [Michael Schwerner] and James found out the church is burned, they would come back. Speaker 1: Now, how did they--I mean--but how did they get there? They weren't--when did they arrive in Mississippi to--I mean were they--they were--were they a part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] when they were killed? Speaker 2: Mickey had been there--I think he and his wife Rita [Rita Schwerner Bender] came in '63 [1963]-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and they had a community center in Meridian, Mississippi. And James Chaney was from Meridian-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so they had already been there. They were working for CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]. Speaker 1: Okay, so they were CORE workers; they weren't part of SNCC, they were with CORE. Speaker 2: Right, they were CORE workers. Speaker 1: But you all know--knew them and-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And they weren't part of the, the crew that came down for Freedom Summer, they were separate. Speaker 2: No, no; they had come earlier by themselves. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And so when we got word that the church had burned, of course Mickey and James and--they said--Andy [Andrew Goodman] said, "I wanna go, too." So he jumped in the car, and the people who burned the church knew that they were coming, so it was a setup. So when they got there, that was the way it was. But I, I mentioned the Wide Area Telephone Service, the WATS line, was because that's how we knew that they--something had happened to them because they were told to call, and they had not received a phone call from them and we, we were notified in Ohio that they had not phoned, and everybody said they knew what had happened, that something had happened to them. And there's a picture of me with my hand outstretched like this (gesture), but the photographer said that I--the students were walking around, you know, talking and not realizing the severity of this whole situation that we were talking about. And I started telling them, "Listen," and screaming, and said, "Look, come to order; this is about a very serious matter. We've lost three people, and you have to understand that this, this is something that we're dealing with and we have to stop this. We're not at a picnic or a football game." And then he said that--I took it outside and continued to talk about it, and to bring some calm and some order and realization to the seriousness and what was in store for us in the future when we did arrive in Mississippi. So, the photograph itself, he said, is what it was all about because I had forgotten all about it. Story_ID: 618581 Speaker 1: Well, we were talking about the training in Oxford, Ohio [at Western College for Women]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And--just give me a sense of how many days was the training? Speaker 2: I would say it had to be about three or four days and included in those days you had John Doar from the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] there, I think Burke Marshall his assistant was there, you had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think Burke was John Doar's boss, actually. Speaker 2: Oh, really (laughter)? I, I didn't get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he didn't know as much as John Doar did about the, the movement because he never went down there that much, but Burke Marshall was Doar's boss. Speaker 2: Okay, I never knew that; I always saw John Doar. But Burke Marshall would come, but he was a very soft spoken man--very, very soft spoken. But both were activists. You had many different categories of training; you had Medical Committee for Human Rights, you had the national lawyers committee [Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law], you had your entertainers, you had-- Speaker 1: Did they come to Oxford? Speaker 2: I'm not sure if any came on site; I don't recall anybody saying that Belafonte [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte] or Poitier [Sidney Poitier] were there, but their support was there. You had the Freedom Schools, you had the medical committee, and all, all these different perspectives were being explained to you. These were workshops during the day; it was not a frivolous kind of thing, these were learning kinds of things for each person because these kids were from Ivy League schools, from state schools, and so forth, and I would say 98, 99 percent of them were white and middle-class. A, a few may not have been in the upper middle-class, but they were coming there bec- out of a sense of commitment, and they wanted to help. The call had gone out, and they--including--you had a, a senator who's a--Lieberman, Joe Lieberman, who worked in Hattiesburg, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Oh, Joe Lieberman came down when he was a student? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And worked? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, he worked in Hattiesburg. And many others whose names escape me; but they were given the charge to--that they were going into a different kind of place, and their purpose for going there was to try and register, and there was no direct action such as sit-ins, but to register to vote--try to get the blacks who were disenfranchised the right to vote, and to live in those communities with the people, and with people to attend church, to live in the community, to go to church, to do what the people did. Story_ID: 618582 Speaker 1: Let me ask this que- question. I--you know I'm--this is a serious question I have. I've never really--for some reason, the answer is eluding me. But what, what role did the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] play to enable the, the freedom workers to actually register people to vote? I mean you couldn't register in Mississippi, right? In the--with the state--with the officials. I mean how did--what was the--I mean how did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did they have to change the rules? Speaker 1: Yeah, how did, how did the rules change at all for the--I mean 'cause you all were doing the voter registration on--you know, with the clipboard and that sort of thing, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But you couldn't register those names with the, with the local county or the local town, could you? Speaker 2: No, no. What you were doing was symbolic--it was symbolism. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was symbolic voter registration. Speaker 2: Yeah, meaning that these young people were going through the same motions that we had been going through, but they were being written about; they were taking a hundred, two hundred people to the polls to vote, and The New York Times they wrote a story about it--or The Washington Post. Somebody may have been beaten up; it was in the newspaper--the picture was there, and that was the difference. I don't think too many people were actually registered, but I do know that in '64 [1964], when we took a, a mixed delegation--when I say, mixed, black and white students; '64 Democratic Convention [1964 Democratic National Convention], you had maybe two whites and several blacks to go to the Democratic Convention in Atlantic City [New Jersey] to try to unseat the all-white delegation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party had been formed, and that came out of this whole body of work that the young people had been doing. Speaker 1: Okay, so in the beginning of the project-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --it hadn't--well, let me put it this way. In the beginning of the project, was it all mapped out that you all would form a Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party--an alternative Democratic Party to the regular Democratic Party of Mississippi to go to the convention? Did you know you were gonna do that at the very beginning? Speaker 2: No, I think it was a work in progress. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, it, it wasn't--no, no. As the need arose. And I'll give you an example. When COFO was organized, we went to Clarksdale, Mississippi and there was a curfew on--I think I mentioned this; at twelve midnight--all blacks are off the streets at twelve midnight. COFO, Council of Federated Organizations, which included the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], and--NAACP, SNCC, CORE, and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], okay? That was a umbrella of organizations to help sponsor the students who were coming, and there was a twelve o'clock curfew--all blacks are off the streets at twelve. We didn't know that, but Dr. Aaron Henry knew it, and so after twelve, we were leaving, and people started getting arrested. So what did we do? We decided we'd stay in the Delta [Mississippi Delta], and that's where we found Miss Fannie Lou Hamer. So, the roles were played out. I don't think anyone said, "Let's organize a delegation to go, to go to Atlantic City." But as you continue working, and you build on these experiences and situations present themselves, ideas always--we always sat and met and talked about different things and came to consensus. When someone said, "What did they do during the day?" Well, we spent a lot of time sitting and talking and hammering, and thinking about ideas as to how we could best not only carry out our ideas, but to survive. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And with that survival instinct, meaning that we would make a contribution, meaning that we would do something. So the Freedom Democratic Party came out from the different counties, like Amite County [Mississippi], Carthage [Mississippi], and all those counties; they had people who were active, and had tried to register to vote, so they came to a meeting in Jackson [Mississippi], and as a result, you formed this party. And Dr. Aaron Henry and Ed King ran for governor and lieutenant governor I think--if I recall correctly. And so--of course they didn't win. And I remember in 1964 going--knocking on doors. If I could vote, I would vote for Lyndon Baines Johnson as president because he was running against Barry Goldwater; it was a marked ballot, and people would mark their X or mark their names on it, and we would save those--we saved those and took--and brought them here to Washington [D.C.] to show that we were disenfranchised, we couldn't vote; but if we could vote, this is what we would bring. This was part of the Freedom Summer. Speaker 1: Okay, so this, this was a--that was--that seems like a strategic move to convince the Democratic Party that if black folks could vote in Mississippi, they would actually vote for the Democratic Party and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for Johnson, since Johnson--and--you know. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 618583 Speaker 1: And there was one part of Mississippi where I went to work, Natchez, Mississippi. That whole southwest part where Herbert Lee was killed was off limits for the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]; they said it was too dangerous to go into because of the Klu Klux Klan [sic. Ku Klux Klan, KKK] activity. And the Klan prevailed for--I think we went in there probably around July--I have a notation, I can't remember exactly--but it was probably around July. We said, "We are tired of waiting." We were waiting for them to give us a signal, so we said, "We're going." So, Chuck McDew [Charles McDew], Chico Neblett--no, George Greene from Greenwood, Mississippi and I went in; we were met by the local police, and we went to George Metcalf's boarding house and stayed, and it was supposed to be one of the most racist areas in the, in the State of Mississippi, and we had federal officers coming down each week checking on us with guns on their sides--with sawed off shotguns on their side--young white guys saying that they were scared to come down there because it was dangerous and they were told to come and check on us, and they weren't coming back. And the following week, they attempt to blow up our house, but they blew up the wrong house. Speaker 2: Now, this is in July of '64 [1964]? Speaker 1: This was probably around August of '64 [1964]. Speaker 2: Okay, now, we're getting way ahead; I don't wanna go that far yet, but I just wanted to get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, but--okay. I'm skipping ahead of myself because I was talking about the marked ballot-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and all that? And the justice department saying, "This is off limits," and so forth, and how we were going ahead--beyond the justice department (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --saying that "We're not gonna listen to everything that you're saying; we're gonna do what the spirit tells us to do." Story_ID: 618584 Speaker 1: Well, that leads to another question about, you know--going back to Oxford [Ohio]. What role did the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] say they were gonna play? And, as you said, you just stated the justice department often would try to kind of pull you back a little bit, kind of slow you down a little bit-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because their interest was not--they didn't wanna see any headlines (laughter) down there necessarily. So--but what role did the justice department say they were gonna play when Burke Marshall and John Doar, you know, showed up? What did they say they were going to do? Speaker 2: They were gonna protect the students-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who were coming to Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. And so thus, you had the media there, too. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And did you get the sense in Oxford that the media was going to be in Mississippi, too? Speaker 2: They were there at Oxford. Speaker 1: I mean were they gonna--did you get a sense that they--did they promise to be in Mississippi, too? Speaker 2: The media followed the buses to Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. And as--I think before we left off, we ended the last roll--you talked about how the news of the deaths of Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], Goodman [Andrew Goodman] and Chaney [James Chaney] reached the group when it was still in training, right? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And you, you know, made a speech about-- Speaker 2: Yes, I did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the impromptu speech about how serious that was. Speaker 2: And, and several others. And then some people left the training and went to Meridian [Mississippi], they didn't finish the training; they went to go and start looking because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, some people from the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] staff? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean the, the CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], SNCC staff. Speaker 2: The SNCC staff. Speaker 1: Yeah, with--okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: 'Cause I, I--there's another--I think in the movie called, 'Freedom on My Mind,' there's a scene where Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses], you know, was talking to the whole group and he gives them a choice. "You need to go back, or you can come down with us; it's your choice. You don't have to be ashamed about it or--." Do you remember that? Speaker 2: Not, not offhand--not specifically. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. But some people did leave and go there. Speaker 1: They went into Mississippi, but did very many people go back home? Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause they were saying, "Look, I'm not getting killed," (laughter). Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: So, they all--everybody stayed. Speaker 2: Yes, as far as I remember. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Far as I remember. Speaker 1: So there were buses-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of students that actually left a--now, what was that like? What? Did you all leave in the morning, at night, or what--when did you go? Speaker 2: Oh, it was during the day; probably--I would say probably eleven o'clock, the bus I was on left about eleven. Speaker 1: Now, did you have--did the justice department provide an escort for you into Mississippi? 'Cause I can just imagine if I was with the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] and I knew there were busloads of people going down there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To be honest I really, I really don't know what they had in place; I don't know. But I have seen accounts with--Bill Kurtis, former anchor for one of your major networks, did a documentary on our three workers entering the State of Mississippi and was met by a car that followed them into--because they were given the tag number and the signal when they reached Mississippi, and they followed them on into--they were given this by a black man from Mississippi. Speaker 1: Oh, were followed by the justice department, you mean? Or the-- Speaker 2: No, by the State of Mississippi. Speaker 1: State of Mississippi, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Once they entered the State of Mississippi, they were met and followed, from information provided by one of our black citizens. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 618585 Speaker 1: So I can imagine, buses comi- now, where were the freedom workers gonna stay? Speaker 2: That (laughter)--you talking about logistics (laughter). Well, people were going to different counties and, and in 1964, you didn't have that many cars and, and buses and so forth, so I remember everybody getting off the bus with guy who--excuse me, let me back up. The guy who gave the information to the po- Mississippi authorities was named R.L. Bolden, B-O-L-D-E-N; he's well documented as being the informant who gave the name to the Mississippi authorities of Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], Chaney [James Chaney] and Goodman [Andrew Goodman]. People were taken to different counties, some slept in the COFO [Congress of Federated Organizations] office overnight, but eventually people got to their locations and there was a lot of moving around because some people didn't necessarily have anywhere to go, but eventually, everybody was placed. Mississippi has what, eighty-four counties, or something? And so you tried to place people in every county or as many as you could. Speaker 1: Okay. And we're talking about, about how many people? Speaker 2: Several hundred. Speaker 1: Okay. So maybe five hundred, six hundred? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was quite, quite a task--quite a task. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So--now tell me about your, your trip down there. Now when your--how many-well-- Speaker 2: My trip? Speaker 1: You were on a bus with about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was sitting next to Paul Cowan, C-O-W-A-N, who used to write for The Nation magazine, and his wife Rachel [Rachel Brown Cowan], and he wrote an article en route there. Paul has since died. And I remember talking nervously the whole time going there, about what was going on and what had gone on, and I, I didn't have a sense of fear or anxiety; I probably had more of a sense of jubilation that I'm--all these people are coming with me, and they're gonna see what I've been seeing. Now, they're gonna know what I've been seeing, and they're gonna tell everybody--something is going to happen. And that was the way I was feeling. I have a whole lot of people here with me, and that, that was--that would be my interpretation. Speaker 1: So you felt a lot stronger about what you were doing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, yes, yes. Story_ID: 618586 Speaker 1: Now what did you do? What was the role--what role were you to play during Freedom Summer? I mean what role did you play? Speaker 2: I, I did frontline work voter registration. I went to Natchez [Mississippi], of course, which was off limits, and I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, who put it off limits? Who-- Speaker 2: The justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]. Speaker 1: So they told you all not to go to Natchez. Speaker 2: Right, they say it was- Speaker 1: Because of the tension between the, the death of Herbert Lee and the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], Klan activity. Speaker 1: Klan? Okay. Speaker 2: That whole southwest area was--had too much Klan activity. You would think that the Delta [Mississippi Delta] would have been worse, but it was the southwest Mississippi. Speaker 1: When you talk about the Delta, what are we talking (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Greenwood, Mississippi, the whole plantation area-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --where Miss Hamer [Fannie Lou Hamer] came from. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but they--southwest part, bordered on Louisiana--that part. Speaker 1: So that part was actually the toughest part? Speaker 2: That's according to the justice department. And I said, "That's where I'm going" (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, who went with you to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Charles McDew, who was the second chairman of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--we call him Chuck McDew, George Greene from Greenwood, Mississippi, whose family had been very active in the movement. Speaker 1: Okay, so with Chuck McDew and-- Speaker 2: George Greene. Speaker 1: George--I'm sorry (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) G-E-O-R-G-E. Speaker 1: George-- Speaker 2: Greene. Speaker 1: Greene? Okay Speaker 2: Um-hm, and me. Speaker 1: Okay. Just the three of you? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was--did, did any white people accompany you to-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Natchez? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were met at the city limits by a police officer, and we went to George Metcalf's boarding house. George Metcalf was the president of the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], living on St. Catherine Street, and he had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, wait a minute; you were met at the, at the-- Speaker 2: City limits. Speaker 1: --city limits by a white police officer from-- Speaker 2: Yeah, on a motor cycle. Speaker 1: Now, what did he tell you? Speaker 2: Billy Bob [Billy Bob Williams]. He, he escorted the car into the city. Speaker 1: In order to protect you, or-- Speaker 2: There were no words exchanged. Speaker 1: He didn't say anything. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: He just rode along with you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --until you got to the boarding house. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so Chuck and George went down to the mayor's office to let them know that we were in town. The mayor said that he knew we were there, and he didn't want any trouble. And they said, "We didn't bring any trouble; we came here to work, and we want justice." So--and I was--I didn't come out; they didn't know how I looked or whatever, so it was like I was decoy for a long time, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, so you could, so you could roam around and they didn't know who you were? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. They knew the two males. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we bought a house on Franklin Street, and used that as a Freedom House where we slept; eventually, we moved there. And we had our office on Wall Street, which was like in an alley, and that's what they attempted to blow up. Story_ID: 618587 Speaker 1: When I told you that the young men were coming down with those sawed off shotguns, and they attempted to blow that up, but they blew this tavern up that belonged to a integrated couple who were in their sixties--a white man and a black woman. Speaker 2: And they had a shotgun--okay, so--now this is a story in and of itself that actually a integrated couple in Natchez [Mississippi], right? Speaker 1: It's not unusual. Speaker 2: But it's not unusual. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, you would think that--I mean if segregation is so important, then how did-- Speaker 1: (Rolls eyes). Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Now, you gotta explain that look 'cause people don't know 'cause this--you know, just don't understand; it's hard to understand this. Speaker 1: They don't know what? Speaker 2: They don't know what it's like in Natchez (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That there's more integration in the South than, than the North? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am; I mean what I--and tell us about that. Speaker 1: Well I, I assumed that everybody knew, but maybe they don't. But (laughter) the chief of police, J.T. Robinson, told us that he was sorry it happened to them because he had known them all his life, since he was a little boy, and he was sorry it happened; Jake Fishman [ph.], a significant other, was as black as coal. Speaker 2: Okay, now he's Jewish, right? Jake Fishman? Speaker 1: I assume so. Speaker 2: It sounds like a Jewish name. He was married to a black woman? Speaker 1: But common law. Speaker 2: Common law, okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And they had to be in their fifties. Speaker 2: Did they have children? Speaker 1: Not to my knowledge. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, see, Natchez is along the water--the Mississippi River? And I was--been told along coastal lines you have all kinds of activity going on. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true, that's true. Speaker 1: And they were not the only integrated couple in, in Natchez. I think St. Clair Drake did a study there. And I met Mr. Davis, Jefferson Davis' nephew, who had a house right around the corner from our house, and he was Jefferson Davis'--his father and Jefferson Davis were brothers, and Jefferson Davis took the land away from his father because he wouldn't leave his mother. His mother had twelve children by his father, and they grew up in Fayette [Mississippi], and he showed me a bed that belonged to Jefferson Davis. Speaker 2: Now, this is a--this nephew is black, or white? Speaker 1: He could be whatever he wanted to be, but he went for black. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But he could pass for white? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He had a little small bed, Mr.--we called him Mr. Davis, and--I told you about the time that I was downtown acting real--you mentioned something about doing things in your youth that you think about, and you don't--and you don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were talking about that off camera that, yeah, that youth have a capacity to do some things without thinking about it that-- Speaker 1: The consequences. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm thinking about one thing that happened. I was downtown with this girl from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; she had come down to work, but she was dating our party director. Speaker 2: This is a black girl? Speaker 1: Yeah, Chuck Neblett [Charles Neblett]. Speaker 2: I keep asking these 'cause I think it's important that we know who's who in this mix down there. Speaker 1: All these were black. And this gentleman spoke to me, and it was a--flirtatious, and she was in a shoe store trying on some cowboy boots. And I always carried a brick in my purse--a stone--and I said, "Bert [ph.], come here! We got a white man to beat up!" And she came running out, she say, "Where?" I say, "Right here." And he said, "Where you girls going?" I said, "Mister, if you hadn't opened your mouth, you were about to get beat." And he didn't know what I was talking about. He was so white until I didn't know the difference until he started talking and I understood the dialect. And it was right downtown Natchez. Speaker 2: You said he was flirting with you? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I was gonna beat him up. And-- Speaker 2: So Jeff Davis' nephew looked like he was white, too, huh? Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yes. And having grown up in, in Mississippi--see, I didn't grow up where my mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] grew up because they had a similar kind of situation with the races--and my father [Eunice Ladner] either. Story_ID: 618588 Speaker 1: But I, I had not been exposed to so much integration in, in Mississippi as I had in Natchez [Mississippi] because you had whites living next door to blacks, and they had strong alliances--very strong, and it was very hard for us to penetrate. Speaker 2: But even at that, they tried to blow up your office, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, because we were from the outside. You know, in Mississippi they said, "We do things--you know how we do things down here; we don't want nobody from the outside coming in telling us what to do. You know how we do things." The day that I got arrested on the day of Medgar Evers' funeral, standing in the hot sun with my hands stretched up in the 110 degree weather (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was back in '62 [1962], right? Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963], right. Speaker 1: June 16th. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: The man said, "I'm surprised at you, coming here letting these people from outside get you in trouble. I know your mama [Annie Woullard Perryman] and daddy [Eunice Ladner] must be ashamed of you letting these outsiders get you in trouble. You ought to be ashamed a yourself, girl here from Mississippi." I didn't say anything. But it's a closed society. But it's opened up; after Freedom Summer, it was never the same anymore 'cause a lot of things were open; they, they were opened. Story_ID: 618589 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me, what were your day to day activities like with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] in those days? What would you do? Speaker 2: Okay, day to day. We would get up in the mornings, thanking God that we had survived the night because we were living in what I would consider very dangerous times, meaning that our house could've been bombed, as an attempt had been made earlier to blow up our house, and they bombed the wrong house, according to the fire chief. And people would call at night and about six o'clock--because people go to bed early in Mississippi, and the phone would ring and they would leave the phone off--their phone off the hook, so we had no outside informa- no outside access; we couldn't-- Speaker 1: Yeah, unless the other person who called you hangs up-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --according to the way the phone system worked in those days; you couldn't hang up and get your--the dial tone back. Speaker 2: No, you couldn't. So, we had the whole night to sit there and, and wait, and, and frightened to death. But the next morning, we saw a new day, and our typical day would be to get up, probably about seven o'clock, eat something if we desired--if we had anything to eat; most times we didn't, we relied on the local community for food. And we would start going out into the community, canvasing, knocking on doors doing voter registration, asking people to go with us to the courthouse to register to vote, or come to citizenship classes to--for us to teach them how to register to vote. Speaker 1: Now, to register, you had to go to the courthouse yourself-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and register, so it wasn't like now when, you know, now you can register somebody in a mall-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --you can register them at a, at a festival with a clipboard. Speaker 2: No, you weren't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You couldn't do it then. Speaker 2: You had to face the sheriff and the deputy, and everybody at the courthouse. Speaker 1: Okay, so would you have them fill out anything first, before they went? I mean to state their intention of-- Speaker 2: Yes, if they told us they--they would give us their name and address and phone number, and express an intent to go, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now how, how hard was that? I mean these are people that never been able to vote and they live in a place that's dominated by a lot of racial violence, so how would they--how did you convince them to-- Speaker 2: You know, I've often wondered, I--and the older I get, the more I wonder about that because I was what--about twenty, and these people were forty, older, had homes and children, working, trying to support themselves, going to school, had children in college, and would listen to us and follow us, and I'm not sure how we would con- how we convinced them. Maybe the time was right. Speaker 1: Now, how many names (background noise) would you get together before you would take a group to the courthouse? Speaker 2: It could be as many as five, or could be as many as ten or, or it could be less. Speaker 1: So, what were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What we were doing mainly was testing because no one would register them, actually register. Speaker 1: So what would happen when you bring them over to be registered? Speaker 2: They would let them fill out the paperwork, depending on the county; some counties were vicious and wouldn't allow you in there--fill out the paperwork, but they would give you a copy of the Mississippi Constitution and tell you to interpret certain sections of it, and then tell you that you failed, and leave. And that didn't deter. Story_ID: 618590 Speaker 1: But Natchez [Mississippi] lost out in a lot of ways because there was a boycott put on Natchez; it was started by SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and it almost crumbled because their unwillingness to, to integrate blacks into their so- political structure. Meaning that a list of demands were taken down by some of the local leaders asking that blacks be allowed to try on clothes, or to be given jobs, or many, many other different amenities or--things that we take for granted now were denied, so a boycott was launched and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, this is the same summer? The summer of '64 [1964]? Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 2: Okay. So that's later, after-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but it, it went over into there. But the problem with Natchez that I had was that you never really knew who you were talking to--black amongst the blacks, because everybody was related one way or the other to the whites, and it was such a mixture. I found it confusing in terms of trust factor and so forth, so we had what we called a student newspaper. Kids would come into the office--had a little newspaper, and we did some tutoring and--for the adults as well as the children, and we would have citizenship classes. Speaker 2: Okay, now, now what would you discuss in citizenship class? Speaker 1: How to register to vote, have a copy of the Constitution, but it--you know, it was an exercise. The shortest amendment in the Constitution says, no person shall be in prison for debt; that's the shortest one, but they never asked anyone that, and they would go over these long Const- drawn out--and a lot of people were not literate enough, and the average person today probably couldn't interpret the Constitution the way they would think that they should. So you had people--we had to really work our way into the fabric of the community because we were strangers, we were strange; we were young people--nineteen, twenty years old, and we were there to help them to get freedom, and we're there to, to help get justice and help you to register to vote. "What is that all about?" You explain it to them, and most times it's--the people who are drawn to you are the younger people, and then their parents. So--and you, you would spend your day actually going from house to house, introducing yourself, getting to know Miss Jones or Mr. Smith, or Mr. Davis, and telling them about yourself, why you're there, and they wanted to hear this. We were messengers. Speaker 2: So, was this--were you all following basic community organizing rules sort of? You know, I, I, I know they, they teach community organizing in different places (unclear), how to knock on doors, how to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, that's new, that's new. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Saul Alinsky and that whole group? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: No, that came after [sic.]. We, we almost--we just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You all weren't influenced by that? Speaker 1: We were before then. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We went in the community, and you got to know the people in the community because we were dependent upon them for food, for food and a place to stay; we stayed with the people, and so once someone trusted you enough to let you stay in their home and feed you, they will protect you, and that's what happened to all of us because we were getting an organizational check for ten dollars a week, and when we would get it, it was nine dollars and sixty-four cents because they took taxes out of it, so we had to rely on the community for food. Speaker 2: Did you get any--I know we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Willie McCray a couple years ago-- Speaker 1: You did? Speaker 2: Yeah, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) God bless him. Speaker 2: --in Yellow Springs [Ohio]-- Speaker 1: God bless him. Speaker 2: --and he talked about being a messenger from Atlanta [Georgia]; he'd, he'd come down to the various SNCC sites. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Did you get visits from, from him or anybody else from SNCC bringing supplies and things? Speaker 1: No, he would probably go to the COFO [Council of Federated Organizations] office there in Jackson [Mississippi]. See, we were way down-- Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: That--Jackson was a central office and Greenwood [Mississippi] was a central office. Story_ID: 618591 Speaker 1: So, but you, you never--did you ever encounter any, any, you know, physical hostility when you tried to register people to vote in Natchez [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: No, and we went to Liberty, Mississippi, and believe it or not, that was in--that was before '64 [1964] now; if I went--I'm going back to '62 [1962]. We stayed there all day; the same place where Herbert Lee was killed? We were ignored the whole day; no one bothered us--right in the same place. It was being filmed by two students from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. They did not bother us the whole day. We were in and outta the courthouse, walking around; we took three people, nothing happened. That was 1962. When we went and tried to take Miss Hamer [Fannie Lou Hamer]--when we took them to Greenwood--not to Greenwood [Mississippi], to Indianola [Mississippi], that was summer of '62 [1962]--no one bothered us, and it was a whole busload. So we're talking about '64 [1964] now, and I can name some of the counties that were disastrous--Canton, Mississippi, Yazoo City [Mississippi], Belzoni [Mississippi], Shaw [Mississippi]--those were treacherous places. Speaker 1: Were people actually hurt in-- Speaker 2: Would, would shoot you. They were, they were treacherous. And Liberty had that name, but for some reason they didn't bother us. Speaker 1: What do you think it was because of the Harvard students filming, filming? Speaker 2: They didn't know they were there, I don't--or maybe they did know they were; I don't know. But I know that I went and gave a deposition to Attorney William Kunstler in Liberty from Natchez--like we came over in Natchez, and no one bothered us then, but it was a court proceeding. But see, Liberty is just one street; I don't know if you've been there; it's just one street and a light and we had Mr. E.W. Steptoe who lived there who would shoot anything moving, and he was a--weighed about 120 pounds, wiry man who, who would--who everybody was frightened of. Speaker 1: He was a white man? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: A black man? Speaker 2: Um-hm (nods head). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But certain counties had a bad reputation. If you wanted to get beaten, that's--those were places you would go to the courthouse. But I never experienced that, but I do know of many people who did. And in Natchez I, I had a trust--as I said again, I had a trust factor problem because I didn't know who to trust, and George Metcalf who we were staying with, and we were staying in his boarding house, he was working for Armstrong Tire and Rubber plant company [sic. Armstrong Tire and Rubber Company], and his--he went to turn the ignition on in his car and his leg was blown off. And so Mr. Jackson [Wharlest Jackson]--you'll hear about this case coming up if that Till bill [Emmett Till Unsolved Civil Rights Crimes Act] passes--was killed in '67 [1967] at Armstrong Tire and Rubber plant company. Story_ID: 618592 Speaker 1: I'm not changing the subject about what we did from day to day, I'm going back to it. But, for instance, one evening we were going to have a voter registration meeting, and [HistoryMaker] Lawrence Guyot and I were passing out flyers for--about citizenship; the police arrested us and took us to jail, and the rest of the charge was distributing leaflets without a permit. And we were kept in jail overnight. And they put sugar in the tank of my car, took eleven dollars out of my little wallet, and a little pinhead diamond ring that I kept screaming about and demanding. And--because, see, when you talk about First Amendment rights, that--there was no such thing. And shortly after I got out of jail, I was at a beauty shop and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agent came to the beauty shop and asked me to come downtown because John Doar had instructed him to have me come to the shop to be interviewed, and I went there and I think I told you about that in the last interview. But I'm explaining my First Amendment right, and that was distributing leaflets without a permit. And I looked at the charge that I got for the day I was arrested on Medgar Evers' funeral? It was like breach of the peace, obstructing ju- obstructing the sidewalk or something. But the First Amendment was used against us at all times. Story_ID: 618593 Speaker 1: And by us being young and in the communities that we worked in, people saw us probably as their children and young people that they would help and take care of. Now, if we had been much older, they would have probably took us differently, but they, they saw a, a honesty about us, they saw a, a desire to bring about change. Most of us were from the South and from Mississippi, and they communicated with us about what we were talking about. And I--for instance, I would say that I grew up in Hattiesburg, Mississippi in Palmers Crossing [Mississippi], and my mother [Annie Woullard Perryman] had nine children, and she came from Waynesboro, Mississippi, because there's a connection. And so you start talking like that and people start understanding. And we can now talk- I'm sick of these people not paying us enough money because I read an article--I had given a interview to them and said that "Would you believe that people are working in the Delta [Mississippi Delta] and being paid a dollar for a hundred pounds of cotton?" That was in 1962. Speaker 2: That's a lot of work, isn't it? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: How long does it take to pick a hundred pounds of cotton? Speaker 1: A long time. Speaker 2: It's a day's work, isn't it? Speaker 1: No, some people pick two hundred. Speaker 2: In a day? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That's still like--well, say it's half a day. Four hours for a dollar? Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, two dollars--a hundred--so that's two dollars and--times five. Plus, women who did domestic work made like what, two or three dollars a day, and bus fare sometimes, so--but these were the common things that we had to engage our people with, with our own plights. We had a lot of commonality--a lot of things in common, so we were called the local people. I, I don't know if you've seen that reference. Speaker 2: (Inaudible response). Speaker 1: In SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] you'll see--you may see a reference to it, and the local people meant the indigenous people from Mississippi, Alabama--mainly from Mississippi because we were so vocal and so persistent. Story_ID: 618594 Speaker 1: Now, were there many--well, first of all, were there many black students from out of the state in the freedom project (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From out of state? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Not really, not really. Speaker 1: Okay, other than, you know, when you talk about the core, other than Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] and a couple of other people, there weren't that many (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some would come down like from Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut]; Eleanor Norton [Eleanor Holmes Norton] came down, Marian Wright [HistoryMaker Marian Wright Edelman]. Eleanor came down but she had--I think she was in her senior year, and she may have passed the bar at that time. And you had a few to come with the law groups. Speaker 1: Was it Bob Moses' first wife, Dona Richards, who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dona. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Marimba Ani, now she, she came down. Speaker 2: What was her name? Speaker 1: Marimba Ani now; she-- Speaker 2: Marimba Ani? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's her name now, but Dona Richards was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know Dona. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She came in '63 [1963], after the March on Washington. Dona and I rode from New York [New York] together to the March on Washington. I met her in Chicago [Illinois] in '62 [1962], and I haven't seen her in many years. But Dona was alien in that her socialization was very different from ours. She was University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], New York, and so Dona was part of the group who drew up the position paper on women. You heard about the women--the women's movement paper that started in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]? Speaker 1: Now that, that comes like after the summer of '64 [1964], towards the end, right? Or does--or did it go--I mean, you tell (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It came, it came around--it came around maybe '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Was it before you went to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], or after? Speaker 2: It, it was near the end. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. But, but I'm saying, she fit in with that group. She, Emma Schrader [Emmie Schrader Adams], Casey Hayden [Casey Cason Hayden], Mary King, Theresa Del Pozzo and Dona. Speaker 1: Those are mostly white women you named (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: --and Dona. Was she the only black woman in that group? Speaker 2: Yeah. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 618595 Speaker 1: And I wanna ask you more about them, too at, at--when we get past the Democratic Convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey], but-- Speaker 2: When you mentioned blacks from outside, generally, they were northerners who had the same kinds of problems that a lot of whites had; they had not been exposed to that kind of environment, and they had--you know, they had issues dealing with it as well. Speaker 1: So they had the same--some of the same cultural kind of issues. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, cultural issues. Speaker 1: Yeah. How did, how did northern whites fare in the South--I mean what was the dynamic? I know there's a lot been written since those days. A lot of books have been written about how the culture--kind of clash in culture; you got educated, super educated white people on one hand-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --coming down there 'cause they're the cream of the crop academically, a lot of them were-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --who came there, and real ambitious, like Tom Hayden, Casey Hayden [Casey Cason Hayden], and Mary King and others, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I saw Tom about two months ago. Speaker 1: Here they come to the South, and they, and they, and they live with people who--sometimes they couldn't read or couldn't--you know, hadn't really--semi-literate, and-- Speaker 2: But the, the issue was the greater good. There was a purpose there for being there, and the other things that you're talking about are--were not relevant to what the social structure was about. So that's how most people dealt with it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So it didn't really stop anything from going? Speaker 2: No, no. And you had people like Mr. Hartman Turnbow, who may have gone to second or third grade, I don't know, and Guyot [HistoryMaker Lawrence Guyot] describes him--he was about 5'6", and who always carried his gun, and had to serve time in Parchman [Mississippi State Penitentiary, Parchman, Mississippi] for killing a man, and went to the Democratic Convention with his pistol, and his wife [Dee Turnbow] had her gun, and no one would come near him. Or you had Mr. E.W. Steptoe--all of his children went to college and grad school from down there at Liberty [Mississippi]; no one came near him, near him. And-- Speaker 1: So you're saying that these are black people down there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --that had established--I mean--when you mean no one, you know, no white racists challenged them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Period, period. Speaker 1: --'cause they had established a-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. And so when you get people like Casey and, and Tom and so forth, they came there for a purpose, and their purpose was the governmental structure, and the people who were part of it are people who were being exploited, you know, from a socialist point of view. So you deal with the destruction that's taking advantage of the people--the working class--and that would be my interpretation of how they dealt with it. And if you were able to score, meaning that if you were able to get some type of law changed--I know God bless them--Attorney William Kunstler, Kinoy [Arthur Kinoy], and McDeen [ph.], and Stavis [Morton Stavis], and all them who came and worked diligently, diligently for days, to bring about change. They had no problems with extracting depositions from the people who had been beaten almost to death or--I remember when Guyot was almost killed in a Winona [Mississippi] jail with Miss Hamer [Fannie Lou Hamer] was there. Miss Hamer could read and could write, but she had like a fifth grade education, but she was eloquent, right? So she was a born leader. And then you had some who were leaders in different other ways--different capacities; they could organize. Now Victoria Jackson Gray Adams [HistoryMaker Victoria Adams] was from Mississippi, and she was able to go to college; she went to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] for a year or so. Her parents [Annie Mae Ott Jackson and Mack Jackson] were able to send her, but she was very articulate. Speaker 1: I think she's a--didn't she get a Ph.D. at some point or, or-- Speaker 2: No, unless she went to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know her son [Reuben Ernest Adams, III] was at Temple. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And if you, if you're working with working-class people, for the most part, you won't find a lot of educated people. So, are you, are you committed to the cause, or are you going to go there to teach them how to talk or spell, or write, or whatever? Story_ID: 618596 Speaker 1: There are some chal- I mean--now how did--well, one thing, I guess, would come to mind, in a state where black men have been lynched for--you know, since before the Civil War for talking to white women and being in the, in the presence of them. I mean how did those white women deal with dealing with black men in the South? I mean would the black men be--he couldn't be seen with a white woman in some sense (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: --cases, so how did they resolve that? I mean how did they react to it? Speaker 2: They didn't; they told them to stay at home. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean they told the white women to stay at home? Speaker 2: Yeah, we told them to stay at home because they posed too much of a danger. Because if you had a picket line and (unclear)--it was going well until a white female step out and then these guys would just go berserk, I mean literally go berserk. So, we would try to keep them away from the mainstream. I think that's one of the reason those papers came out, 'cause they were relegated to the office and so forth. Speaker 1: So they were--they felt discriminated against because of the-- Speaker 2: Their sex and so forth, but let's face it; it was reality, too. Speaker 1: 'Cause, you know, I mean their presence could actually get somebody really killed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Killed. Speaker 1: All right. But that, that wasn't their intention, but they wanted to-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --participate but they couldn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they should have had the right to participate but it, it, it was, it was--the deck was stacked against everybody. I remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this really, as the Communists say, "It heightens the contradictions" (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) I remember in Hattiesburg, Mississippi, my hometown; we had a picket line right in front of the courthouse with Theron Lynd, the big fat white man you were talking about earlier, the registrar, and the picket line was going fine. And one white girl came to the line and all hell broke loose! I mean they went berserk, so the line had to stop because they were, they were encroaching upon the line, (gesture) encroaching upon the line. And the girls were--you know, they wanted to participate, but it was just that these guys said no. No, they weren't gonna have it. And that's why we told them to stay at ho- at--stay in the office, you know, do co-op work, or whatever. Speaker 1: Now, was that the summer that Viola Liuzzo of Detroit [Michigan] was killed at a-- Speaker 2: She was killed after the Selma to Montgomery March. Speaker 1: Oh, '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965]. Okay, so, she wasn't (unclear) so--that's, that's later (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Now, you see how she was killed? You see what happened? Speaker 1: She was shot by the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] clearly. Speaker 2: Right, right, because she was driving black people. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, so that just inflames the racism. Speaker 2: It, it brings something out, it just brings something--I knew Vernon Dahmer, who was killed the Klan in, in Hattiesburg my hometown? Now Mr. Dahmer could've been white if he wanted to be, but he chose to be black. His sister [Eileen Dahmer Beard] was as white or whiter than any white person that you would know; she was blond, blue eyed, big--a white woman, and she chose to be black. Her husband's about my color, and if they were walking downtown the, the people get so mad, start raising hell, and carrying on. But-- Speaker 1: Because they thought she was white, or (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 618597 Speaker 1: You said you got the word in August that the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party was gonna be formed in August of '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: We went to Atlantic City [New Jersey] in August of '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, but--okay, what I'm asking is like when did you get the word that, that a party was gonna be formed? Speaker 2: Well, we start distributing the marked ballots probably around March or April of '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact, our vote, our vote for [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson, that was a pre-requisite to going to Atlantic City, to challenge what was being--what was happening was that people from all the counties were being organized into del- as delegates and, and precinct captains, and so forth to bring them together to Jackson, Mississippi to, to the main event--main party, to discuss it. I don't know if you've seen that on television, about 'Eyes on the Prize,' where Miss Ella Baker is up--standing up talking? Speaker 1: Right, right; that happens later on in the summer, right? But--right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I--remember when I asked you earlier, in Oxford [Ohio], if there was a overall plan to form a, a party and to go to the convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: I told you that not to my knowledge. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. But, but you're saying that people started--I mean--so what was the intention of marching (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The emphasis--I said the emphasis was on voter registration. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. So, do you remember about when the idea came to form the party and to-- Speaker 2: I know we started, as I said, doing the marked balloting around spring time. Speaker 1: Yeah, but there wasn't a full idea yet then, for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was being formed because delegates were being selected. Speaker 1: Okay, so there was an idea to form a party before you went to Oxford. Speaker 2: No, this was '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But we couldn't say that a--it was an idea that was on the books because, you know, things were more fluid, I would say. I couldn't say that we--April 4th like we're going to start organizing a party April 10th, so and so and so; it didn't work that way because you couldn't--you were under so much duress and, and you asked me how did all the summer volunteers get to their various locations, some of which were like two hundred miles, so you--when you talk about saying we're gonna have this party organized, you know, it's sort of like--we may have it in our minds, but we--is it gonna really work--but this is something that we would like, but will it be realized? And you work on it, and then it did come to fruition, okay. So--I would, I would say that; I wouldn't say that at Oxford that the whole notion of organizing a Freedom Democratic Party was the foremost in everybody's mind--it wasn't. The foremost in everybody's mind was getting to Missis- teaching these primarily upper middle-class white students, who've never been south, how to survive--what--why they were going there, how to survive, and how to get out, and how to live with people of lesser means and so forth--different colors and cultural orientation. Story_ID: 618598 Speaker 1: Also, our three workers [Michael Schwerner, Andrew Goodman and James Chaney] had been murdered and that was devastating, so--and then you had all these other issues to deal with-- Speaker 2: Well, just for clarification, at that time they had disappeared, nobody had said--you know, you figured they had been murdered, but nobody knew. Speaker 1: We knew they were dead. Speaker 2: Yeah, you kind of knew they were, but-- Speaker 1: Yeah, because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the state kept saying they were missing, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] was notified and they say they needed twenty-four hours. They may have been saved if they had acted-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they waited twenty-four hours. Speaker 2: So the justice department knew-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that they were targets, but they didn't do anything-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --right away. Speaker 1: No, they were notified. Speaker 2: This might be a good time to raise this is that, I guess subsequent, you know, to that--to those days, that then books written by various FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] informants saying that they actually knew, and the FBI was well informed about what the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] was gonna do and what other groups were gonna do ahead of time. I don't know if they were in every case, but I know they, they knew a lot of things were gonna happen but they didn't act, for whatever reason. Speaker 1: Yeah--well, it wouldn't have been anything out of order, other than they had more people to attack. They burned more churches--bombed more churches than anywhere across the country. And, fortunately, people were not killed, and we didn't lose a lot of lives, thank God. Speaker 2: So, did anybody lose their life that summer in the civil rights struggle? Speaker 1: With the, with the exception of our--the three, no. Story_ID: 618599 Speaker 1: So, well, tell me about going to Atlantic City [New Jersey]. I mean was there a--there was a convention, right? Speaker 2: Yes, the Demo- Mis- the Democratic National Convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: DNC. Speaker 1: Yeah, but before you all went--you all went as the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And there was a convention of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party prior to going, right? To-- Speaker 2: You had two parties; you had the regular Democratic Party, which was all-white, from Mississippi, and then you had us, which was an integrated party, the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, and had a priest from Natchez [Mississippi], who was also a delegate; I can't call his name. Ed--Reverend Ed King was white. I think we may have had two or three whites in our delegation, but the problem came when we presented ourselves to the Democratic Convention. Speaker 1: Now, you--how many people--I'm asking you details that, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --how many people went, 'cause this--you know--and how did you all go? Did you-- Speaker 2: On buses and cars. The, the party itself went by bus, and I remember going in a car. Speaker 1: How many people went to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] with you? Speaker 2: You know, we came from Mississippi. It must have been about--I'll say about two hundred. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, these are the volunteers and the, and the local residents that wanted to--were members of the party? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And you say you took the bus trip? Now, did, did the state try to stop you all from going? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Did they know about it, as far as you knew? Speaker 2: I'm sure they did, sure they did, but they--as far as I know, they didn't try to stop the bus, but when we got there, we had hotel space, or living space. It's amazing, it's amazing how people were helping us--it's amazing; things were falling in place because I remember standing in a small hotel, and we had to lobby. Congresswoman Edith Green, Senator Wayne Morse and--I can't think of the other names now, but they were very sympathetic, and they gave us passes to the floor, and so (unclear), we were trading passes back and forth, and I remember Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was on the boardwalk, and his leg--he was in a wheelchair and his leg was in a cast, and Walter Reuther walked him in and told him that he better stop us or he wasn't gonna get any more money, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So is that something that you saw yourself, or did you-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah, I saw it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was of no consequence; he had no control over us. And when Hubert Humphrey came to the meeting, I wasn't at the meeting, but I was told he came with tears in his eyes asking that our delegation accept the two seats at large with (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're going too fast now; you're going too fast 'cause you're taking us to the negotiations before we get to the crises, 'cause--so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Miss Hamer's [Fannie Lou Hamer] speech. Speaker 1: --you went to--so--okay, let me just put it in--okay, so you got like the regular Democratic delegation from the State of Mississippi. Speaker 2: All-white. Speaker 1: All-white; always been all--except for the Reconstruction when we had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --Revels [Hiram Rhodes Revels] and Blanche K. Bruce and some others. But, but, but all-white delegation. You all formed an alternative Democratic Party called the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, right? Speaker 2: Right--was integrated-- Speaker 1: Which your goal was to take the place of the all-white delegation 'cause you all were actually formed based on the Democratic platform and rules, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Which the Mississippi delegation, the regular one, was not, since it was all-white, all racists, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so the Democ- the national Democratic Party is faced with a challenge of do you accept the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party that's followed all your rules, or the, or the racist one which controls various committees in [U.S.] Congress and (laughter) is considered powerful in the Democratic Party but as Dixiecrats or whatever, or do you choose the ri- I mean, so, that's the dilemma, right? They had to choose which delegation they're going to sit, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Story_ID: 618600 Speaker 1: So, that--all right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Miss Hamer, Fannie Lou Hamer, went to testify before the Credentials Committee-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to ask that we be seated. And she gave a very powerful testimony that this is America, the land of the free and the home of the brave, and Miss Hamer was a sharecropper from Ruleville, Mississippi who probably hadn't registered to vote by that time, I'm not sure. But the TV was cut off and President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] interrupted and came on television with his own press conference. Speaker 1: So he drew the press away from Miss Hamer? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You think he did that on purpose? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. 'Cause everybody was--it was a very, very powerful testimony. Speaker 1: Now this, now this raises some issues about--so here's Johnson who's signed the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] later on that summer, and--but he, he's afraid that you all are--I mean you're gonna mess up this bond he has with the regular Democratic group from Mississippi, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it's--you think that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He'd already told President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] that--well, he delivered the South to President Kennedy, right? So he was in a bind. Speaker 1: Had he gone against the Democratic Party, he would've lost that--those Democrats. Speaker 2: Yes. And Hubert Humphrey was nominated as, as his vice president. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's like Mr. Civil Rights in the, in the [U.S.] Senate. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But he told you all what? Speaker 2: That if we didn't accept the, the two votes at large with Alaska, that he wouldn't be nominated as vice president--with tears in his eyes. Speaker 1: So you had him in a bind, too. Speaker 2: Yes. So, the position was that we didn't come here with anything, so we'll leave with nothing. Speaker 1: So, the compromise they offered you all was two-- Speaker 2: Seats at large with Alaska. Speaker 1: --with the Alaska delegation. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, no seats with the Mississippi delegation. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. And I--now, from what I have seen on television and radio, the Mississippi delegation--the regular delegation was so insulted by the very idea that you all were being given--by the very idea of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party giving--being given any seats that they left the convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and left their seats empty. Speaker 2: Right. But they, but they were not allowed to be used. Story_ID: 618601 Speaker 1: Once again, from what I understand, a lot of leaders, including Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], came to you all and told you all to back off. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Kind of tell us about who, who spoke to you? Was Whitney Young there [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey]? Was--who, who (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember Whitney Young being there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Only person I remember was Dr. King. Speaker 1: Okay, and what did Dr. King--what was his message? Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't hear him directly because see, the delegates were meeting in, in different venues at different points, and we were lobbying with different delegations. Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And also--plus, we had the car from--that had been found from the Mic- the three workers [Michael Schwerner, Andrew Goodman and James Chaney] had been dug up--you know, had been burned. Speaker 1: Yeah, now they were just discovered on a week that you all went to-- Speaker 2: The car was. Speaker 1: Yeah, the car was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The car was brought to Atlantic City [New Jersey] and put on the boardwalk. So, we had a lot of activity going on, and we knew what was going on with the meeting, but we were not actually in all the meetings. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. But I do know that Walter Reuther told that to Dr. King, and our position was that, that we came there with nothing and we would leave with nothing. We didn't come with any seats, and if, if you--if these the seats you wanna give us, we don't want them. Speaker 1: Now, from what I understand--I remember myself, as a kid, watching Miss Hamer's [Fannie Lou Hamer]--the broadcast of her testimony at eleven o'clock, or midnight, or something, on CBS. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Yeah. They broadcast it late. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: They put it on late, after she had delivered it live. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They taped it and put it back on (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was that morning, yes. Speaker 1: So people did see it; some people saw it anyway--I know I saw it when I was about--I was what, thirteen or fourteen when I saw it. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: And--but--and it moved us, you know; I mean my mother and I saw it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. But--oh, I had another question about the-- Speaker 2: You were asking about what activities were we exposed to, and what-- Speaker 1: Yeah, what you--yeah, but--oh, so they--oh, Joseph Rauh [Joseph L. Rauh, Jr.], from what I understand--I don't know if you were in the hall when he, he--his job was to, to kind of filibuster, to be--so the rules committee wouldn't make a decision before the negotiations were finished. And--what's your knowledge of that? What happened? Speaker 2: From what I understand, he wanted us to compromise, which we didn't. Speaker 1: So--I think there was a, there was a compromise made without your--without your consent, I think, right? Speaker 2: If he did, we didn't know anything about it; it was not part, it was not part--we were not party to it. Speaker 1: I know that people are divided now to whether Joseph Rauh sold the group [Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party] out or did not; some people say he wasn't, he was really trying to hold the fort for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], I mean from the--for the party, and some people say he did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From what I heard, from what I heard was that he, he was more or less selling us out. Story_ID: 618602 Speaker 1: Now, Miss Hamer [Fannie Lou Hamer]--do you remember her reaction to-- Speaker 2: Well, she said that we came here with nothing and we'll leave with nothing--and everybody else, too. We didn't want two seats, but that was an awakening in politics for us; that was the real deal. (Laughter) I mean we understood--we felt that if you go there with--it was a loss of innocence. If we went there and presented our case, that they would listen to us and, and act accordingly. But it doesn't work that way, it doesn't work that way. So I learned a lesson that day about mainstream politics. Speaker 1: So, were you really disappointed? Speaker 2: I wasn't disappointed; I, I learned that--see, I had already been on the outside, so I knew that I was still--I was still on the outside, and so it, it, it didn't really phase me that much because I didn't expect too much. Speaker 1: Do, do you have a sense of what the other volunteers felt like after working all summer, and then then taking, you know, these registered voters, I mean these voters that are--they tried to register anyway--to the national Democratic Convention and bringing them before the Democratic Party that had these high ideals, and then to have them rejected? I mean how did they--what was the mood in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] after, after the convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Most of us who were lobbying and actively working had already been exposed to the rawest form of oppression and degradation, so--meaning that this was just another form of it on a very high level. Speaker 1: But what about the others? Speaker 2: Some may have been disappointed, but for the most part, we weren't; we just saw that we had another fight ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did the volunteers disperse after the summer? I mean did the, did the same volunteers stay down there, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think, I don't think that many went because it was near the end of the summer, and volunteers were returning back to school as well, so we didn't have that many left. Speaker 1: Okay, so there weren't as many white volunteers that went-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --that actually went to the convention. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. So, most of them are already gone back. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 618603 Speaker 1: Well, so, when you, when you went back to Mississippi it was just basically business as usual, just, just keep struggling? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. We had the whole issue of the deaths of our three workers to deal with, and just the, the whole state to deal with, and I was involved in this lawsuit that was filed. It's on the Internet; I can't remember the date. I think it was like June, on behalf of Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], Chaney [James Chaney] and Goodman [Andrew Goodman]. I remember Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses], Ruth Schein, and Hunter Morey [R. Hunter Morey] filed suit against the State of Mississippi, the Klu Klux Klan [sic. Ku Klux Klan, KKK], the highway patrol, et cetera, et cetera, for violating their civil rights, and had to go to court in Meridian [Mississippi]. And I went to court in Meridian but when they called my name I didn't answer. The judge (unclear) because Rainey [Lawrence Rainey] and Price [Cecil Price], and others, were sitting around the judge's chambers-- Speaker 1: Now, who are they? Speaker 2: The sheriff and the deputy who killed our workers--were sitting there. And so he kept asking for me to stand up and I, I never stood up. And-- Speaker 1: You suspected they would try to set you up? Speaker 2: They would kill me. So, I--we all left and went back to Jackson [Mississippi]. No, I wasn't--(makes sound). They would sit--they were ready. That was--my name was the only name that they called. Story_ID: 618604 Speaker 1: But the Democratic Convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey] did--the next four years opened up the state, and blacks began, began to participate in political process, and it--but the '68 convention [1968 Democratic National Convention]--remember when all the--in Chicago [Illinois]--the fallout from there? But it was '64 [1964] or '68 [1968], so there was a spillover, and it was hell in Chicago. I wasn't there but I, I, I know what happened. Speaker 2: You think that was like backlash from the '64 [1964] convention? Speaker 1: Well, you had a lot of people who were, who were getting even and, and plus Mississippi had brought an integrated delegation at that time, I think, and Julian was nominated for president, wasn't he? [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond was nominated for president. Speaker 2: I think so, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, it was like a free for all. And then Daley [Richard J. Daley] got into it with the police, and they had Abbie Hoffman and the others, and the Yippies [Youth International Party] and-- Speaker 2: Well, some of the, the Yippies and some of the other white activists had been involved with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] during summer of '64 [1964], yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tom Hayden, Tom Hayden got arrested--yeah, the Chicago Seven. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. So that was '68 [1968], four years later. So, four years later and four more years, but I know that this past what, June? When they had the meeting here in Washington [D.C.] with the candidates--the county super delegates and so forth, and it was--the model was used that was drafted proportionately to have so many women and minorities, et cetera, et cetera, and that's how they selected the, the candidate based on the model that was used. I remember Donna Brazile saying that she used the model that was drafted, and that was the platform they were using; it wasn't anything that they had cooked up. Speaker 2: The model they had--that they--was drafted (unclear). Speaker 1: Proportionately that no one would be discriminated against. You had to have so many females, you had to have so many this, so many this. And so here in Washington, that was applied with Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] versus Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]; that model was used for that. Speaker 2: Okay. I, I missed--so the model that came out of the struggle that SNCC-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All right--was used to--and is still being used to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Yeah, I'm not, I'm not explaining myself, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, okay, okay. Speaker 1: But, but remember, we didn't have a model in '64 [1964]; '68 [1968] was when it was probably drafted-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and it has followed since then, but it has never--had to be tested, but this time it was tested, and so it was applied. Speaker 2: So, so well, the--is this when--well, what's the mood of SNCC when you go back to Mississippi in-- Speaker 1: Of SNCC? Speaker 2: --in '64 [1964]? I mean was this consi- was the Democratic Convention like a--did it energize SNCC to work even harder or did people feel depressed, or what kind of-- Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], or '64 [1964], we were still engaged. Sixty-five [1965] is when we went to Waveland for a retreat to discuss where are we, and what are the issues, and so forth. Speaker 2: You went where now, to-- Speaker 1: Waveland, Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --which is on the Gulf Coast--for a retreat and talk about issues. Speaker 2: So, now who was--who was the head of SNCC then, at that point? Speaker 1: Jim Forman [HistoryMaker James Forman]. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: And I think we kind of beat up on ourselves, and that's when we started dispersing for the most part. Speaker 2: Now this is--this is in early '65 [1965]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] was accused of, of being a chauvinist with women. Speaker 2: What do you think? Do you think he was? Speaker 1: He did--it was just in jest. See, you--if you're in a struggle, you--you're combative (laughter); I mean men and women. When I say combative, you go toe to toe, there's no taking o- if he say, "Oh (unclear), oh, you shut the hell up!" Or something like that, it's a comeback. Story_ID: 618605 Speaker 1: Well, we were talking about the, the early part of 1965, a retreat in Waverley, Mississippi? Speaker 2: Waveland. Speaker 1: Waveland, Mississippi, yeah, Waveland, okay; down on the coast, right? The Gulf Coast (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Mississippi Gulf Coast. Speaker 1: Yeah. And you said that the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people were kind of beating up on themselves. Speaker 2: Well, yes. It was a retreat to assess what we had done, our successes and failures, and where were we going from there. And some people thought that enough hadn't been accomplished; some thought that some- something had been accomplished, and some weren't quite sure. I know--for myself, I, I knew that things had changed; I'll speak for myself. Speaker 1: Okay. How had they changed? I mean this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because, as I said earlier, that I wanted the young people who were coming into Mississippi, I wanted them to come and see, come and see what was going on, what was happening to us--the young white people who were coming and bringing the media and bringing the federal government into the State of Mississippi to see the brutality and the deaths, and to see the disenfranchisement, the humiliation, the wages--low wages; I wanted everything to be seen. And for me, I knew that Mississippi would never be the same again because it had been exposed to the whole world, and that, for me, was enough. It wasn't enough, but it was enough for me to say that never, never, never again would this happen, and I felt that voter registration, going to the Democratic Convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey], and encountering people from different congressional districts, and having gone to the seat of power, Humphrey [Hubert Humphrey] and the president of the United States [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] knows that we're here now, and our workers had been killed, and the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] had set up headquarters in Mississippi. J. Edgar Hoover had been down there and--searching for the bodies, and the whole state was saturated. No stone was left unturned, although they may have hidden something under them or may--something may have been left, but everything was wide open; Mississippi was wide open, and blacks had gained a sense of empowerment. There were no, no longer any twelve o'clock curfews in Clarksdale, Mississippi, ten o'clock curfews for blacks in Ruleville, Mississippi with the night watchman [J.W. Milam] who had killed Emmett Till serving as the night watchman in Ruleville, and these things were--got--were eradicated. I wanted everybody to come and see, come and see. And for me, I felt that a lot of that had been accomplished. Of course, we had a long way to go because Mississippi is still the poorest state in the union, and the economic part had to be dealt with. But just the humiliation of buying a dress and not being able to try it on. Not being--being told to get out of a restaurant or doctor's office. I know when I was about twelve years old--I had always suffered with sinusitis, and went into the doctor's office and they--woman--nurse came and told me, "Get the hell out of there and go in the back door." Now there was another door at the end of the hall, to go to that door. But the humiliation of day to day activities that you don't anticipate, but it's like everybody sees now, everybody knows what's going on, everybody knows that Herbert Lee was killed, Louis Allen was killed, Mickey Schwerner [Michael Schwerner] and James Chaney and Reverend Lee [George W. Lee] from Belzoni [Mississippi] was killed--they know that; they know Emmett Till was murdered. Emmett Till was murdered and his mama [Mamie Till Mobley] let everybody see his face. Mack Charles Parker was killed--he was thrown into the river; everybody knows that. How many deaths will it take? And they started naming all the names of people who'd been killed. So, that was my whole feeling about what had happened. Story_ID: 618606 Speaker 1: Now, the congressional delegation came up after that; '66 [1966]--Mrs. Fannie Lou Hamer, Miss Annie Devine. Victoria Gray [HistoryMaker Victoria Adams] ran for Congress, but that didn't stop anything. The Waveland [Mississippi] meeting was, was a retreat to talk about what we had done and how far we had gone, okay? But we still had another project, which was the congressional delegation, and all of those votes were brought to the Congress of the United States, and they were recognized on the floor of the Congress here in Washington, D.C.--those three black women. I don't know if you have seen that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this was in 1966 you said? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, let's not skip the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm jumping. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, when President (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what I was trying to get at was like what happened at that meeting in Waveland? I mean did people--I mean who said that the, that the-- Speaker 1: No. I, I told you-- Speaker 2: Who was--who thought that the--that, that SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] had a lot of failures, or was it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I can't name all the names; I'm saying--I gave you three different scenarios of how people felt. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Some people felt that we had made strides, some felt that we had not done that much, and some felt that--in--a sort of neutral, okay? Speaker 2: So--now were these like--was this the meeting where they brought up the women's issue? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, this is when Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] was accused of telling the women to be subservient and, unfortunately, that was the only thing that came out of that meeting that, that people talk about. I've seen something on the Internet where (unclear) says that [HistoryMaker] Dorie Ladner say, "Can't we all get al- can't we get along? Can't we love each other," or something to that effect. But we, we were hard on ourselves; we point out the, the faults--the good parts and the, the bad parts and--scat! And we're talking about what, thirty-eight years ago? Speaker 2: Yeah, a long time ago, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. But-- Speaker 2: Longer than that; it was about forty something years ago. Speaker 1: Please don't remind me. But I, I, I wouldn't sit here and say that--well, the organization didn't close down, but a lot of people felt that enough had not been done, and that's when I said I spoke up for myself, and I'll leave it at that. And I think that maybe somewhere along the line, your other people will speak for themselves. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But in--in that meeting in Waveland, it was an assessment. Now, did any--did leadership change hands, or anything like that? Or did people-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --did Forman--did [HistoryMaker] James Forman stay the-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: He stayed the president? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: He continued as president of SNCC? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Or chairman of SNCC, right? Speaker 1: He was the executive director (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) executive director, okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 618607 Speaker 1: In '65 [1965], SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--from what I understand. Well, fo- well they were--'65 [1965] is when Alabama became more of the focus on what was going on nationally. Now, I don't know what was going on in Mississippi. Did you stay in Mississippi? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Some focus had been, been to Alabama, and-- Speaker 1: I know Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that as a result of the some--I remember going over there in Natchez [Mississippi]; that was before the Selma march [Selma to Montgomery March] across the bridge [Edmund Pettus Bridge, Selma, Alabama]. A group of us rode over there and saw that it would be too dangerous and we went back to Natchez, that's why we weren't on the bridge, but-- Speaker 1: So you were there prior to the-- Speaker 2: The march. Speaker 1: --they--the--they called it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sunday. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bloody Sunday. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. A group had gone into a (unclear)--see, Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] organization was in Alabama. I remember Bernard Lafayette and his wife Colia [Colia Liddell] went into, I think Wilcox County, Alabama and started working around '63 [1963], '64 [1964], and they, they did have a semblance of an organization there, and they left and went to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] to finish their degrees, and Stokely and some others came in and started working with the local people, and-- Speaker 1: Now, Stokely is SNCC and--but SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] had kind of started, you said, and it-- Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they went in and what, Jackson [Jimmie Lee Jackson] was killed, the local (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the young man was, was killed when--I think his mother was attacked and he tried to defend her and was killed-- Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: --at a restaurant, I think it was. Speaker 2: And that's what started the whole, you know, march. But I do remember going to meetings at Brown's Chapel [Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church, Selma, Alabama]. But strategically, we didn't think it was wise for us to try to march across the bridge; it was too, too dangerous. Speaker 1: Did you--I think it was a--I believe it was Hosea Williams and, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hosea, [HistoryMaker] John Lewis, Bob Mance [Robert Mance], Annie Pearl Avery--that's about it, to my knowledge. Speaker 1: I know I've heard people tell the story that, I think, Hosea Williams felt that God had revealed to him that they should march, or something? And that was a persuasive--he persuaded people based on that. Did you have any-- Speaker 2: I haven't heard that before. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I know Hosea marched at night in Natchez, Mississippi and I, I said, "No, no. I will not march at night." And I met Chief--not Chief Tyak [ph.]--maybe Chief Tyak from this area around here--nation around here; he said he had marched with Hosea in Georgia during the longest walk two weeks ago--he mentioned Hosea Williams. And I said, "Yes, yes." But I'm gonna digress a little to tell you about Hosea. I met him at Carania Farm [sic. Koinonia Farm, Sumter County, Georgia] in '62 [1962], and was a chemistry teacher, I think, at the time, and he became very involved, became passionate about the fight for justice, and quit his, quit his job and started working with the SCLC with Dr. King--knew him very well; that was in 1962. And up until he died, he was still--had a fire burning in him. But getting back to '65 [1965] (background noise) in Alabama, I can't speak to Alabama because quite a few went over into Alabama. I don't know what all was going on in Alabama, but I do know that Reverend Reeb, and Miss Liuzzo [Viola Liuzzo], and Jonathan [Johnathan Daniels]--what you had about three people killed over there? Speaker 1: James Reeb, yeah, talking about--yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) James Reeb, yes--were killed there, but I never spent time there. Story_ID: 618608 Speaker 1: So you, you were--basically worked in Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --through- throughout '65 [1965]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now--so, what was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Natchez [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. So the focus was still the same, to register people to vote? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: And to get ready for the congressional dele- congressional challenge. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the congressional challenge consisted of? Speaker 2: Challenging seating of the whites in the [U.S.] Congress. There were three seats that were being challenged, and--one was Jamie Whitten; I can't remember the names of the other two, but-- Speaker 1: Well how--what were they challenged based on? Were they based on the fact that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Disenfranchisement. Speaker 1: Okay--that black people didn't have a chance to vote-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for the--okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now--so they actually--So Miss Hamer [Fannie Lou Hamer] and, and-- Speaker 2: Annie Devine and Victoria Jackson Gray Adams [HistoryMaker Victoria Adams]. Speaker 1: So, they actually got a hearing from Congress? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And how did it turn out? What was said at Congress? I mean-- Speaker 2: Well, it was--as far as I recall, it was expressed that they had been disenfranchised, and it was acknowledged. Story_ID: 618609 Speaker 1: I know that 1965 was the year that Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] signed the Voter- Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965]? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was in Natchez, Mississippi that night, and I heard him say, "And we shall overcome," and we all turned and looked at each other and said, "What? He said what?" And it was like--how did I say it? It was like someone had taken your power away from you, using your own words. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. That's the way I felt about it. Speaker 1: So you didn't feel any--now, a lot--a lot of people, you know, were thrilled. They said that was the first time that Johnson, you know, spoke so passionately about civil rights, I mean to that extent. Now, it shocked-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the southern whites, out here, and it made them wanna get out of the Democratic Party when he did it-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but, but you felt he had kind of--was stealing the thunder of the movement? Speaker 2: Not, not the thunder. When I heard him say, "And we shall," I can't tell you what he said in the whole speech, but when I--the last thing I remember him saying was, "And we shall overcome," that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And we shall overcome, right? Speaker 2: --and I was floored. It was (laughter)--and see, when Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] mentioned that--and it took Lyndon Johnson to get the Civil Rights bill passed--Voting Rights bill passed, it became a, a very ugly thing because it started out under President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], and she was so vicious, she threw it back and said--and Johnson was the one who got it passed. And we were trying to figure out and what point was she making? And that's when Senator Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] became so enraged, and went to work for Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] because of that. It was a--she didn't, she didn't give the Kennedy administration any credit because--see, the March on Washington and the whole civil rights initiative had started with the Kennedy administration, and Johnson was the one who finished it, but she said it took him to pass it. Speaker 1: But in another sense, would either administration have done anything if it hadn't--if it had not been for the, for the marchers and the demonstrators, and the people who tried to register to vote against the odds and--I mean for--if it hadn't been for people like SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], and-- Speaker 2: Well, that's true, too (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], would Kennedy had done any--have, have done anything? Speaker 2: Not, not on their own because, see, they were comfortable, they were rich, they had not been exposed to anything. So that was the least thing from their mind until those buses start burning and, and Birmingham [Alabama] became a big problem down there, and Senator Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] had to get involved, so, the pressure was on them. And when our three workers [Michael Schwerner, Andrew Goodman and James Chaney] were killed, it became really, really bad. Story_ID: 618610 Speaker 1: I remember when Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] went to the Mississippi Delta when he was running for senator [sic.]; he was, he was--like he'd never seen anything like that in his life. He, he couldn't believe it. So, I guess you have to step on people's toes and make, and make--pinch them and make them aware that you're around. If you don't make any noise, then people won't notice you. So you have to--they, they used to call us rabble rousers, agitators, and so forth--you have to. Frederick Douglass said, "Agitate! Agitate! Agitate!" You have to in order to get anything done in the social order. And, and not one time, it has to be constant because people do one thing and then they forget about it. "Oh, I did that." Yeah, but the world keeps moving. You know, the minimum wage just went up a few cents recently. But my overall assessment of this--of the Freedom Summer--as I said, if I go back from the very beginning on my ride from Chicago [Illinois] to Ohio, riding the bus and looking at the cornfields and arriving at Miami University [Oxford, Ohio] and seeing all these young people, the TV cameras, the reporters and all these officials, it was like, "Oh, my god!" And all them young people--white people--running around. "Oh, my god! Oh, they have come to hear our story!" I wasn't thinking about color, I wasn't thinking about any of that because I knew that they had the power. And Bob [Robert Parris Moses] said the same thing; they had the power to bring power. They were the power, so with them came power, and one of--if any one of them got hurt, their mama and daddy called the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], called the governor, the senator, and things would be taken care of. We had no one to call. And someone asked how did we protect ourselves. I think I saw something similar to that on there. Our protection came mainly from try- mainly using common sense, and avoiding danger as much as possible. Of course, danger can happen, but if you feel that something is not right and you feel that you may be harmed, don't get into it. Like I said, Hosea [Hosea Williams] marched at night; I wouldn't march at night. The night has no eyes. I always went--whenever I went to a place, I would sit near the exit, or knew where the exit was, was, like with that George Wallace photograph you took earlier--at that Wallace rally at the Kiel Auditorium in St. Louis, Missouri. I knew where the exit was; I was close to it, so it, it's a instinct for survival that you develop, and you don't make foolish mistakes, and you learn to live knowing that tomorrow may not come, but I've given all that I've given and I've given it for the cause. And that's the glory of it. And my legacy would be that whatever I have done, I haven't done enough for man, for human rights--equal rights, and that I would want to do more. Story_ID: 618611 Speaker 1: Now you've remained involved in civil rights and, and in the struggle-- Speaker 2: Throughout, throughout (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for human justice throughout your life, correct? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And will continue. Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything that you would do differently, if you could? Speaker 2: I would do more of it. I was talking to [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory at the Native American march two weeks ago--those Native Americans who had their thirtieth ann- year anniversary who returned to Washington [D.C.] from California and Arizona to present a peace treaty to--asking the federal government to protect Mother Earth. Thirty years ago, they came out for religious right- reasons; they couldn't pray where they wanted to pray, but I was talking to Dick Gregory who's been involved with them for years and years, and I met him in 1962 when he came to Mississippi. I said to him, "When you came--you saved us when you came to Mississippi. You know you helped to save us." He say, "Hey, yeah, yeah--lots of--I remember MFs wouldn't go where I would go--all them, all them other cats." I say, "Yeah," I say, "and around 1970 or '71 [1971], I think, at Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia], you told the audience that 'That woman there has been on every march that I have ever been on, and she hasn't missed one.'" And we started laughing, and just fell out laughing. I said, "And I'm still marching" (laughter). It was funny because I didn't expect that to come out of his mouth. Some demonstrations, something going on, and we had met at Georgia State, and he was talking, he say, "And there's [HistoryMaker] Dorie Ladner, she--I've never seen a march without her on it." I said, "And this is 2008 and here we are sitting out here in this hot sun." And we laughed. But it's, it's a passion; it's a fire that won't go out, it won't go out. Story_ID: 618612 Speaker 1: We were talking off camera about the planning that you said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --in the morning you would planned for-- Speaker 2: Each--I gave you a sort of a overview of what we did each day during the week. Generally, after we ate, we would sit down and map out strategy as to what areas we were going to; I think I'm repeating some of it. And a great deal of emphasis was placed on the church and the ministers, and the sisters who belonged to the church who were the most influential people, and the deacons. And we were very successful with a lot of the churches, so--I wanna take an aside to tell you about one little incident that occurred. One Sunday I wanted to talk about a citizenship class we were going to have, and the--it's one of the largest churches in Natchez [Mississippi], very high, highfalutin type church, and I stood up to--and the pastor ignored me, and I stood up again and he said, "You can't talk." And so I con- I started to talk and--to tell the congregation what we were gonna have the citizenship meeting, and what time and place. And so he retorted by saying, "Oh, she's drunk." I said, "Well, according to the Book of Acts, chapter four, when the saints went into the upper room and began to speak in a new tongue, they were accused of being drunk off new wine, and I think that that may be what you're referring to." And I finished. And there was nothing else said. And now that I'm thinking about it, it was an appropriate text to (laughter)--I had learned at church and home (laughter). Speaker 1: How did the congregation react to what you did? Speaker 2: They were positive; they didn't say anything because they knew who we were, they knew what we were trying to do. And for him to de- try to deny me that right was wrong, and I'm saying that to say also you have to take the--seize the moment, seize the moment; it if's not given to you, you, you take it; you, you take it, right? Speaker 1: Was that part of the philosophy of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]? I mean in terms of--in those days? Speaker 2: We didn't say it, but I mean that's what we did. Speaker 1: I know I heard, you know, years later, you hear Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] say, "Seize the time," you know? Speaker 2: Seize the moment, seize the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And seize the time, yeah. Is that pretty much-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm sure that's probably what it meant. I know when I said at Jim Forman's [HistoryMaker James Forman] funeral, "Miss Rice [Condoleezza Rice], we did not fight for you to go and start wars all over the world," the writer Emile Harris [ph.] interpreted that by saying that we were the organization that said, "If we can't sit at the table, we'll kick the legs from under the table." So, that's the organization he said that we represent. Story_ID: 618613 Speaker 1: Well, in the organizing days, was there a--I know you all worked a lot with churches, but SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] is usually seen as a--as the religions organizing group and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] is seen more of a political--as a political based group. Was there any, any conflict? Was it hard to work with churches, or any rivalry with SCLC (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we didn't find--we didn't find it hard to work with churches, but see, we didn't necessarily work with the SCLC. We were young people who had a different outlook, a different agenda. We didn't wear suits and ties and drive cars and go to dinner; we didn't have homes and families, churches, responsibilities; we were mobile and we were zealots. We were about business. If we decided that we wanted to go to Selma, Alabama, we would all get in the car and go. Miss Baker, Ella Baker, who founded SNCC--helped to found SNCC at Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] said that after a sit-in movement when the students came to--in Shaw, January 1, 1960, SCLC was there, but she had the insight to see that if she had put the young people with the clergy, SCLC, that there would have been no leadership. So she had the understanding to separate the two, and she put the young people in a room to themselves and let them develop their own agenda and their own programs and their own leadership. And as a result, SNCC came out of that, February 1, 1960, and SCLC stayed over here (gesture). So we never really interfaced with SCLC. [HistoryMaker] John Lewis, by him being chairman of SNCC, he had more of an occasion to talk with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] because they what they called the Big Five--Whitney Young, Roy Wilkins, Dr. King, John Lewis, [HistoryMaker] James Forman; they would meet on a regular basis and so forth, but we never saw them because we were busy, busy going here and there. And we, we called Dr. King De Lawd, and it wasn't out of disrespect, but he was an old man and we--as far as we were concerned (laughter), and we were, we were like the [U.S] Marine Corps (laughter)--move on--we made a slogan, "Move on over, or we'll move on over you." Speaker 1: And so this is all proportional 'cause Dr. King, you know, when he died he was thirty-nine, he wasn't that--you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know, I-- Speaker 1: --but to you all he was an old, old man. Speaker 2: That's true, but--I don't know if you remember that slogan during the war [Vietnam War]; it was a, it was a panther--the symbol of a panther--said, "Move on over, or we'll move on over you." It was a big symbol. So we, we--he died at thirty-nine; we were nineteen, twenty, so there was not too much that we had in common. And we didn't wanna hear any sermons. Story_ID: 618614 Speaker 1: And to be honest, I was telling [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory about that. He say, "You know I told--." I say, "You know when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was speaking, I was playing with your two oldest children and talking to your wife [Lillian Smith Gregory]." He said, "Yeah," and he said, "and I was somewhere back there flirting with somebody." He say, "We didn't expect all of that." I said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, at the March on Washington? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: He say, "We didn't expect all of that." I said, "No." I say, "I didn't know what he said until much, much later because I was running around." I was--we were angry because see, they had changed [HistoryMaker] John Lewis' speech in the very beginning, and first thing that we did when we got to the March on Washington was went to the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] about five [o'clock] in the morning and start picketing because we had three guys on death row in Georgia. And then we came back. I remember going to the Hilton hotel [Washington Hilton, Washington, D.C.] and seeing Malcolm X sitting there; didn't really know who he was. I had heard his name before, and he was sitting in the lobby, and ran on over to the Lincoln Monument [Washington, D.C.]. And I had a pass, and Lena Horne was being interviewed by the French press, and so she said, "These two children here, you should be interviewing them," said, "They are the ones who are doing, who are doing the work." And she had us give some statements to the French press. And so the march kept going on and on, and, you know, when you are busy running around and doing things--we were the only ones who sang. Mahalia Jackson sang, but we started singing freedom songs and so forth; we got off the agenda. And when it was all over, we didn't know that--I didn't know that he'd had a dream; I really didn't. When we started singing again, we met up with each other, and that picture that you saw--that I showed you with, with all of us joining hands, we started singing, and it was cleaned out, and everybody was on the bus and gone by five o'clock. But we--it was so scripted, so scripted. [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, Sidney Poitier, and all them, put a lot of work into it, a lot of work into it, but it was so controlled. And old Boyle [sic. Patrick O'Boyle] just--but Monsignor, or Cardinal Boyle said that he would not participate, and then one of the federal officials said they would not participate if John gave the speech, and he would march through the South like Sherman [William Tecumseh Sherman] did (laughter). And so they, they said he had to take that out and something else, but we didn't see anything wrong with it, and John was adamant about keeping it in there for a long time. And that was the wrong foot. And we were overwhelmed by the numbers of people who came, the numbers of people. And that was in 1963, right? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So then you had Freedom Summer in '64 [1964], so the momentum was already building up. Story_ID: 618615 Speaker 1: Tell me this. When--what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African community today? Speaker 2: That each person would be able to live a quality life. When I say quality life: good food, good shelter, clothing, education, those are basics for survival. Good healthcare--survival. And then that each child learn its history, each adult learn its history. Story_ID: 618616 Speaker 1: Now, you yourself, you're involved in genealogy right now (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Now, what's the value of genealogy to you right now? Speaker 2: To learn more about my ancestors and to try and understand the areas--the geographical areas that they came from, the way they may have grown up. I found out that one great-great-grandfather, Jordan Polk [ph.]--I'm sorry, Phillip Gates [ph.], who was born in South Carolina, migrated to Chickasaw County, Mississippi and then to Wayne County, Mississippi, picked several bales of cotton in order to buy over two hundred acres of land, and that was the agreement that he made with the owner of the land. And learned that most of my family members owned their own land; they had homestead land which took a great deal of effort, meaning that you had a lot of bureaucracy; you had to pay the money, you had to fill out the papers, you had to go back and forth to the courthouse. I heard [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg talking to Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.], a--Professor Gates at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], about the process of applying for homestead land. There's a great deal of involvement. You have to get signatures of people attesting to the fact that you've lived on the land and so forth, and that's very hard. But I found that on both sides of my family, that they all had homestead certificates, and that on my mother's father's [Joseph Woullard] side, and on my father's mother's [Della McLeod Ladner] side, they were threatened with being sent to Oklahoma with the Native Americans, but they owned their own land, and they were very fiery people and had guns, and they were not going to back down and be told to go anywhere. Speaker 1: So you've been able to uncover a more complex story than what you had thought before, I guess (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes. Fortunately, when I first start doing this, when the Mississippi archives [Mississippi Department of Archives and History] opened for blacks in 1992 in Jackson, Mississippi, they said they had found--finally finished all of the slave records and they opened in '92 [1992]. I started going there, but my--all of--eleven of my mother's [Annie Woullard Perryman] sisters and brothers were living, and they were able to give me information; they would have very good memories. And on my father's [Eunice Ladner] side, my father had excellent memory and, unfortunately, my--his mother died and I haven't been able to find the Hahira, Georgia side which is Florida, the Lawson family, and that's the side that I don't have information on. Speaker 1: How, how do you spell Hahira? Speaker 2: H-A-I-H-A-R-A [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Georgia. It's near Valdosta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: The Lawson family. But I--I showed you the death certificate for Jordan P-O-W-E [Jordan Powe]; he was 105 in 1913. That was my mother's great-grandfather (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 2: --he would be my great-great-grandfather. Speaker 1: Right, we've seen--yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. So--but genealogy also gives you a description. If you look at death certificates for those you're able to, to tell you about the family structure and the type of disposition that you may have health wise and so forth and--which is reliable, and you can sort of look at that. I know on my mother's side that they have--all of them have died from cardiovascular diseases, every one of them--and one aunt left [Mary Woullard Thompkins], and she, at this point, doesn't have it. On my father's side they all died from tuberculosis. My grandfather [Thomas Ladner] died, but my father died three years ago, but he, he had a upper respiratory problem, but it wasn't from tub- TB. Story_ID: 618617 Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about your family today? I know you were married at one time, right? Speaker 2: Yes. I was married to Eyeloo Churnet [ph.], C-H-U-R-E-N-E-T [sic.], a Ethiopian national. We met in Atlanta, Georgia and married in Atlanta in 1971, and our daughter, Yodit, Y-O-D-I-T, Mabrat, M-A-B-R-A-T, Churnet [Yodit Churnet], was born in Atlanta, August 30, 1973. Eyeloo was studying international law when I met him at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], transferred to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and started working on his Ph.D., which he did not finish. We relocated to Washington [D.C.] because he felt isolated, and I also felt that Atlanta was a big southern town, and I wanted to get away and move to Washington. We have since divorced, and do maintain a close relationship, and we're very close to our daughter, so I've learned a lot about their culture as well. And while growing up in Mississippi isolated, I always felt that I needed to know as much about other people around the world as I knew about my environment. And each and every day I'm looking through a history book, I'm buying history books, reading about other cultures, other people, and trying to learn as much as I can. And unfortunately for people of color, you don't have as much information. On my father's [Eunice Ladner] side, there only two identifiable black Ladner families in the United States--those who admit that they are black, the rest are white, or say they're white. And on my mother's father's [Joseph Woullard] side, the Woullard, W-O-O-L-A-R-D, or W-O-U-L-A-R-D, or W-O-L-L-A-R-D is one of the largest families in the United States. There's a Woolard nation in Oklahoma; they are constituted of, I would say, tri-racial--Native American, Caucasian and black. And they are very fertile. My [maternal] aunt [Mary Woullard Thompkins] said to me last week she wish we could all come together. I said, "We would have to rent a state." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: 'Cause when I was go on the Internet, I mean the names just keep coming. And all of them can be traced back to Wayne County [Mississippi] where Benjamin Woulard, who was born in 1805, Caucasian, came with my great-great-grandmother Mary [Mary Woulard], and I don't have any information on her. And that's what's really bothering me. Story_ID: 618618 Speaker 1: Let me switch chapters here-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and just, just to ask you this now. Now, you were so instrumental in trying to get the vote for the disenfranchised people in the South, especially in Mississippi. How do you feel this year with the, with the election of--the candidacy of Barack Obama for president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]? Speaker 2: I think that the voter registration drive is phenomenal (laughter). I think that this is a chapter out of our book--voter registration drive--when I heard that, it reminded me of everything that I've thought about for the past forty years. A voter registration drive, yes! Good! And I want each and every one of you to go and vote. And I don't want the votes stolen. Speaker 1: Are--so you're hopeful that-- Speaker 2: He'll win. Yes. And we do know that with the government that there are many obstacles that will take place, but to put a, an identifiable black president in the seat of government would be a first. Speaker 1: Now, did you imagine this in 1964? Speaker 2: No, no. But later years, I have studied history and found out that they have--that there have been blacks who've served as president, but they were of a fair complexion. Speaker 1: But no--nobody really knew that--I mean, well, most people didn't know who they were. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 618619 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you one last question today, and it's one we always ask of people. It's, it's similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: And I said earlier--as a, a warrior, a fighter for human rights, one who was very passionate, one who was devoted to making life better for mankind, due to respect or race. I've always been for the person--the less fortunate, and those who have less, but I'm also about teaching, and I want our people to learn their history, both white and black, because the more I read, the more I learn that we--none of us really know our history. Whether we're from Europe or Africa, we don't really know the history; we only know what the history books have said, have been written, but we need to study more, and by doing that, we will begin to understand each other and to share a common bond...