 Story_ID: 64857 Speaker 1: We're going to start by slating it. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And we're just gonna have a conversation. But I have these first two things that we're gonna do that are more... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Alright. Speaker 1: or less slated related. One: I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: it for us. And that's your middle... I don't... "J" is your middle initial. I need the name... Speaker 2: And the full name. Okay. You like me to do that now? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Alright. My name is Walter, "W A L T E R" Jewell, "J E W E L L" Leonard, "L E O N A R D". Speaker 1: And I need your date of birth. Speaker 2: I was born October 3, 1929. Speaker 1: Okay. And I need to have your... today's date which is... Speaker 2: 'June 18. Speaker 1: 2001. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the address where we're at. We're at the home of... your home. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And give the address. Speaker 2: It's at 3505 Glenmore Drive, in Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815. Speaker 1: Okay. Now... And your profession? Speaker 2: An educator. Speaker 1: Great. Speaker 2: And lecturer. That's how it's listed. Story_ID: 64858 Speaker 1: Now we're gonna have... I ask five questions of everyone. There's no particular meaning. They're sort of People Magazinish. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Okay. Speaker 1: But I've done it of everyone. I like to first start out by asking you what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: [Chuckling] well that depends on whether it's dessert or an entree. My favorite dessert is coconut cake. My favorite entree is... the way my wife prepares a certain kind of chicken dish. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: And now that one begins to worry a little bit about cholesterol and those things--what once was my favorite was a nice beautiful piece of beef. But I am a little less on that now and I look for salmon. So I guess the second would be salmon. Speaker 1: Okay. Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: There's a tie for my favorite destination. And the tie puts me-- Speaker 1: [TAPE INTERRUPTED] Speaker 2: The tie puts me in the, I have to say in the islands rather than to select any particular of the West Indian Islands. Having spent some time in the Virgin Islands. And then having a great number of friends in Jamaica. And then the next one is I really do like Spain. I like the Andalusian portion of Spain. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Segovia, Cordoba and other parts of Spain. Speaker 1: Hmm. And your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: That's a tie. I like spring but I also very, very much like the fall. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: The changing of the leaves in the fall really does help to understand the power and the beauty of nature. Speaker 1: That's beautiful. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I would think that my favorite phrase... [pause] It depends on context. And I say it depends on context because my children, my daughter and my son have heard me quote my grandfather many times about friendship. And that is that, "Friends, true friends are those who show up at the showdown." Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: There's another favorite saying. And that is, "In order for one to be certain that he or she has done one's best is to have a fetish for preparation." You'd be so prepared that, whatever it is that you're going to do, that you could not be faulted for not having tried. And then I suppose another one is that, "When you have struggled hard enough, then for you to just be present at the finish line is a victory." Whether you've crossed it first or not. But just your presence is a victory. Speaker 1: Okay. Those a lot have to do with preparation... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes. Speaker 1: Really in many ways. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes they do. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: They do. They do. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] [Chuckling]. Speaker 2: They do. Story_ID: 64859 Speaker 1: I want... We start out by asking people about their family background. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And I know you were born in Alma? Speaker 2: Alma. Speaker 1: Alma. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Alma, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Bacon... And what was it... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Bacon County. Speaker 1: Bacon County. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you talked about your grandfather. And I was wondering what side? Was that on your mother's [Rachel Jewel Kirkland] side? Speaker 2: Maternal. Maternal grandfather. Speaker 1: Your maternal... Speaker 2: Um-hmm. He was the person, whom I knew best, in terms of a grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Well can we talk about your mother? And, you know, where she was from? And your-- Speaker 2: [OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 1: --Down leading toward the gulf. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 1: And it is highlighted as the Blueberry Capital of the United States. I didn't know that. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 1: But that's what it is highlighted as. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 1: When I was born there it was a leading area for what was called turpentine naval stores resin... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 1: Out of which paint and other things of that nature are made. And pine tree reproductions for paper mills. And peanuts, cotton and tobacco. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 1: It was one of the early places of plantations, where enslaved Africans were taken... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 1: To build homes. And to clear the forest, and to plant cotton. And to harvest that which made the United States rich. Story_ID: 64860 Speaker 1: Now I want to go back to your mother [Rachel Jewel Kirkland] Speaker 2: [OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 1: Your mother and her name. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And if you... if she told you anything about growing up and... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: You know. I'd like to talk about your grandparents. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: But anyway... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. My mother's name is Rachel Jewel with one "L". And that's why my middle name is Jewell with two 'L's". Her maiden name was Rachel Jewel Kirkland, "K I R K L A N D". And she was born in Georgia. Speaker 1: My maternal grandparents were... One: my grandfather was a minister and a teacher. He was an itinerant minister. But he was one of the very early, early people, who... He was born in just at the time of the end of the Civil War. And he did the astounding thing of finishing high school at the what was then called, Central City College in Macon, Georgia. Which later became Morehouse College in Atlanta [Georgia]. He then in effect taught himself by reading practically everything that he could find. And eventually he received a Doctorate of Divinity. It was one of the Doctorates that was given by one of the earlier institutions. And so he was referred to as "The Doc". Story_ID: 64861 Speaker 1: But he founded a school in the little town of Alma [Georgia]. And at the time that he had reached the... at that point, sort of an elder age, in his late fifties and early sixties, he had to retire because he lost his sight, I wrote a chapter in a recent book by... edited by Nikki Giovanni [HM] about my grandfather. A copy of which I will let you have. You have to send it back to me [chuckling]. Unless you have. But it describes my relationship with my grandfather when he lost his sight, I became his seeing eye. And for eight years he and I traveled together. Because he was a minister and blind, the Greyhound Bus Company had a policy of blind persons traveling for half price. He was also a minister. They also had a policy of letting ministers travel for half price. And very often what happened is that my grandfather and I... because he became known by the various people at these bus companies, we would travel from Savannah [Georgia]. We moved to Savannah by the way. We purchased a home in Savannah shortly after I was born. We would move... When we would travel from Savannah to other places for half fare, for half of one fare. One of the most memorable trips was when he took me to Atlanta [Georgia] for the first time. He wanted me to see the Atlanta University Center. Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], at that time Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Atlanta University and the theological schools attached to those schools. Which is now an independent. It's now an independent theological institution. But he wanted me to see those institutions. He also wanted me to see Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. So we took a bus from Atlanta up to Fisk. We went on the campus of Fisk. And he would ask me about the placement of various buildings. And he would tell me that this is the memorial chapel and if you look to the left you'll see Jubilee Hall. So I saw those buildings and I saw those institutions through the eyes of a blind man, my grandfather. Any event he, was just... he was so learned as far as this little boy from... born in Alma, Georgia, now living in Savannah. And being... He gave me my first books. He and my uncle who was... who's succeeded him in ministry. And one of those books was a dictionary. And he said, "You read this book. You study this book in the same way that you studied the others. The reason being that this book will tell you what the others are saying. And more over this book is like a key to a very big house. You use it to open the rooms to find out what's in there. And the dictionary will open the rooms of other books. So that you can then see and understand what's there." So early on I would take time to read the dictionary in the same way that I took time to read other books. As if it were a regular assignment. But that--that was because of the influence and the guidance of my grandfather. Story_ID: 64862 Speaker 1: Did he ever share... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes? Speaker 1: anything about his growing up with you? Speaker 2: Yes. He did. He had been born in the... He wasn't quite sure of precisely where but he had been born in Georgia. No, no. I'm sorry. My maternal grandfather was born in Cheraw County, South Carolina, on the Cheraw--the Kirkland Plantation. Speaker 1: [OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 2: On the Kirkland Plantation. And before his family was moved, he moved into Georgia. It was at the time that, "freedom" actually obtained, then his family... It was right at that point when he was but--he was born. But freedom was delayed if you recall. Even though the Proclamation [Emancipation Proclamation] had been issued and all of that. Most if not many of the Black people in the south, many former slaves were still in effect just as much in slavery. And then his family moved into Georgia. But he talked about a little bit about having grown up working in the fields as soon as he was able to carry a bag or a basket. He was asked to work in the cotton field. Not asked. He was told to work in the cotton fields. He also worked in what he called, the pecan plantations, the pecan fields, to pick up pecans at harvest time. And he was able to get a book. And he began to read a speller. Then he was able to get another book. And he began to understand that a little better. And he would ask people, anyone who would listen, "What does this mean?" Then he found out that the... at least one or two people would help him if he decided, if he decided to read the Bible. They were not they weren't particularly concerned and interested in other books but they would help if you were reading the Bible. So he was able to get a copy of the Bible. And then he began to study the Bible. And began to compare what bit he was reading and what he understood that he was reading to what he heard in the sermons that were given on Sunday, on what he called, Worship Day or Holy Day. And it was through that process that he began to understand the need and the quality for education. Story_ID: 64863 Speaker 1: In fact he once said that, "One of the early instructions that he received by just watching and listening and noticing was that we were living in a land that demanded education. Demanded some resources." We would say now, capital. "And demanded some understanding of social graces. And some understanding of the political process." And he's talked about how evil and how unthinking and because of the acceptance of Christianity, he said, how unchristian it was to take a whole group of people and say to them in such a land that you are free now to compete; when they had no education. They had no land. They had no resources. They had no capital. They were barred from the political process. And yet they were told that they were going to be held responsible in the same way that those persons, who had been fortunate enough to have all of those resources for them and supporting them. So it was that kind of discussion that he would have. And he would do it in a way that his young grandson could understand it. He would do it by telling little stories or giving examples of things. I would credit him with having caused me to begin to think very strongly about the inequities of life, as well as the inevitabilities. And also to think very strongly about the danger of falling into a trap of being so obstinate about a number of things. That, that which would make you angry will destroy you. And in a fact there of he used to use the term, "Those whom the gods would destroy, they would first make them mad. And then caused them to destroy themselves." So whatever anger you develop, develop a way to manage it and control it. And use it as an energy, as a source of energy. That was the kind of person that my grandfather was, my maternal grandfather. Story_ID: 64864 Speaker 1: That's, that's--now, how old were you when you were leading him around and spending time with him? Speaker 2: He lost his sight when I was in my eighth year; I was almost eight years old. And I led him around until he died. I was fourteen. Speaker 1: So he was really a great mentor in many ways. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh! Incredible. Speaker 1: Do you know why he had this passion for education? Was it a way out of his condition? Did he... I mean he seems like a very seasoned and reasoned person. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: A thinker. Speaker 2: Well everything that he had been able to see and do, everything that he had been able to sort of admire and to give him some foundation for hope and for faith and for some vision had been associated with learning. With education. There was a statement he made to me one time. You asked me my favorite verses, favorite statements. And that statement was, "You will never find a book that will refuse to let you read it. And as a consequence you can take a book and travel to any land that that book is about or will take you. And it will tell you about it. There you will never meet a book that will refuse to let you read it." So it was that kind of thing. And he also believed in memorizing good poetry, memorizing biblical verses. Finding quotable statements and memorizing them. And then he would say, "Speak these to yourself over and over until you understand exactly what the person who wrote it or said it was thinking or trying to say." Now I didn't realize that what he was telling me is to learn how to analyze language. I didn't know that but what he was...but he was... And he probably had not thought about it that way. But it was more than just quoting a statement. You must understand the statement. Why was it made? By whom? And for what purpose? While he didn't put it just that way, that was--I was later to learn is what he was doing to me. And I said that in the article that I wrote about him. Story_ID: 64865 Speaker 1: Now your father. What was his name? Speaker 2: My father was killed when I was quite early in life. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Was he? Okay. Speaker 2: I had a stepfather, whom I grew up with. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you tell me your father's name? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] My father's name was Francis Albert Leonard. And he was born in Dothan, Alabama. He had two brothers and a very active uncle. I never knew whether he had sisters or not but he had two brothers. One of whom moved into the Cincinnati, Ohio area and began a tailoring company, became the Leonard Tailors. And then another moved into the Maryland area. I never really got to know them very well. But I got to know a little bit about them. But I never really got to know them very well. Story_ID: 64866 Speaker 1: And then three years after his death, my mother married--remarried. And she married a man, Oliver Jenkins, "J E N K I N S", who had been born in Patterson, Georgia. And who was both a tenant farmer and a cook. He cooked for what was called, the railroad section gang. These were the people who repaired the railroad. Who lived in what were really rolling section houses. They repaired the railroads. And he was the cook for them. And the railroads also built small villages for their families if they had what was considered permanent jobs with the railroad. And so as a consequence my mother [Rachel Jewel Kirkland] and my stepfather lived in a little town called, Nichols, Georgia. Which was at the outset, one of the little towns, one of the quarters as so to speak, built by the Atlantic Coastline Railroad. And he was a regular. He won the job as a regular cook. Now I can remember early on when I lived with my mother and my stepfather. And he and one... He and two other people had the same job. They worked two days a week on a job. It was one job. Three people worked that job. And then of course he had his... He did tenant farming from which I don't think he ever made a dime. I think it was always, "I owe my soul to the country store." I think it was always that. But I lived with them until... I was three when they married. And then I lived with them for about three and a half years. And then my grandmother and grandfather said, "That they were going to... not take me." But they told my mother, that we want to send this boy to school. And we want to make sure that at some day he's going to go to college. Speaker 2: Hmm, that's a wonderful story. Now... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yeah. Speaker 2: Let me just get perspective here. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Did your father [Francis Albert Leonard] die when you were born? Essentially almost after... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Shortly after. Speaker 2: Shortly after. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Very, very shortly after. Speaker 2: Very shortly after. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yeah. Speaker 2: And then... Okay. That gives us perspective. Story_ID: 64867 Speaker 1: Now... So you're... When your grandparents took you were they living in Savannah [Georgia] at that time? Speaker 2: They were moving to Savannah then. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. They had just moved to Savannah. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what are your... Well that's somewhat of a hard question to ask... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And in fact, before you tell that, I to some extent... And this is... This might be interesting. I had been in effect home schooled by my... I mean my grandfather had gotten books for me to read. And so early on I had books and things to read. So when I moved to Savannah I was... When I was moved to Savannah, I was ready then to start in school at what was then Kyler Elementary School, which became Beech Kyler High School. [Unclear] [Chuckling]. Speaker 1: Hmm. Hmm. Speaker 2: So home schooling is not new. Speaker 1: Do you believe in home schooling? Speaker 2: Well, I think now that what we should do is to make certain that our public schools are adequate. We pay for public schools. And this is one of the points that I believe that I agree with Thomas Jefferson. And there are [unclear] a whole lot of things that I agree with Thomas Jefferson. But I agree with him that you simply cannot have a democracy. Or you cannot have a republic. You cannot have a healthy nation, unless you also have an educated citizenry. And to the extent... And these are not his words. I add these words. "And to the extent that any citizen is denied an opportunity for an education. And to any extent that the public resources are not used to help educate the public, then to that extent it is like intellectual genocide. And it's an unfair imposition on the children who are brought into this world." Story_ID: 64868 Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Now you. As a young... Well let me ask you. Besides your, you know, the story about you and your grandfather. Do you have any other early memories of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Oh yes. In addition to the great influence of my grandfather, there was also an uncle, Robert Benjamin Kirkland. Who followed in my grandfather's footsteps to become a minister. And he became my mentor. He was the first in our family to go through college. I mean to actually graduate from college. He graduated from what was then called, Georgia State College. It's now Savannah State College. And... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 2: I can recall that my first long pants, new suit was purchased by Uncle Robert. And he took me to his graduation. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 2: From Savannah State College, in 1936. And I went there with this new suit on and all of that. And he introduced me to a man, who was later to become in effect a giant. This was 1936, '37, when he graduated. A giant in our life. And the man was Benjamin Elijah Mays. Dr. Mays was then the Dean of the School of Religion at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. My uncle wanted to go to the School of Religion after finishing college. And he was advised that, "Well what you ought to do is just write and make an application." Well it turned out that Dr. Mays had been invited to do the commencement address at the time that my uncle was graduating. He as I understand the story, he arrived in Savannah, Georgia needing a haircut. And the college barber was Robert B. Kirkland. Story_ID: 64869 Speaker 1: You were talking about Dr. Benjamin Mays coming and needing a haircut. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeas. Well Dr. Mays had been invited to serve as the commencement speaker for the graduation ceremonies in Savanna [Georgia] at Georgia State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia]. And by... my uncle [Robert Benjamin Kirkland] tells me the story that Dr. Mays and others have told me that same story. Dr. Mays needed a haircut. And it has not always been easy for Black men to find barbers. It still isn't in some places. And they said to Dr. Mays, "Well there's a young man on campus who's a senior. And he is the campus barber. And in fact he's one of those who wants to go to School of Divinity." And as a consequence my uncle met Dr. Mays. Took care of his tonsorial needs. And then he wrote to Dr. Mays later, after they had made this connection. And he received a scholarship to the Howard School of Divinity. Now I don't suppose that, that had all to do with it. But it certainly helped. And then he introduced me to Dr. Mays at the... during the graduation ceremony. I was at that point; I think I was either seven or eight years old. And whenever I'm... had an opportunity to go, after Dr. Mays left Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Whenever I had an opportunity to go to Atlanta for any reason, including the time that my grandfather took me there... up there. I'd always tried to make certain that I would find a way to at least go by and thank Dr. Mays, for having been so kind and so generous, as to take the time to encourage this little boy to study. And it was a nice thing. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 2: But that was the kind of influence that my uncle had. Story_ID: 64870 Speaker 1: Hmm. What kind of little boy were you? You know. Were you well mannered? Were you mischievous? Were you, you know. I can't imagine rambunctious. But. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well I think that I was probably a little bit of both. Well-mannered and... You simply had to be well mannered. That is under the headlights of the community and of the family. Maybe you could be slightly mischievous with the little gang or your buddies or whoever you had. And you could then pretend that you were free to do certain things, when in fact you knew that, as we would say, you were slipping to do something. You know. But I think by and large, I was well mannered. Because I was constantly rewarded. Not so much by things, but by observation and by encouragement. Things like... My middle initial was often used by grandparents and by others and my uncles. They'd say, "Well J, that was a nice thing that you did." Or, "J, that kind of thing can be very helpful in life." You know. It was... And it was also a kind of discipline. And one also had to remember that I was at that point the grandson of the Kirklands. And it didn't matter what part of town or about the school, you were the Kirkland boy. And you were expected to behave in a certain fashion. You were even expected to make certain that you were quite clean and that you were neat. Even if you were wearing what we called an overalls. They had to be ironed and appropriately fitting and all of that. So I think that by and large I was probably considered well mannered. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 2: But I do remember some mischievous streaks. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 2: And also some independent streaks. A bit of rebellion here and there. Not rebellion against family but rebellion often against the system. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 2: Very often against the system that contradicted some of the many things that I was reading. You know. And I would just say, you know, they... Why should I spend my time reading this about history, when in fact it simply is not true?" So. Story_ID: 64871 Speaker 1: Now are you talking... was this reading that you were doing, this wasn't in elementary school? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No, no, no. Speaker 1: This was later. Speaker 2: Well, no. Well as we moved into elementary school, then we moved into fifth, sixth and seventh grades. We were grounding ourselves very much for what would be considered, as you moved up into seventh, and junior high or into high school. You were developing a foundation. And I can recall taking reading... doing readings in what was considered contemporary Georgia. And this was sixth, seventh grade material. So this is beyond... You know, at this point I'm about twelve... eleven, twelve years old. And I'm reading in contemporary Georgia about the great heroes of the United States, who are all southern. Stonewall Jackson, you know. Nathan Bedford Forrest, Robert E. Lee. These are the books that we were given and they were usually two years old in the public schools. We were... White students would get the books for the first one or two years. If they... If the books were worn, then they would be given to the "Colored" schools the next year. If they were well kept and they didn't change the book, then it could be... It would have been that white students would have kept them for two years. And then the colored students would get them the third year. And if they adopted a new book, then the book that was then disallowed was given to the Colored students. And the new books were given... the newly adopted books were given to white students. And so I was reading these things and I would raise questions. "Now why is it that I have read in one place that the heroes of the United States were people like Lincoln and Grant, and Hamilton and Washington and all of these... And then I'm reading over here that the great heroes of the United States were Lee and Jackson and Nathan Bedford Forrest. I read over here that Nathan Bedford Forrest was the founder of the Ku Klux Klan. The paddy rollers." You know. "Why am I reading over here that he was a great southern--great national hero?" You know. And Jackson who initiated the trail of tears of the Native Americans. So, "Why am I reading here that he was this person, who helped to save and develop a great nation?" So those contradictions would cause me from time to time question what... Why is this the case? And I was always told, always told, always told by my uncle [Robert Benjamin Kirkland], by my grandfather and by others. And of course later by teachers particularly, my teachers in our schools, that, "Because you were provided one set of materials by the state and by the city, does not mean that you are confined. In fact, it's a challenge to you, to make certain that you understand that there's more to life and the world and to history than you have been given by the city--by the city and by the state." Part of this they would tell me goes back to why there were different Bibles given to slaves and to those who... persons, who owned slaves. The slave Bibles did not have the great Israelite victories. Slave Bibles were... had those things that were... had all of those stories of the deliverance of the Israelites. They had been extracted. And so in many, many ways American history even in its boiled down version of some sense of fairness had been modified even lower in the books that were often given to students in the schools when I came along. Story_ID: 64872 Speaker 1: Now with school, did you have teachers that, you know, any favorite teachers that you remember? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Oh yes. I can remember four or five. My teacher of history was a...and the first real history course that I remember was a man named Armstrong. And he would give us extra assignments. And extra assignments often included making sure that you could get a copy of the Pittsburgh Courier, the Afro-American and the Chicago Defender. And also, he would have... he had a little personal library of books. And quite often he would make sure that we could borrow one of those books. And that he would give an assignment to read. So I began to learn. That's when I first learned about Crispus Attucks and Salem Poor and the earlier heroes of the country but who were also Black. And it was through that. Even though... He reinforced what I had gotten from my grandfather and from my uncles and others. So those teachers were... refused to confine themselves to the outlines, which had been made or given to them by the state, the county and the city. Story_ID: 64873 Speaker 1: Any, any other teachers? Speaker 2: Yes. My teacher in music appreciation was... One of the very first assignments that I received was to understand Gershwin's Porgy and Bess. And I was not quite sure at first what the teacher was trying to tell me. So I was able to find the actual music for Porgy and Bess. And it sort of... when it was first introduced as a play. And I read it and reread it. And then I found myself getting a little bit angry about it. And the... I became a little bit angry about it because it was being taunted as this great, great, great achievement and how it depicted all of the best and the beautiful of Black life. And that simply was not so. Moreover, the hero in Porgy and Bess was a drug dealer. And I just said, "You know, this is not right. Why is it that the hero, the Black hero... Why is it that the Black hero has to be someone, who's engaging in what is considered criminal behavior? Why?" And she said, "That's exactly what I wanted you to see." And then of course, she was being in music appreciation she assigned us to read and to listen to music by Hanover, by Grieg, Rachmaninoff and Debussy. And I really did love Debussy and by Chopin. So we listened to all of this. While at the same time she made sure that we listened to and that we heard Duke Ellington and Jimmy Lunceford and Scott Joplin. And Willie "The Lion" Smith. And all of these. So my music teacher just opened a vista. Opened a world to me that was just truly magnificent-- Story_ID: 64874 Speaker 1: --I then was able from time to time to find enough coins to buy a 78-record. And I had a little turntable that I think cost me all of the grand total of seven dollars and a half, which was a whole lot of money. And I'd wind it up and put on the early Louis Armstrong, Willie "The Lion" Smith and listen to them for a while. And then on Saturday evenings I would listen to the Chicago Theater of the Air. Because the Chicago Theater of the Air would broadcast the European classics. That was another thing that she taught. She said, "Now there's two sets of classics. You will hear as you move along in life, people will talk about classical music." But she said, "But there's two sets of classical music. The first set is an all American classical music and it grew out of the experiences and the struggles of Negroes, of Colored people." She said, "There is no such thing as a Handle or a Grieg classical music for America, that's European. But the classical music for America is the music that grew out of the experiences of the bondsmen and bondsmen of slaves." And she said, "You can look at it in three categories. The spirituals or what we might call, the slave songs or what we might call, the sorrow songs. Songs that were introduced in the world by the Jubilee Singers. Or you can look at them as the gospels. The religious gospel songs which were introduced by people like Thomas Dorsey out of Chicago, Sister Rosetta Tharpe and Mahalia Jackson. Thomas Dorsey's Precious Lord and Let There Be Peace In The Valley, even though they tried to steal it from him. You know. Then you can hear that. And then you can hear the jazz. The jazz of course has three or four different categories. But the jazz of Duke Ellington. Which is a kind of spiritual jazz." I mean it is jazz it's now... there's some offshoots, you know, like Benny Goodman and Harry James and others, who do what they call jazz. And that's fine. It's acceptable. But the jazz, Duke Ellington and Louis Armstrong and the precursor to that of course Scott Joplin, Eubie Blake, Fletcher Henderson, Noble Sissle. So she opened... She just opened a vista. Suddenly you could see and understand that the music of freedom had these three names. The spirituals, the gospels and jazz and quite often they were so intermingled and so inter-related. But yet each one speaking within a genre that you could understand that was... refused to be quiet. You know. So my music teacher. Story_ID: 64875 Speaker 1: And then my teacher in English, who fascinated me always with... She would say, "Get some good words." And I also had a male teacher in English. They would say, "Get some good words. Understand words. Don't accept just common words. Common words describe a common thing or even a common person. So get that which is unusual. And as you understand them. And you understand the ethnography and the etiology and the syntax and the porosity of words. You also began to understand the history of thought, of people before you. And you began to develop your own process of thinking because the language is in fact the connecting links of life and society and history, and the future. You go into the future based on what it is that you understand of what is happening today. And the language is that which teaches you what is going on." Story_ID: 64876 Speaker 1: Then I had another teacher in science. Two of them in fact. One was named W. Dickerson Donnelly, who was my physics teacher and math teacher. And it was because of him that I won the Bausch & Lomb Science Award when I was in high school. He sort of... He turned me on to mathematics. And it was a little bit surprise... I was surprised myself too that I found math and physics and the sciences fascinating. And so I won the Bausch & Lomb Science Award in my... eleventh grade in high school. That was W. Dickerson Donnelly. Story_ID: 64877 Speaker 1: And then there was a woman... another woman named Grant, who was my biology teacher. And one of the things that I remember is that she asked us to look at the story of Philippa Schuyler. Philippa Schuyler was by any stretch of the imagination an incredibly gifted person. Just a genius by any stretch of the imagination. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 1: She was a daughter of Schuyler's, who owned the Pittsburgh Courier. She had in her very... I think she was in her early teens when she wrote a paper on, The Causes of Medical Trauma in Poor Communities. And she decided that one of the things was the air. I mean so we're talking about clean air now and all of that. This is some time ago. And she came up with something called, The demonitromicroscopic cylocosis vocanuosis. Which is the biggest and longest word I'd ever seen in my life. And what it was, was the question of pneumonia, which... around more and more people in Black communities and poor communities. And given... If you know the history of the Schuyler family, they weren't so big on Blackness. However, they were big on suggesting that, "Yes, we are equal to everybody else." And she looked at these poor families and said, "The question of pneumonia was because very often of what people were... places they were forced to work. And to breathe the sand and the silicosis. And very often it was obviously a microscopic thing that caused the infections of lungs, etc. You know. So late in life, we read things about the asbestos and all of that. But here's a young Black girl, you know, back there in the '40s [1940s] talking about demonithromicroscopic silicosis volcanosis as being a condition that many poor and Black people developed because of environment. That was really amazing. And so it was one of my science teachers. Then out of that I thought that what I would want to do when I finished high school was to go to college and major in what would then lead me to medical school. That's another story all together. Story_ID: 64878 Speaker 1: Okay. We're being creative there [chuckling]. That's okay [laughing]. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Very, very. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] [Laughing]. Speaker 2: very creative [laughing]. I saw this thing coming in. Yes. Speaker 1: [Laughing] Now... Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: So really... Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: you've been blessed in many ways. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Absolutely. Speaker 1: with this very, very nurturing... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Absolutely. Speaker 1: you know, group of people. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well I was not alone. There were so... This was a period of time... You know. This was the same period... I was born in '29 [1929]. Martin King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was born in '29 [1929]. And if you would look at the people, who were born in that period, I would say from... I'm [unclear] that the same thing obtained with a number of people, who were born in the 1870's. But if you'll... if one were to examine the lives of the people, who were born in the late 1880's and in the 1890s, there was such a drive. Charles Hamilton Houston was probably the greatest lawyer that this country ever produced. You know. A lot of folks don't know anything about him. I know. I know. But he breathed life into the Constitution of the United States. And made the people who said, "They loved it." Made them kiss it [laughing]. Made them take it and hold it until their hearts hurt. Houston was born in 1895. Went to Elmhurst when a number of Black scholars went to Elmhurst. Pinkett, Montague Cobb [William Montague Cobb]. And you say, "What produced these people?" Dunbar High School. You know. Those mentors, those nurturing people. Well the same kind of thing happened with a young man who went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Young men who went to high schools in Washington and in Savannah [Georgia] and in Atlanta. The Booker Washington High School in Atlanta [Georgia]. The Beach High School [Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia] in Savannah here. Part of the reason is that those persons, who just a generation before that, who had been fortunate enough to obtain an education couldn't, work anywhere else except in the high schools for their own kind. And so we were often beneficiaries. And it hurts to have to say that but it's true. We were often the beneficiaries of what was a system that denied opportunities to people, who were some of the very best that the system produced. And then they decided that what they were going to do was to replicate themselves. That was why Houston was able to take people like Thurgood and Bob Carter and Frank Reeves and Elwood Chisholm, Spottswood Robinson, take them and and James Washington... Jimmy Washington and turned them into a legal juggernaut. That's why he was able to do it. He couldn't get a job at Harvard. Even though he was probably the best educated person that Harvard Law School ever produced. But he couldn't get a job there. And so I had in effect the same kind of nurturing from people who had pushed and pressed their way through. And then took jobs in high schools like Beach High School [Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia]. Story_ID: 64879 Speaker 1: --It looked to an octaroon named Alexander Hamilton. You know. And then when it decided it really needed statecraft, then it looked to Ralph Bunche. And then when it decided it needed to put shoes on his shoes... on his feet, it looked to Jan Matzeliger. And then when it decided it needed real medical training, looked to Nathan Hale Williams [Dr. Daniel Hale Williams]. When it decided it enjoyed sports and looked to Isaac Murphy. Isaac Murphy was the first to win the Kentucky Derby. Then when it decided it needed to have some humanity put into its soul, they found Martin Luther King Junior. And when it decided it needed scholarship, they looked up in Massachusetts and Great Barrington and there was DuBois. You know. But unfortunately just as you were not exposed to... And I could go on and on. Just as you were not exposed to them officially, we were not. But we had those teachers who said very much what Charles Houston said. "That if I must live within this system, I'm gonna find a way to make this system appreciate the legitimate interest that I have within this system, having helped to build it." And I don't want to use my energy and my time for anyone to say, "Well, you know, I'm trying to get out of it. I'm trying to destroy it." No, I'm not trying to destroy it. I am just gonna make certain that it works for me and for mine. And it was a process of trying to make it work for "me" that brought the resistance. You know, the people out there who began what I would call the Civil Rights Movement. The Civil Rights Movement as far as I'm concerned really began back in 1890's. In fact, maybe when... with John Mercer Langston. Even before that. When John Mercer Langston was raising questions about, " Why is it that we do not have? How can you say that we're going to be free and we can't have voting rights?" So the 15th Amendment... you know, how is it that you can say that this country was found--founded for those who are free, and yet you okay slavery? Now Frederick Douglass had been the great lion to have raised that so many times, that people were... They just knew that when Douglass appeared... So they... The Civil Rights Movement, I would say actually began when the first Black slave found him and, or, herself aboard a ship. And either committed suicide or jumped overboard. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: That's when the Civil Rights Movement-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: It took on the life and flesh and momentum when the debates began in the 1870s and 1880s. Story_ID: 64880 Speaker 1: Many people talk about the great debate between Washington [Booker T. Washington] and DuBois [W.E.B. DuBois]. I think that people would... many people should read Washington's History of the American Negro. And take a look at what he said about the time that he was invited to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And how distressed he said he was that he could find these young Black men who knew so much about the Greeks. That they could almost quote you letter and verse and line of the great white writers. But they knew nothing of themselves. This is Brother Washington. But they knew nothing of themselves. Well now this was in 1880's when he was invited there to receive an honorary master's degree. Right. DuBois was a student. DuBois was encouraged and inspired by Washington's attack on what I guess Frazier [E. Franklin Frazier] might have referred to early on as the over assimilated or the earlier bourgeoisie. And of course, DuBois had been very much conditioned by his experiences in Nashville [Tennessee] and in Great Barrington [Massachusetts]. He had wanted very much to go to Harvard at the outset. And the towns and local people decided, "No, he was going to Fisk." That, of course, turns out that it was good for him and also good for Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. But the American Missionary Association and the congregational church people decided that he was going to Fisk, not to Harvard. And so the great divide between Washington and DuBois began to occur after the 1895 speech by Washington. But at that time DuBois had not yet developed the full scope of his understanding and his approach. I mean he... The Philadelphia Negro was not to appear until 1899. The Souls of Black Folk didn't appear until 1903. Well by this time his ideas were beginning to take on a firm vigor. Washington had been sort of thrown into the, into the flame, as it were, before 1895. And then took this more accommodational look after 1895. I've always... It's been... It has always puzzled me, as to how and why that obtained, until I look at the fact that what he was really trying to do was to make sure that he built Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama]. And the people who were going to be the funders of Tuskegee demanded either directly or understandably indirectly demanded a kind of attitude that he seemed to have developed. Story_ID: 64881 Speaker 1: Well you didn't ask me to discuss DuBois [W.E.B. DuBois] and [chuckles] Washington [Booker T. Washington]. But getting back to this thing about when the Civil Rights Movement began. There we saw this schism between these two thinkers. And I quite frankly don't think that they were so far apart, as the system would have us believe. After all, the person who offered DuBois a job... had he received a notice one week after he received his job notice from Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], was Booker Washington. Booker Washington asked if he would come to teach at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama]. And this was after Washington had read a piece that DuBois had written about the economic... the political economic analysis of the position of the African-American or the early Negro. And Washington was absolutely impressed with it. So he invited DuBois to Wilberforce. I mean to Tuskegee. But he had already been invited to Wilberforce. And he accepted the position at Wilberforce. I often wonder what in the world would have happened if these two men who were later to go in different directions had been brought together. Story_ID: 64882 Speaker 1: But anyway that... So that's the Civil Rights Movement. And then the next step that I see is when DuBois [W.E.B. DuBois] and his--and persons who supported him. And there were so very, very many in 1904. When the Niagara movement was begun, officially and founded. And he said essentially five things. "That we deserve to have education, housing, health care, jobs and political involvement." And guess what we're still fighting for? [pause] The very same things. And the Niagara Movement then. Since he was able now to find a group of people. And particularly those persons of Jewish background who still had not become white in America. Who--and to some extent, some Irish and some Italians who still had not yet become white. There are many people now who've now become white. And they... Many of... Many people have. But they had not yet become white. They were still not accepted. They were still rejected. And they found a common existence in many ways with Black people. So DuBois was able to gather around himself and others the intellectuals and the resources from some of these groups. And they helped to found--start the Niagara Movement. Story_ID: 64883 Speaker 1: And then later, of course as they were trying to find a way to negotiate. Then in the home of the great emancipator there was this riot. Almost a massacre in 1908, in Springfield, Illinois. The home of Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln]. And it was clear that the negotiations were not going to work without some framework. Without some way of directing its energy. So the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was founded. And the NAACP as we know was to fight in the courts. To find every possible way that it could to persuade the nation to live out the meaning of its constitutional underpinnings. Story_ID: 64884 Speaker 1: And then they found that also around that time, if you recall the history, the industrial structure began to change. And so even some of the earlier sharecroppers and others began to lose jobs. So they were pushed... began to be pushed into the northern areas. And into the cities. And they were lined up in these cities with nothing. It was like another slavery without the shackles. Here they were, pushed into slums and into poor communities. What was officially called at least in the old world, the ghettos. The ghetto never really had anything to do with Black people. It had to do with the meanness that was being heaped upon the Jewish communities in Europe and elsewhere. And it was identified as a religious kind of deprivation so to speak. Well so Black people lived in slums. And poor areas. And I think it should still be looked upon as such. And suddenly then there was a need to try to find a way to help these people who were moving into these cities to find jobs. To find ways of holding... bringing the family in. And holding the family together. And an organization was founded by... First by the way DuBois had finished Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. So an organization was founded by another man who had finished Fisk. And his name was George Edmund Haynes. And the organization he founded became the Urban League. And then it was to work with helping people to find jobs. To help them become assimilated and acclimated into the city life. And to persuade the corporate executives and the owners of businesses that they simply could not go wrong by hiring new people and giving them a chance. But also they would help persuade the boards of education that the public school system had worked so magnificently with the Irish, with the Jews, with the Italians and with others who had been brought in from Europe. Story_ID: 64885 Speaker 1: The public school system was such that they were looked upon as the Americanizing effort and influence. No one would dare talk about closing a public school. No one would dare talk about closing a library. No one would dare talk about not giving jobs... public jobs to people who were becoming American. I mean no one would dare talk about charging tuition to go to City College [City College of New York, currently City University of New York, New York City, New York]. City College probably produced at least as many Nobel Prize winners as almost any other institution in this country. And not one of them had to pay a dime to go to school. No one would dare do that. And because you had these new immigrants coming from the old country, and they needed a helping hand to become American. So the public schools were equipped. In New York they had... not only did they have the basic public school system operated and controlled and... by a superintendent, but they had the Regents Examination. To make certain that the schools were doing what they were supposed to do. And teachers were held at high esteem. Alright. Many of the people who went into those schools in the first instance couldn't speak English. They spoke a kind of Ebonics. I mean it was called, you know... It might have been called by something else. It might have been called Italian. It might have been called French. It might have been called Spanish, you know. It might have been called Hebrew. It might have been called some... But it was a kind of Ebonics. That's what they spoke. And no one ever denied them an opportunity to learn to speak English. And nobody ever wrote a headline saying, "My God, these people are unintelligible. They're not teachable." They talked about how beautiful there old language was from the old country. Well what about those who grew up knowing nothing other than Ogeche (ph.) or Swahili? Are they not equal to the task of learning the English language in the same way that those who came who knew nothing of the English language? But now there's this great movement to destroy the public schools. Is that because we have all of the Jewish immigrants that we need now to Americanize? What about the migrants in this country? What about the Latinos? What about the poor Black Americans? What about the Vietnamese whom we have now decided to bring into this country to compete? What about the Koreans? Are they not as entitled to the same kind of public expenditures that we made for the Irish and the Italians and the Jews and the Pols? Are we to be so hypocritical? Well that's what the Urban League was talking about. That's what the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was talking about. Back in the 1908, 1909, 1910. And then, of course, you had the sort of grandfather and the grandmother institutions that would cause the Emancipation Proclamation to become something other than a cruel hoax. Story_ID: 64886 Speaker 1: You had the Historical Black Colleges. And they stood there as beacons. When a person applied to City College [City College of New York, currently City University of New York] in New York [New York City, New York], and they find out that the person is Black. Even though his or her record showed "A's" and "B's" and credible understanding of all of the academic requirements. They were told, "Sorry." All too often they were told, "Sorry, you... it's not available." I read a story the other day where Bruce Wright used to be called 'Turn 'em A Loose Bruce', had applied to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]. They looked at his record. And said, "My God! Must have him." Then he showed up for registration. And they said, "There must be some mistake." Well just two weeks ago, they called him and gave him this great honorary degree. It's many, many, many years. I think he's in his mid-80's now. The same thing happened with Paul Robeson's older brother. Paul Robeson's father was a Presbyterian at the time. Very much the same as Woodrow Wilson. And both of them being members of the Presbyterian Church, and both of them being what they considered them--he was a minister. Wilson was supposed to be fair and easy going and whatever. President of Princeton University. Paul Robeson's father went to his friend, he thought, Woodrow Wilson. And suggested that, "My oldest son is finishing high school here in Princeton. And he's going to be near the top of his class. I thought it would be appropriate and good if he could go to Princeton." And Woodrow Wilson said, "I disagree. Princeton is not available to your son." So here is a man who is Ph.D., college president of Princeton, president of the United States eventually, a founder of... what is it? The Freedom... And then eventually Nobel Peace Prize winner and a racist. So Paul Robeson [unclear]. So Paul Robeson's brother went to Lincoln [The Lincoln University, Oxford, Pennsylvania], a black college. A historically black college. Story_ID: 64887 Speaker 1: When Charles Hamilton Houston finished Harvard, he had a Bachelors from Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts], Phi Beta Kappa with triple major and a minor. He then spent time in the U.S. Army. He taught here at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.] because he finished at a point when he was too young to go on to law school. After finishing Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and his time in the army, he insisted that he wanted to become an officer in the same way that other college graduates. So they had to set up the officer training corps in order for... to keep him out of the regular officer training program. He was sent to Italy. And he was literally put under the command at first of a white sergeant. And he was an officer. He became something of an angry person. He came back. He went to Madrid [Spain], got a Master's in civil law. And then went back to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and got the LL.B. [Bachelor of Laws], the LL.M. [Master of Laws] and the S.J.D. [Doctor of Juridical Science]. He was better educated when he left Harvard than any of his professors. And he could not get a job. So he came to Howard and turned Howard into a legal juggernaut. Alright. But it was that kind of thing that a Howard, a Lincoln [The Lincoln University, Oxford, Pennsylvania], a Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] provided a means where by the Emancipation Proclamation would be something other than a cruel hoax. And if the move now to close the public schools is successful, it pretty much reduces the life chances of so many thousands of young Black men and women. That it is almost a revisit of the effort to deny the full opportunities of Black folk back in the 1870's and the 1890's and now again in the 1970's, and the 1980's and the 1990's. It's a... It's almost as if it were taking the clock and turning it back almost 100 years. Story_ID: 64888 Speaker 1: Now let's... I wanna get back-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [Chuckling] Speaker 1: To your education. That was very good. And I let you go on that. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes. Speaker 1: But I wanna get back to your education. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you were at Beach High School, Alfred E. Beach High School [Savannah, Georgia]. And was there any question about you going on to college at that point? Speaker 2: There was never any question about me going to college. The question was... it became to some extent, when. Because when my grandfather died, I was... I guess that mischievous part of me probably came out. I was to some extent angry. Also very disappointed. I did not think. And I didn't believe that it was possible for a person who was as good and as kind and as generous as my grandfather... I did not believe that he would be taken away from those who loved him so much and who needed him so much. And recall now, this is in the 1940's when he died. And the '40's [1940s] were not kind to us. The whole war effort was showing more and more the absolute hatred that existed in the United States--Black and--between Black and white folk. The... Even early on, some young Black men who had even volunteered for the services were being caught in uniforms and dragged and killed and maimed and lynched while in uniform. Often because they were wearing the uniform. Because they were seen as uppity. Well so when my grandfather died in 1944, I was not at all... I was not so structured and so settled. That it was just automatic that I would go on. So the next year, I actually dropped out of high school. And I knew that if I could get the white insurance collector to sign an affidavit that I was seventeen years old, the local authorities would accept that. So I went to the U.S. Merchant Marines. And they said I was too small. And I went to the U.S. Army, and they said, "No." I was clearly not large enough, you know. So I went to the U.S. Coast Guards with this affidavit signed by a couple of people, including the insurance man. Who said that he had known me for seventeen years. I was fifteen. So I went into the U.S. Coast Guard at fifteen. Story_ID: 64889 Speaker 1: I was... had just reached tenth grade. I was... I had finished tenth grade in high school. Went in the U.S. Coast Guard. And the next thing I knew I found myself on the U.S.S. Duane as a storekeeper. But with the class of a steward's mate. But I was a storekeeper. Store keeper because they [chuckles]... Well they found that I could handle... I could write and I could read. And I could handle records. Okay. But I didn't get the designation. I didn't get the promotion to store keeper. But I was called a storekeeper. Then the next thing I knew the... we were prepared. Our ship was prepared to go to... We had gone to the North Atlantic for what they call a shakedown cruise. And then we were being prepared to go to--to the Far East, to Japan. Story_ID: 64890 Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Okay let's go on. You're on. You're on... Speaker 2: I'm in the U.S. Coast Guard. Speaker 1: Right, yeah. And you're... Speaker 2: U.S. Coast Guard. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] You're a storekeeper. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 2: And... But I'm classified as a steward's mate. Because most Black... young Black men who were in the naval services at that time, like Dorie Miller, were classified as stewards and steward's mates. It didn't matter how good you might have been with a gun or whatever. Even if you wanted to be good with one. For the most part, you were classified as a steward or a steward's mate. And so I... When we were all prepared to go to the Far East, our ship was taken to Charleston, South Carolina for retrofitting, etcetera. And while we were there, the war was declared over in Europe. And then we were sent up to Boston ready to [chuckling] again, to go from Boston [Massachusetts] in to the... what was remaining of the war. And while we were there at Constitution Wharf, the War in Japan was... Hiroshima occurred, Nagasaki occurred. So at a little less than seventeen, I received an honorable discharge from the United States Coast Guard. Fully formed as a veteran of the Armed Forces. And not yet seventeen years old. Story_ID: 64891 Speaker 1: I took the placement examination at separation center four in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] on my way back home. And the test that they gave us, which were to some extent, kind of new. This was sort of the beginning of the great testing era. I didn't realize at the time that I was supposedly taking an IQ test. I mean I didn't know. But they gave me a test. And then I know that I was called back the next day. Because it wasn't possible for me to have done that well on that test. And I said, "Keep--what's the problem? I mean did I mess up?" And they said, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no. We need you to take this test again." I did. And I didn't hear any more from the test. But I was told that if I were going back to finish my high school, and then possibly go into a work situation. They didn't have junior colleges then, but I'm sure that they would have told me to go to junior college. But a work situation, then I should do very well. That's what they told me. And I said, "Well what did the test... What was the test all about?" I was then later to learn that this was supposed to have been an IQ test. I was also later to learn that my earlier score was 144. And the second score was 151. And they simply did not believe that this fellow from the hinterlands of Georgia... But what they I suppose did not realize is that I had been a reader. And I had learned early on that no book would ever refuse to let me read it. Story_ID: 64892 Speaker 1: So in any event, I just felt that, that was a point that you might want. Then I came back to Savannah [Georgia]. Returned to Savannah. Well I came to Washington [D.C.] actually and lived with my uncle for a little while. And then I went back to Savannah. Returned to Beach High School [Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia]. Speaker 2: [0FF-CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 1: But any event, are we back to...? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: the high school? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: You've come... You've come back to Beach. Speaker 2: Yeah, come back to Beach. And I attended... Went back. Pardon me. And as a... And I went into summer school. And then the next year--andI was able to finish with my class. And the reason is that I was able to go to summer school. And so I was able to finish with my class in 1947. I Doubled up on whatever requirements that I... And then I enrolled in Savannah State College [currently Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia]. Georgia State at the time. Savannah State College. Story_ID: 64893 Speaker 1: And on the very first day of school at the very... at the bus stop in Savannah, Georgia, I met Betty Singleton. And we became friends. And later [unclear] we decided... Later we became an item. And after that, we decided that after four years what we would do. We were gonna finish college. And then we would get married. This is about four or five months into the relationship. Well while there were some diversions along the way, we did, in fact... Betty graduated on the 6th of June in 1951. And we were married on the 16th of June in 1951. I did not graduate at that time. Story_ID: 64894 Speaker 1: Part of what occurred at Savannah [Savannah State College, Savannah, Georgia] is that we were both very, very active. We helped to found... I had helped to found a NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Youth Council in Savannah [Georgia]. And we were quite involved with that. We organized a Sunday program, Youth Wants to Know. And we were able to get one of the local stations to give us a half hour every Sunday. And this was the... through the Savannah Youth Council. Several of us were involved. And then I attended a youth legislative conference sponsored by the NAACP. And at that time the NAACP sponsored the youth legislative conferences annually. So I attended one in Washington. The conference was addressed by Charles Hamilton Houston, by Thurgood Marshall, by Robert Carter, by Mordecai Johnson, by Ruby Hurley, Gloster Current and others. Roy Wilkins and others. And when I returned to Savannah, to Georgia State, we began to set up efforts to establish a college chapter of the NAACP. This was now into my... This is going beyond my sophomore year. Well first I... I better go back and tell you. I decided I was gonna major in chemistry and physics and minor in English. Because I thought I would go to medical school. Story_ID: 64895 Speaker 1: Can I understand...? When did that come about? Because I would have thought you would have been more into humanities to begin with. I mean the fact that you... I don't know. Reading, I associate with... I know you said that you liked your... Was it the biology teacher? What was your...? You... Though I'm surprised about the medicine part. Did that come to the surface? Speaker 2: [OFF-CAMERA INTURRUPTION] Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] I... I'm sorry. Speaker 2: I'm just... Speaker 1: I'll tell you. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Okay, I'm [unclear]. Speaker 1: They... Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: And I meant to tell you this first. The... Well first when I found out that I had taken these tests, and that I had done what some thought was so very well on these tests. And then as I be--and I remembered how much I appreciated and liked the studies that I had done in the sciences. But particularly, I loved literature obviously. I loved it. But I thought that the sciences... And part of what had occurred too was that Paul Robeson had come to Savannah [Georgia]. And a man named Henry Collier, a young medical doctor. And there was a family of Colliers had built a home in Savannah [Georgia] they called Shangri-la. And Paul Robeson was campaigning for Henry Wallace [Vice President Henry A. Wallace]. Who was running for the presidency against Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] at the time. And so we were invited... Was it Roosevelt he was running against? He had been a secretary in the cabinet. He'd been secretary in the cabinet. But he would... But Paul Robeson was... [unclear]. I'm sure it was... I'm not certain whether it was Roosevelt or Truman [President Harry S. Truman] at that point. But I'll get it. But Wallace was standing for the presidency. And Robeson was campaigning for him. And Henry Collier... Doctor Henry Collier had organized a session, inviting us to his home. Several people. I was included and a man named W. W. Law was included. W. W. and I had been schoolmates, not classmates, but school mates. And we went out to hear Paul Robeson speak and sing. And he talked about the great need that we had at... that we had for all segments of the society. But given... The Tuskegee Experiment had come to life... come to light. And how we very much needed people in the sciences. And particularly in medicine. Then the Colliers talked with me. Doctor Collier said, "You know, you really ought to consider going into medicine. I know you can do it." You know, and we--and then there's the Savannah pride. "We need to have others from Savannah to go into medicine." Then Doctor Cooper, who had been one of my science teachers decided that he was... he left his teaching in school and went to dental school. Then there were a couple of other families. For reasons that I wasn't quite certain at--about. I mean I just wasn't... didn't quite understand at the time who were quite vocal and--in then promoting my thoughts about going to medical school. So I decided when I reached Savannah State [Savannah State College, Savannah, Georgia], Georgia State at the time that I would major in chemistry. And I would minor in physics and English. So I never forgot that my grandfather said that even the most complicated books were written in English. If you understand English, if you understand the language, you can understand the book. So I was going to major in chemistry, minor in physics and minor in English. And I was about that. I was about to do that. Story_ID: 64896 Speaker 1: And then in my second year in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] effort and all of that really came to the front. And it began to push. And then I met people like Grant Reynolds. And I met, as I said, people like Charles Hamilton Houston. And I visited Doctor Mays [Dr. Benjamin E. Mays], you know. And there was something about the way these men... And then Ruby Hurley. And I met some of the great women. And there was something about their stance and their demeanor. And I also recognized that the... there was a certain amount of costs to go into medical school. And there were no medical schools in Georgia to accept me. I would have had to go to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] or to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. And then I decided that what I was going to do is become a lawyer. Now mind you, I had these ministers in my family. And they were constantly pushing and pressing. My family was telling me, "You've got to walk in your grandfather's footsteps. You've got to walk in your uncle's footsteps." And it could very well have been that what I was doing was moving from medicine, eventually into the ministry. It could have been that. I'm not quite sure about that. 'Cause I never really got to that point. But I changed my major at the end of my second year. And decided to do the humanities and social sciences and political science and management, public administration. But also I had met Betty Singleton. And we never even thought about this. Betty Singleton was an absolute devout Catholic. Having gone through elementary school in Savannah [Georgia]. And having gone to high school in New York at Archbishop Youth Memorial. And then when we decided that we were going at some point to get married, it was clear that... I don't think either one of us was going to let anything stand in the way of that. Or modify that. I won't say stand in the way. But modify that. So the... It became I think a bit easier for me to think in terms of the law, or think in terms of being a teacher, or think in terms of being a writer, or think in terms of a public kind of occupation service. So we continued that. Story_ID: 64897 Speaker 1: But let's go back to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the college chapter. A few weeks after I returned from the Washington meeting... conference Leadership Institute for young Black leadership for the NAACP, then we began our efforts to establish a chapter in Savannah [Georgia]. It just occurred to me that I simply was not going to sit on the back of that bus anymore. So I talked with Wesley Law [W.W. Law] and Cliff Hardwick [Clifford Hardwick] and a few others of us. And I said, "This bus comes from downtown Savannah to Thunderbolt, Georgia where the college is located." The students would get on the bus in Thunderbolt at the foot of the college... the mouth of the college. The foot of [phonetic] Fallaken Avenue. And we were allowed to take seats from the back of the bus toward the front. But to leave the two front seats like this. And then the long two front seats. We had to leave them vacant. So that just in case some white person down in Thunderbolt, downtown Thunderbolt wanted to get on. One: they wouldn't be harassed by your very presence in the seat that they were to take. Well I decided that's not going to happen anymore. And so I asked the students to fill up all those seats up into the front. And I would take the front seat. They did. Sure enough, we reached the little town of Thunderbolt. And I was told to move in the back by the bus driver. And I told him, "No, No." I was not gonna move in the back." That sign up there said that Negroes will seat... In fact, it said, "Colored will seat from the rear toward the front." It didn't say anything about where you stopped. So even if the seats were all filled behind you, and there was one vacant on the buffer, you could take that seat. And all of the seats behind me were filled. And I had paid a full fare. And I was not going to move. Well you can just imagine the consternation that, that caused. Because this is 1949. You know? Story_ID: 64898 Speaker 1: And so he called the local sheriff. Stopped the bus and called the local sheriff. The local sheriff wasn't sure what to do. 'Cause [chuckling] this is, you know, this is a new phenomenon here. I mean this is some crazy action. It's obvious that this is one of the crazy ones. [Chuckling] And we're not certain what we ought to do with him. Well the students are all standing. And I'm sitting there. The sheriff tells me to get off the bus. And I don't see any reason to get off. And I wasn't gonna get off. Because I didn't know where... How much beating I was going to get. And the students were still with me. And so he wasn't gonna get on that bus 'til they called the president of the college. Who at that time was James Colson. And they in effect released me. Doctor Colson said, "Let me take him. And we'll... I'll talk with him." So in effect, they released me to... into his custody [chuckling] so to speak. Then there was a meeting by the Georgia... a committee of the Georgia State legislature. And within the next two weeks on the campus demanding that anybody involved in this communist run organization had to leave the school. This communist run organization being the NAACP. We had to cease and desist or else we had to leave the school. And so much pressure was put on the president that he resigned. And then the president who succeeded him called me in and said to me that... This is now... We're into 1950. I have completed '47 [1947], '48 [1948], '49 [1949]. I'm now a junior. Finishing my junior year. And he said to me that, "You're a bright young man. You can transfer into almost any school in the country." And by any school in the country, he means any Black school in the country. "And you'll do well. And you really ought to think about this. Because you can't really get through life sometime by biting the hand that feeds you." And this was his justification. Telling me to... As they used to say in my neighborhood, "Hat up. And be on my way." So in effect, I was put out or asked to leave school. Story_ID: 64899 Speaker 1: As a ju... in my ju... end of my junior year. I did. And I came... I went up to Columbia, South Carolina. [Coughs] Excuse me. Where a distant cousin owned a funeral home. His name is Isaac Kirkland Leavy. His family too had come from that same plantation in Cheraw County [South Carolina]. Where my grandfather was born. The big difference, however, could be seen in the way they looked and the way my grandfather looked. But they came from the same plantation. But I worked with my... with the Leavy Funeral Home one summer in... And I attended the Benedict summer school that summer. But I also met the governor of South Carolina that summer. Because there... My... The owner of the funeral home, Isaac Leavy was an influential person within the Columbia [South Carolina] community. And so I met the governor. And I also met the other people who were associated with the governor at the time. And interestingly enough, the governor was later to become a... Well he had just become... Yeah. He would later become a presidential candidate. And his name was Strom Thurmond [Senator James Strom Thurmond]. There's some other things about that. But we'll talk about it sometime. But in any event, I spent the summer there-- Story_ID: 64900 Speaker 1: And then I left there and came up to Washington [D.C.]. In Washington I went to work for the U.S. Government. I worked in the civil service [unclear] part time work more or less. Worked the U.S. Post Office, [unclear] part shift. Went to work for the Bureau of Prisons. These are not all at the same time then. But I did these. And then on the... When Betty fini--and I enrolled in school at the United States Department of Agriculture Graduate School. And took courses in the graduate school. Which I later learned was the largest graduate school in the nation operated by the Department of Agriculture. And the way it works is that the Department of Agriculture contracts with institutions like American U [American University, Washington, D.C.] and University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]. And as a government employee, you can go and take courses at these schools. Which are fully credited for a price that is much lower than if you were enrolling as a regular student in the institution. So I did that. Story_ID: 64901 Speaker 1: And during that time, I met people like Dovey J. Roundtree. I also met, engaged and involved myself in the Washington movement to desegregate Washington [D.C.]. So I met Mary Church Terrell. And I met Luke Moore. And a number of people who were involved in helping to desegregate Washington. Eventually that would come to the case of John R. Thompson v. the District of Columbia [District of Columbia v. John R. Thompson Co, Inc.]. Which was, in fact, decided in 1953. That's the case that actually segregate... I'm sorry, not '53 [1953]. It was decided in... Yeah. In 1953. As the case that would actually desegregate Washington. 'Cause it followed on the heels of cases like Sweatt v. Painter and cases like that. Even though it was decided before those cases. Those cases were already in the hopper. And had been since the mid '30s [1930s]. Beginning with Murray v. University of Maryland. But in any event, I involved myself into the sort of quasi-political, quasi-legal life of Washington. I was even working with Dovey Roundtree. And when the case... the Brown V. Board [Brown v. Board of Education] case was argued before the Supreme Court, I went into the court and sat with Dovey Roundtree and with her partner, Julius Robertson carrying their briefcases. As a part of their office. And so I heard the arguments on... of those cases. And at that point, I was certain that I had to become a lawyer. So in 19... As I said in 1951 Betty and I were married. Our children... Our first child was born, 18 months later. Anthony Carlton Leonard. Then 18 months following that our second child was born. Angela Michelle was born. I'm still taking part-time courses. I then went to work for the United States Department of... U.S. Department of Justice. Was transferred. Story_ID: 64902 Speaker 1: I was asked to go to Atlanta [Georgia] and work with the U.S. Bureau of Prisons as a "correctional parole officer". And I worked with the Bureau of Prisons for... I think a little more than a year. And then while I was in Atlanta, I got myself very much involved in the modern Civil Rights Movement. And began to work with the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. Well SCL... helped to... I actually sat in the founding of SCLC. But began to work with Doctor King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], with Ed Clayton, and with a number of other people involved in the movement. Story_ID: 64903 Speaker 1: But what is... Speaker 2: [Unclear] Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] was my Dean. Speaker 1: I know. I know. Speaker 2: And I was his research assistant. Speaker 1: Hmm. Right. I know that. Speaker 2: Okay? And hmm, his wife had developed cancer. And Clyde was doing everything that he could possibly do. He took her to the... to Johns Hopkins. He took her to the National Institutes of Health. He took her... Any lead with respect to whether or not there was any possibility of arresting if not curing but arresting the growth and advancement of the cancer, he took. Whatever step that he could. And being an older student, there was really not a great deal of difference between his age and mine. So we as a... so as his research assistant and... He had a demanding schedule. I don't say that he was a person who worked you hard. But you had to work hard if you were going to be his assistant. And he... There was a place in Washington [D.C.] called Murphy's Supper Club. And we used to go there to get... and just talk about things. And one day he said, "He thought that his wife was probably beyond any thoughts of cure or ev--or even arresting the situation." And so following that, it was just obvious that it was pushing and pressing him to bring himself to perform as a Dean and as a Presidential Advisor. And as... And that incredible mind that he had was being challenged in so many different ways. And as a consequence, there were engagements that he had... engagements to which he had some obligation. And he would ask the persons involved whether or not he could send his assistant. So I... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 2: --Was very privileged to sit and... I mean literally sit at his feet. Story_ID: 64904 Speaker 1: Now there's an article that I did in the Harvard Civil Rights Law Review on Clyde [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.]. The title of it is 'Crossing the Lonesome Valley'. And you might want to read that. That is... it gives you I think, a very good insight and good picture of what one, what he meant to me. And the friendship that we developed. In fact, when his wife died [clearing throat] the people who arranged her funeral services provided a car for him and for his three daughters. And I drove our family car. My car. And he told them that he thought that he would ride with me. So here is this big [chuckling] automobile. You know, that's provided by the funeral services, and he gets into my car with his daughters. And I took him to the services. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: So [clearing throat] that was the kind of friendship that we had. And that's a whole... we get into another story because then I have to tell you about my going to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And how Clyde played a role in that. Even when I did not know that he had played a role in that. Because see, you know, Clyde taught Derrick Brach and Arete and a few others up there. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: Because of his brilliance in legal accounting. Brilliance in... And he knew the UCC [Uniform Commercial code] and he knew accounting. Or... One would not have known that he knew... that he was such... that he was so sharp in accounting. Because one would have thought that he was foremost... or a legal or a constitutional scholar. But he just happened to be all of those things. But anyway that... Speaker 2: Hmm. Story_ID: 64905 Speaker 1: I'll let you... [laughing] We... I'm sorry. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Okay. So that's [unclear] Speaker 1: We're getting ahead of ourselves. [laughing]. Speaker 2: But let's... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yeah. Speaker 2: So we're back. And I was... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yeah. Speaker 2: -Asking you about... Speaker 1: Yes. SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]? Speaker 2: How you end up getting involved? It does... It would seem to me that you might have continued... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 2: On with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and work there... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Um-hmm. Speaker 2: In Atlanta and that's [unclear] I'm just curious. Speaker 1: Well I did... My work with the NAACP there was through serving as an advisor to the Youth Council. Particularly when the marches and the strikes were in force. I would meet with the groups. And often what we had was a sort of combined march. But the students who were involved in NAACP were all... many of them were also SNCC [Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee]. And they were all from the local colleges and universities. In fact, just on the size and aside, the newspaper The Inquirer [The Atlanta Inquirer] was founded in my basement in Atlanta [Georgia]. Because the local papers including at the time, one prominent black paper, simply would not carry the stories of the marches and the strikes. And so a man named Jay Lowe Ware (ph.) and I whose daughter still runs... No, no, no. The Inquirer was purchased and bought out by Jesse Lewis. I mean Jesse... Yeah. Jesse Hill. By Jesse Hill and a few others. Julian Bond was our... was our Director of Publicity and Benjamin Brown worked with the paper. But we founded the paper in my basement. So that the students from the movement SNCC, and NAACP Youth Council and college chapters would have exposure for what they were doing. And so Jay Lowe Ware and I started it. Story_ID: 64906 Speaker 1: So yes, I was still involved. And my friend Ruby Hurley, who was a Regional Director of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Southeastern Region, had come to Atlanta [Georgia] from Alabama. When the Alabama authorities demanded that the NAACP turn over all of its records. And so in order to prevent that, they moved to Atlanta. And... also involved at the time was another person whom I had befriended and had grown to admire a great deal. I had seen him come back home during the summer from college in Chicago [Illinois]. And later he attended Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. And I was living in Atlanta at the time. And I was also doing coaching. I was coaching a boxing team for the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. The Butler Street YMCA. And we would have these sessions. And this young man and others would come and we would talk about life. And I grew to admire him. And then he finished the Howard Law School and came back to work in Atlanta. I had met Don Hallowell [Donald L. Hollowell] who was quite a figure. Whose brothers had served in the... who had been in effect Buffalo Soldiers. So I met him. And this young man had come and had... was beginning to work with Hallowell. So I went to my friend Ruby Hurley. And I said to her, [clearing throat] "You'd been searching for someone to serve as a Regional Director--Georgia State Director of the NAACP. It occurs to me that a young man who has now come here, has finished law school. In fact, he is a person whom I would give titles to." Because I had begun real estate development there in Atlanta. I said, "It occurs to me that he would be an excellent Regional Director... Georgia State Director for the NAACP." And she said, "But yes, I don't know whether I should talk to Don Hallowell about it. Because Don likes him and he's promoting him." And I said, "I know but I don't think Don would... I think that it would work out all... It would work out very well." And sure enough she approached him and he accepted the position. It wasn't just my own... my recommendation. But others and almost after... Almost immediately after he accepted the position, then the University of Georgia desegregation drama played out with Charlayne Hunter [Charlayne Hunter-Gault, HM] and Hamilton Holmes. And this young man who had accepted the job as the Regional... as the Georgia State Director, Field Director, was called upon to drive them back and forth from Atlanta [Georgia] to Athens, Georgia. Shortly after that, he went on to do some other things. His name is Vernon Jordan [HM]. Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: But he was a... he was, and is a very good and dear friend. Story_ID: 64907 Speaker 1: But I'm suggesting that my gravitation to... Then I met Doctor King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] for the, I think the third time. And we talked. We also had some medical experience with my daughter. And when at a point when it was clear that she was going to be all right, then it was time... I thought it was time for me to go to law school. And I had a good long talk with Ruby Hurley, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Regional Office, Don Hallowell [Donald L. Hollowell] and with Martin King. And the three of them suggested that, "You have been talking about going to law school for years. And it must be about time for you to go." At the time, I was thirty two. I applied to Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] and I was told that I should go back to a... By this time, I had enrolled in Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University] School of Business. That I should go back and finish whatever work that I was doing for the Masters in Business Administration. Because Emory had already accepted its one Black student for that year. I went and talked to the people at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] and they said, "Well we will admit you. But we do not have housing for married students. And we don't have jobs. So, you know, [laughing] if you come here it means you commute from Atlanta to Athens every day." And I can't do that. So I applied to Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. And I was admitted to Howard. Family school anyway. My uncle had graduated from Howard. And I came to Howard, sold the little business that I had in Atlanta. Story_ID: 64908 Speaker 1: And with a full appreciation that I was going to return to Atlanta [Georgia], and serve as House Counsel for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], and for the Counsels for... at least Associate Counsel for the Regional Office of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And maybe, just maybe, some personal work. But those two were going to keep me busy. What was clear was that SCLC needed to have its own counsel. NAACP could use additional counsel. Don Hallowell [Donald L. Hollowell] was over just--just overwhelmed. And we also thought that it would be appropriate to try and learn something about banking, to help establish some intermediaries. Some financial outlets under the aegis of the SCLC. So when I came up to law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], and began studying to learn the law and to learn something about banking... When I got com... When all of that was just about to gel, King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. And it was Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] who said to me, "Well why don't you just stay in legal education?" And by that time, Chrysler offered me a magnificent... at that point, what people considered a magnificent offer. And Clyde said, "I think you ought to stay in legal education." But I said, "You're about to leave. You're going away as Ambassador of Uganda." He said, "You're gonna be alright." Well the next thing I knew, I was named Assistant Dean of Law School by Clyde Ferguson. Fir... just out and I graduated in May. And on June 1, I was named Assistant Dean of the Law School by Clyde Ferguson. He then goes off to Uganda. Story_ID: 64909 Speaker 1: And I learned that I have been invited to do a speech that he [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] was supposed to do. He was scheduled to do at the Association of American Law Schools in December. Well I said, "Okay." I... so I went down to New Orleans [Louisiana] to the Association of American Law Schools. I did what I thought would be a speech that they would, one, they would never even let me into a law school again. Oddly enough, Monrad Paulsen who was then the Dean of the School of Law at the University of Virginia came and said to me, "Walter, you know it is time for the University of Virginia to open its doors." He said that speech! So he asked me if I would come down there. At least for the summer, and consider coming down and joining the faculty [laughing]. And I said, "I hadn't had any plans like that." Claude McKay... No I'm sorry. Not Claude McKay. Robert McKay. I keep thinking about Claude McKay the poet. Robert McKay, who was the Dean at NYU [New York University, New York City, New York] said, "Now are you going to think about joining our faculty?" And Bob McKay was someone whom I liked very much. Clyde [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] had introduced me to him early on. And I said, "I don't know Bob. I really don't know what I am going to do at this moment. I just... I'm not sure." Then Russell Simpson--this is all within two days. Russell Simpson came to me and he said, "Well I'm Russell Simpson." Russ Simpson he said, "I'm Russ Simpson. We at the Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] have just lost one of our Deans. His name is Lanengray (ph.). He's gone to work for Stanford [Stanford Law School, Stanford, California]. And that leaves vacant at the law school one of the deanships. And Derek Bok who has just become the Dean... 'The Dean' of the Harvard Law Schools [Cambridge, Massachusetts] suggested that maybe I should speak to you, and ask you if you would be interested in talking with him." [laughing] And I said, "Sure I'll be happy to talk with him." So we set up this little time. And he and I had this chat. And he said, "I was wondering if you would be interested in coming to Harvard." And I said, "I'm not sure. I... that... Harvard... I mean that was really never part of my plans. I just don't know." And I think he might have been taken aback there a bit when I said that. I mean here's Harvard, you know. I said, "Please let me talk to my family about this." Well as it turned out, I accepted the position at Harvard. However, in the summer of 1969, I remained on the faculty at Howard until the end of June. Mid-June I went to the University of Virginia to do a Cleo Program for them. So I was on the faculty at the University of Virginia for half of that month and on the faculty at Howard. Accepting the position from Harvard... Harvard had a practice of not advancing... of not paying travel expenses, so they put you on the payroll early. So I was put on the Harvard payroll when I accepted the position. So for fifteen days of that year or a little more, I was Harvard, Virginia and Howard. It was amazing. Story_ID: 64910 Speaker 1: All from a speech! Speaker 2: Well it... I told you that I later learned... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] That... what... [unclear]. Speaker 2: That Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] had said to people at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as well as to [Robert] McKay and to Monrad Paulsen, "That if you are prepared to add to your faculty and your administrative staff: a person who is going to do a very, very, very good job, but who is also going to be quite open and frank about positions, etc., etc., and about issues, then you really ought to take a look at Walter Leonard." I have now known him he said, "For about four years as a student, and also as a colleague, and as a friend." And I understand that he said a couple of other things as well. Well as a... I don't want to say that... All I can say is that that was a big factor. The speech I think might have said to them, "Clyde was not wrong about this guy." And then I think that the students later on might have said... In particular after I've did the stint at the University of Virginia. Many of those students now are judges etc., etc. But I think they might have said too that, "We really would like..." In fact, they did. I mean they had a little petition to ask the University to hire me. And I said, "I've already accepted a position at Harvard." Story_ID: 64911 Speaker 1: But what Bob McKay [Robert McKay] and I did was to then begin to put pressure on the Association of American Law Schools. To establish, first, a committee on minority groups and to begin to pay attention to the fact that the law schools really were not living up to what was supposed to be their agreement. To begin desegregating those institutions, and to admit the future lawyers who would be Black and who would be female. So we were able to push the association. And the association was being headed by a person who had been on the faculty at the University of Texas even when Sweatt v. Painter was argued. So we pressed them, Bob McKay and I, to be... look at... es... establishing a Committee. Bob accepted the Chairmanship of the Committee. Then we began to press for a section which would make it a permanent part of the structure of the Association of American Law Schools. And we were able to get that done. So I accepted the Chairmanship of the Section of the Minority Groups of the Association of American Law Schools. Story_ID: 64912 Speaker 1: And, there are four annual reports that you would find very, very interesting. In the proceedings of the Association of American Law Schools from 1971, '72 [1972], '73 [1973], '74 [1974]. You would find them very, very interesting. As a matter of fact, give a call to Joyce Hughes [HM] and ask Joyce Hughes about... Because I... When she was the lone black professor at the University of Minnesota, they accepted the word of a student about her... about her. And the Dean of the University of Minnesota called a meeting with faculty and with a couple of students to question her about what a student had said. And she asked me if I would come to represent her. So it was Joyce and Walter Leonard. And over there were the members of the Faculty and the Dean and the students. All of 'em were white. And I did a report on that. Story_ID: 64913 Speaker 1: But I want a couple things. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: To just sort of clarify. You... I don't think that you really clarified to me though, how you got involved or founded L... SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. Speaker 2: Oh I got invited. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] You were invited. But the minis--see I don't understand. Speaker 2: [Laughing]. Speaker 1: Okay. The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is doing its work. What... You know, groups were founded because... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: there's a need. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Or someone says, "We're gonna do, you know, our part in this... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Um-hmm. Speaker 1: whole thing. So... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: So I'm just... Can you... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well let's just look at this. The NAACP became more and more, and particularly during the demonstrations, it became more and more, "We are going to do our thing in the courts. We will protect you in the courts." The NAACP or--didn't find itself stricturing (ph) itself. But it became more and more focused on the courts. And remember also now that the legal defense fund had been going in a slightly different direction. Alright? And the Urban League through Whitney Young, was looking more and more at the corporate entity, the boardroom. "This is what we can do in the boardroom." Then you had Malcolm [Malcom X] who through his speeches were beginning... was beginning to, shall we say, call a bubbling up of some of the young Black talent and pent up concerns. Particular among Muslims and those who had been in prison, etc. But Malcolm while effective, and one of all of our heroes, never really led a march. So you had Whitney in the boardroom. You had Roy Wilkins in the courtroom. But then you had the streets. And the domain of Martin Luther King Jr. was in the streets. Particularly after he began to convince people that the Ghandian 'Satyagraha,' soul force, non-violence. That this was an appropriate way, if joined by the legal efforts of the NAACP. So if the NAACP is going to get us out of jail, and if the Urban League is going to try and find a way to get resources, and if Malcolm is going to stir people up with his speeches, then somebody has got to organize. Got to direct the everyday effort of those persons who feel the absolute must to confront the tiger. And it was through Martin Luther King Jr. and the success of the Montgomery Bus Boycott. Story_ID: 64914 Speaker 1: Said, "We can do it by placing our bodies on the line." And we needed then to find a more cohesive way. Because it had been the Church. It had been those weekly prayer meetings and those meetings. And the ministers were becoming frustrated. Because you would go and meet in their church and you would commit their people. But they were often not involved in the leadership. So the strategy was to... Since the real organized religious groups were not yet committed, they were even somewhat tentative about these efforts. Like there were some who denounced Martin King and the efforts, the tactics. So to get those ministers who were, in fact, committed, get them in line with a feeling that they were absolutely important and essential, then why not organize them? And give them a voice, give them a platform. So it was then through the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. Also we had the so-called Speakers of Middle America who were ministers. Who were telling their flock around the world that, "Martin King and those people simply don't understand the teachings of the Master and the teachings of Christ." And so Martin King through SCLC began to construct and to teach what we would call a social gospel. You know, that Jesus just wasn't somewhere... somebody in the by and by but the principals and philosophy of... of her... The Jesus experience is the now and now. And so the social gospel that SCLC began to propagate and to teach. In fact it began to challenge. Some people became afraid. Now you got these... If you organize these preachers and you really get 'em organized, and they began then to go beyond talking, to developing economic systems. And that was the reason for my going... One of the reasons for my going to law school. To come back and to begin to establish under the aegis of SCLC the kind of intermediaries that would provide funds to save homes, to save land. Or, to, in fact, provide funds so people'll buy homes. And also to work with the schools and to work with those persons who did not find a niche in other places. Story_ID: 64915 Speaker 1: --Push this person. And so that's why I said that there was an agenda that I didn't always know about. I didn't know that they were talking about, you know, "We oughta encourage him to go on to medical school and go [unclear]." The community had that kind of thinking, that kind of feeling about it. I'm not sure that those same things are obtained now as they once did. You know. So that's what I meant. Speaker 2: And when you said that the... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Hmm. Speaker 2: The people in your... And the relatives that were in Sav... I think in... were they in Savannah [Georgia]? But, anyway, the relatives. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: The ones who owned the funer... funeral home? Speaker 1: Yeah, I said very distant relatives. Speaker 2: Distant. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But were they of the... were they lighter skin? Because you said that they... that you... "We came from the same plantation." I was just want... I was just trying to clarify. Speaker 1: [Unclear] By what you did... was to look... You saw it immediately. Speaker 2: Ri... okay. okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: That's okay. Speaker 1: They came from the same plantation. Speaker 2: Okay. That's fi... okay. I got that. Okay, Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Same last name. Speaker 2: Okay. I got it. So that [unclear]... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Same slave owner. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah. I was just trying to... Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Just making sure I understood... that [unclear] Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Same slave owner. Story_ID: 64916 Speaker 1: The other thing is... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: So when you... When you didn't go back... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Um-hmm. Speaker 1: to... Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Savannah State [Savannah State College, Savannah, Georgia]? Speaker 1: to Atlanta. Speaker 2: Oh, to Atlanta? Yeah oh yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: What was... what was th... You know. Were people really disappointed? Or were they happy? Or it didn't matter. Because you said, you know, "It was already guaranteed what I was gonna be doing." Speaker 2: Well by this time, Martin King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. So that just changed a whole lot of things. There was... For all intents and purposes, the earlier configuration of my decision had been altered. So there was almost nothing to go back to. I mean... And I say almost nothing. But... And I could have gone back. But a major portion of going back would have been to work with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. And SCLC was at that point, teetering on the precipice. So... And by that time a lot of things had happened in life. I mean my meeting Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] and meeting a whole lot of people through Clyde Ferguson. A lot of people. I had met A. Leon Higginbotham and I had met Wilbur Merrill (ph.) and Chris Edley Sr. And all of these people I had met primarily through Clyde Ferguson. And it was... So the tentacles had been set and spread. And my whole life had been changed to a great extent. And I'm going to tell you more in our next session. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: [laughing]. Speaker 1: That's fair enough. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: That's fair enough. Speaker 2: And we will have another session. Speaker 1: Okay. Good. Story_ID: 64917 Speaker 1: So anyway, we're gonna start out by reslating-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you know, everything. So I, I'm gonna--my name is Julieanna Richardson, the interviewer. This is the second part, Walter Leonard. And the Scott Stearns is the videographer. And I'd like you just to state your name and spell it for us and today's date and location. Speaker 2: My name is Walter J. Leonard. The "J" is J-E-W-E-L-L, Walter Jewell Leonard. And this, we're in Chevy Chase, Maryland, in my home. And today's date is January 27th, but it shows you that I haven't really been out very much in the last few days. Speaker 1: Two thousand three [2003]. Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003]. Speaker 1: 'Cause it's been over a year (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right, it's been over a year. Story_ID: 64918 Speaker 1: Now, when we last ended we were actually at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you were talking about your relationship with Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I'd like you to talk, you know, let's pick up there and really talk about the work you did while you were at the law school. Speaker 2: All right, well, let's--as a segue into that, my relationship with Clyde Ferguson began at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. And he, if you recall, I was named Assistant Dean of the Howard Law School on the day that I graduated actually by Clyde Ferguson. He was then named Ambassador to Uganda. And I attended conference, at his request, where I met Derek Bok and Russell Simpson. And it was out of that relationship and that meeting I was invited to come to Harvard. I might also say as that, that meeting also produced an invitation to the University of Virginia and New York University Law School. Robert McKay was the dean of the NYU [New York University] Law School. He and I later founded the Section on Minority Groups at the Association of American Law Schools. And Monrad Paulsen was the dean of the law school at the University of Virginia. And I wound up spending the summer of 1969 at the University of Virginia before going to Harvard that same, that same summer. But at the Harvard Law School one of the deans, Lidenker (ph.), had been hired by Stanford [Stanford Law School, Stanford, California], and that made the position available. So Derek Bok asked me at the meeting of the Association of American Law Schools if I would be interested in coming to Harvard. I think he might have been a bit shocked at first, because I said I wasn't sure (laughter). And, and I, I just simply had not thought about Harvard as a part of my future. I had been appointed at Howard, and that was, I was very pleased at Howard. We had had some interesting developments there. Clyde Ferguson left and then Patricia Roberts Harris was named dean and remained so for a short period of time. Then James A. Washington became dean, and he and I had a magnificent relationship. So I expected to--we even bought a new house here in Washington [D.C.], and I expected to remain in Washington for some time and at Howard for some time. But the circumstances were such that I was invited to Harvard, invited to NYU, invited to the University of Virginia, and of course I wound up going to Harvard. I was appointed Assistant Dean of the law school, Assistant Director of admissions and Director of financial aid at the, the Harvard Law School. Story_ID: 64919 Speaker 1: The-Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had not had any, had never had any difficulty with respect to numbers of applicants. But we thought, Russell Simpson and I--Russell was the, the dean, the assistant and director of admissions, and I was assistant dean and assistant director of admissions. So we thought that it would be appropriate to consider how we could increase the number of applicants from among African Americans and non-minority women. So we agreed that I would set up a schedule of travel and recruitment. We also agreed that I would begin to develop conferences, small and eventually a very large one of this conference, the Black Lawyer in America Today, which brought a number, about 400, lawyers and judges and legislators to Harvard. It was the first time that Harvard had seen so many faces of, of--in fact, the first time that the students and others had seen so many faces of black legislators and black judges and black lawyers from--and corporate people from all around the country. And--but anyway, we agreed that I would do that, so we set out to do some travel. A number of schools were absolutely surprised to know that Harvard was, they were actually--actively--recruiting and recommending and strongly urging the people to apply. We were already receiving some five to six thousand applications for 1500 seats. We were not receiving--we were receiving what we might call traditional applications. These were--we could have actually filled law school class without leaving the city or the suburbs, the Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York City, New York], Washington [D.C.], Boston [Massachusetts], and maybe a couple of others. But that wouldn't have provided, in our judgment, the kind of class of persons who'd represented the heterogeneity of, of the United States of Americana. So we wanted to be sure that we had a student from Jasper, Wyoming, or Casper Wyoming. We had a student from Peoria, Illinois; then we had a student from Savannah, Georgia; (unclear) we had a student from, from small, unheard of town in Minnesota who had done quite well in high school, who had done well in college, but who probably had not thought of Harvard as being available for law school. Story_ID: 64920 Speaker 1: So, through our recruitment efforts, we were able to say to a person that the one way not to get into Harvard is not to apply. And our applications grew to about 7,500 for class. And then we sat with the awesome task of looking at seven to eight thousand applications. And from that seven to eight thousand applications, culling out people who represented all segments of society who, in our judgment, Harvard had a responsibility to try and help educate and train people who would be the persons who would guide the development of the legal communities throughout the country. Sure, it was, it was in that spirit that we felt that that was the, the reason that we had an admissions committee. Otherwise, we could have used a computer just to select whoever had the highest scores in their college GPA [grade point average] or the LSAT [law school admission test], and by LSAT, we, we insisted that LSAT did not mean law school aptitude test. It meant Law School Admissions Test, and so we insisted on that. And so we would look at applications and we would [cough], we would sometimes argue about them; we would sometimes worry about them, but in the end, we saw to it that our classes were what we called balanced classes of people representing every segment of the society. Story_ID: 64921 Speaker 1: Now, the number of African American students during the two and a half years that I served on that committee grew from just a few more than twenty to 155. The number of women students grew from about 50 to nearly about 200. So the, the growth of, of the law schools admission, the growth of the classes, was reflected in many ways by now what had become the, what is now the buzz word "diversity," which, in my judgment, doesn't really have the meaning that we have tried to--we, we had a class of persons who are representative of all of the segments in the society, and they were entitled. Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is a public trust. We're a tax-exempt institution. We exist, we are rich, and we live, and we, we are powerful because the public believes that we're gonna do the right thing with respect to what the public is all about. And so we worked and we struggled at that. And as a consequence, we found ourselves very much on the cutting edge of what was appropriate in the admissions process. Story_ID: 64922 Speaker 1: I do find a little bit disturbing that now we have this assault against the admissions process, against the integrity of the admissions process. I think that Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard College should combine forces with the University of Michigan's Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and their undergraduates, take all of those thousands of applications and go put them on the desk of the Chief Justice of the United States and say all right, sir, if the courts are going now to become the admissions committee for these institutions, and we have been doing it for over--Harvard has been doing it since 1630. Now we've been doing it for longer than you have existed, but if now if you wish to become the admissions committee for Harvard, here, here you are right here, sir. There are 10,000 applications of the law school, and here are 20,000 applications of the college. You go through them one by one, and we will accept your findings, and then the University of Michigan does the same thing. And all of them go on the desk of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, and then bring in these other groups. And there are four of 'em basically who have been the salting, the--and attacking the admissions process since the early 1970s that began with "DeFunis" [DeFunis v. Odegaard] out in, at the University of Washington [University of Washington School of Law, Seattle, Washington]. It's, it's absolute, pure, unmitigated, raw racism. There's nothing and no other way to put it. And now what they have done, unfortunately, is recruited young white women, and they're using them as cannon fodder to fight the progress, the meager progress of African Americans, and to some extent, those who are Latino. But anyway, we were, we were at Harvard, and at Harvard we decided that we have an obligation to the country to help educate and to educate those persons who represent the country. And that was the process that we used. That's how the Harvard Plan was developed. Story_ID: 64923 Speaker 1: I'm proud to have been one of the central crafters of that Plan [The Harvard Plan], and-- Speaker 2: I, I wanna go back just a little bit. You have these three choices. I mean you could have stayed at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]--or you have four choices: to stay at Howard--of five. Speaker 1: I know it's not written about there, but I have been offered a job at the Chrysler Corporation, which is very, very interesting job, you know, which would involve the new automobile and the nice pay and all of that, you know, but yes, go ahead (laughter). Speaker 2: And the kra--with, with Chrysler, was that--it was--was it also--that seems out of left field. Was it related to law? No. Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, I had a couple of friends who had recommended to the chairman of the board of Chrysler that they were, at that time, trying hard to get there personnel policies and other things that were in line to do what some people refer to as the right thing toward employees and toward--just get things underway and also to work with people in Detroit. And so I was surprised that I received this call. I was flown out to Detroit [Michigan] and put up at the Hotel Pontchartrain and given the use of a New Yorker, and I drove across the Ambassador Bridge and over into Canada, all of that. And three days later I got this magnificent office--offer. I mean it was very nice. And--but unfortunately, my children looked at it, and they said, dad, we have moved so many times, and I think that we are somewhat comfortable where we are right now. And--but, so I didn't, I didn't accept it, but I, I just wanted to mention it because it was really quite nice of them to have made the offer at the time. Story_ID: 64924 Speaker 1: Did, so you had these offers. What, what was different about, you know, Bok's [Derek Bok] offer? What was that--what intrigued you about that, and can you put that in the context of the times? Speaker 2: Yes, I can. I, see, I had gone to law school in my mid-thirties. Our daughter and our son--our son was always very healthy and adventurous and what have you, but our daughter was born with some medical difficulties. And we had decided that the one thing that we were going to do, my wife and I, is that we were going to commit ourselves to whatever was needed to make sure that she was okay. And I was very fortunate along the way to meet people who, who helped, like Dr. Paul Dundy White and others. And I began in Atlanta [Georgia] working closely with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and with other organizations, and it was--so in my mid-thirties with the support and with the suggestion of people like Don Hollowell [Donald L. Hollowell] and Martin Luther King, Jr., a few other people who were--Louis C. Brown, people who were very close to me. I went off to law school, and I was going to return to Atlanta and work with SCLC and probably become general counsel to that organization, and also worked with the regional office of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], my dear friend, Ruby Hurley, who was the executive director, and Don Hollowell's office. My other friend, Vernon Jordan [HM] was there, and we were thinking in terms of maybe the offices would expand all of that, and Horace Ward was there. So we--but it's off I go to law school, so I come to Washington [D.C] to law school. Story_ID: 64925 Speaker 1: And one of the things that we thought about, particularly with respect to SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], is that the, the increasing losses of land, and farms, and houses by African Americans in South Carolina, in Alabama, in Mississippi, in Georgia. It was just horrendous, just horrendous, so--but partly because they couldn't get the capital. So we thought in terms of how, how can we, one, help stem this time? And what is it that we can do to help in some way cure, close this, this--put the finger in the dyke, so to speak? And we thought about (unclear) development of, of a bank, or banks, some kind of intermediary, financial intermediary under the, under the auspices of SCLC. So while I'm finishing law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and studying and learning something about banking, I met a man, Duncan M. Spencer, who was chairman of the board of the Fiduciary Trust Company of New York, who, for what reasons there were I, I don't know, decided that he liked me and that he wanted to have support my efforts, even made a very nice financial contribution to my last year in law school, and I became a Duncan M. Spencer Fellow. But I traveled up to New York, number One Wall Street, the Irving Trust building, the Fiduciary Trust was up in that building. So I traveled there and began to learn something about how banking really worked. And then as I moved on to, toward graduation, Martin King was assassinated. And so, plans of going back to Atlanta were placed on hold and eventually they just changed. And it was at that time that I began to get these offers to Chrysler and other offers, Howard, and then of course Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], and NYU [New York University, New York City, New York]. Well, I grew up in Georgia, born in a small town, Alma, Georgia, grew up in Savannah [Georgia]. When one mentioned institutions at which one would attend, you know, the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and places like that were, were, were institutions that you read about. Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Harvard were institutions that you dreamed about. So suddenly here I am without what I would say any effort of my own, which would have been inaccurate, because all of my efforts had prepared me for that. But I would have said without any effort of my own, because I hadn't been, I hadn't been programming myself in that direction. So here I am, and I'm offered a position at Harvard. The first reaction was shock. And I said, I, I told Dean [Derek] Bok I have to think about that. You know, I want to call and talk with my wife (laughter), and she couldn't believe it. I think the greatest reaction came from my mother and my father-in-law. My mother [Rachel Jewel Kirkland] said well, son, you've been in preparation for that all your life, you know. And my father-in-law said, I'm not surprised, I'm not surprised. But anyway, I'd better get off of that (laughter). So, so, so as a consequence of, of this, I thought that I could--if I'm going to use my life as, in a kind of service, what better platform? Is it possible to have a pulpit that is bigger or better than Harvard? And then what does it do for my children and my family? And so, off I went to Harvard. Story_ID: 64926 Speaker 1: Now did you--'cause you know a lot of times, you know, positions may be well intentioned, but not well envisioned. Yet you were able to create, you know, with the Harvard--was there a plan in place, or is this something that you hammered out with-- Speaker 2: No, there was a plan-- Speaker 1: --your-- Speaker 2: --in place. Speaker 1: So Derek [Bok]--okay, this is what it actually end up becoming. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So what was the--what did he lay out for you? What was the whole, you know, I want you to do this, this, and this? What was the-- Speaker 2: It, it wasn't I want you to do this. It was this is what I would like to see. Derek Bok is, is scrutable, but to some extent inscrutable, if you follow me. His, his--it, it's a kind of indirection and one has to listen. And he said I really think that what Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] can do is become something of a--and I don't think he used the term leader, but an example of what can and maybe should happen in higher education. Without saying it, he's saying we have the resources and we have the will. Now what we need, the ingredient that we need is the thought, and the courage, and the development of the thought. And so we need to spend some time thinking about how best to use our great resources and to use--and our resources are far more than just monetary. I mean, yes, every history, 1636, you know, you (laughter), you've been around for a while. And I believe that if we do it without being braggadocio or anything of that nature, but if we do it, in all likelihood our, some of our sister institutions will find that it is possible to do it. And we believe that you have the capacity, and we know that you have the passion to help develop that about which we are now talking, whatever that is to become. Story_ID: 64927 Speaker 1: And what we're thinking about is we look and we see that the legal profession has less than two percent, it's less than two percent African American. It has a very, very small number of women who--non--who are Caucasian women. It's almost absent with respect to Native Americans. And they're so few at the time we said Mexican Americans and Puerto Ricans and Borikens and Chicanos, just so few. Now isn't there some way? Don't we, don't we have an obligation to share our blessings with all of these people who are in fact citizens and who in some indirect way have a relationship to this institution? So what he really did was to sort of lay before me a kind of tabula rasa, you know, a kind of clean slate, and in effect, say that you are, you're free to develop it. And so, knowing that I had not only his blessings, but I had his encouragement and I had his courage and his will, and I had the resources, I began. And the--and there are some very interesting little things along the way that I, I, I can't really share with a big audience (laughter), but we, we began. And I believe the, the high point was the conference on The Black Lawyer in America. Story_ID: 64928 Speaker 1: Did anyone else fight--to understand this, this is 1969. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: This is--there's been a lot of, you know, the Black Power movement that's been out there. You had come from SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council] and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], but there was, you know, it was troublesome on the campuses-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --you know, that had occurred. So-- Speaker 2: And, and, and there were students who wondered where my head was. I mean I'm, you know, I, I don't look like the person who would walk around in a dashiki and a big fro and paratroopers of boots and things like that. I don't look like that person. I, I--you know. So there were students who wondered whether or not Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was bringing this person who was going to be in the ameliorator, you know. And yeah, so go ahead. Story_ID: 64929 Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: So because there have been all of this, you know, sort of happening. And, and yet, you know, probably on the part of faculty there was probably some fear, I mean all of those things. So, I'm wondering what you--what was the process that you, you know, instituted? Did you go back and really sort of study the state of affair first, or did you say--did you look at other things happening around in other parts of the country, or did you--I'm just trying to figure out what, with this clean slate, what were your steps? Speaker 1: Well, I, I think that we could say that they were-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: So by the time I got the, the finished copy, he was in financial trouble, and he's also a little bit of a (laughter)--but anyway, it, it, it, it, it turned out that he printed 2,000 copies and it went like that without it-- Speaker 2: But let's--okay, so I was saying-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you had this clean slate. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So what was the process? Speaker 1: Well, my--fortunately, I had been involved a bit with the Association of American Law Schools because Clyde, because of Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] at, at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. And I had met people like Robert McKay, and I had met the dean at the law school at Temple [Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], who later became president of the, of the institution. So I knew a little bit about what was going on with regard to the, the politics of admissions within the law school family. So I knew that the law schools--it wasn't until 1965 that the law schools, through their official organization, the Association of American Law Schools, could make the statement or would make the statement that none of their institutions are denied admission on the basis of race. And until 1965, they simply would not make that statement. And after--as of 1965, there were some other schools that were, which should have not made--which should have--should not have made that statement because they were in fact still denying students admission on the basis of race. So I knew about this, but above all, I read as much as I could about the history of the efforts of, of black folk to become legally educated. And that gave me some leverage, having that knowledge. I also looked at the legal profession and how in many ways it used the law schools as sort of a training grounds or shall we say far--a farm system like the baseball uses colleges in many ways as a kind of testing ground. And I committed that to part of my plan. Story_ID: 64930 Speaker 1: I then sat and talked with the senior members of the Harvard Law School faculty. That was an incredible education. It was also a great privilege to sit and talk with people like Libby Hall, and A. James Casner, and Dawson and other folk like that, talked with them at length. Louis Loss and I became just fast friends, as it--as I did with several others. And I asked them for their guidance so that we, so what we, what we want to do is to have Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] reflect the society. We want to know that in every nook and cranny of this country some, when someone ask where is a Harvard alumnus or alumna, someone can stand and say I'm a graduate of the Harvard Law School. And then we know that we are in fact and in truth a national institution, that the country looks to us for leadership and for guidance. And I'm trying to develop as best I can a way and a plan that will produce, will bring to this institution the kind of human resources with which we can then work and shape and mold into what we think is the Harvard tradition. Well, the response was incredible. Most of the faculty members said whatever it is that you need from me, so, in a sense, whatever you need from us we have it and you have it, but, but most of all, the appreciation that was registered as a consequence of my going and talking with faculty members individually about our plans. And I said now I've talked with the dean, Derek Bok, and he has said that, in fact, the, the task is mine. And so it was, it was, that was the beginning. So then I began to look at the, our population within the institution. From where do we get these students? Most of the students at Harvard was self-selected. You know, these were students who over the years, either through parents or friends, had been told that you ought to apply to Harvard. And they got letters and other things in support to--so our job to have students was an easy one. The, the job that we had was to expand, to increase, to in some way take those numbers and do an admixture to those numbers. So I began to write to institutions asking for their schedules for admissions persons, counselors who would come and talk with their students about law school, etc., whether or not they had conferences, and got some surprises. There were a couple of places to which Derek Bok had been invited and he asked me to go in his stead. And some people sat around waiting for him to arrive and waiting for his representative to arrive, and I was sitting in the audience. And so there was a little bit of shock educational treatment in some ways in some of the greater--great--institutions. Story_ID: 64931 Speaker 1: So along the way there was this educational process. And as we recruited from various schools, folk would ask the question: Are you sure that you know (unclear)--don't wanna be wasting my time (unclear) you know what I always said. But I sit on the committee on admissions. I only have one vote. And if you--if your record is good enough, and if you motivation is good enough, and if your background is strong enough, and if you can bring something to the institution as well as take something away, then you will be considered fairly along with everyone else. Well, am I gonna get in on color? I said--and this is where the Harvard Plan came from. I said it would be a factor. The answer is no. You're not gon' get in because you're black, but it would certainly be a factor. You will not be denied because you are black, just as this person is not going to be admitted because he's white. You have got to bring something that the institution can use to help it develop other students, and other students will bring something that will help the institution to develop you. So, I began to write these things down as I thought about them, and eventually we worked up what was about a seven-step process in the admissions process which became the Harvard Plan. And they--when I presented it to, to the dean and he presented it to the faculty, they began to talk to their friends about it. And the next thing I knew, as someone said, I became what they call a legendary character (laughter), you know. But it was all the way--I had Russell Simpson, who was the incredible user. I mean, long before people became computer experts, he looked at how you would weigh GPA's at Podunk and GPA [grade point average] at the university of so and so, and how is this student like to do at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and then take the Harvard student, Harvard College student as the hundred percent student and compare how that student has done at the Harvard Law School, as compared to the student from X institution. And then we would set up as a (unclear)--consequence--we would set up an admissions index and how many students would be admitted under that index, and how many students would be admitted here, and how many students would be admitted here. So we came out with a program and it worked. It's still working. And I'm surprised at all this foolishness, wasting our money down here in the Supreme Court. But anyway, that--it worked. But, but that's how it happened. Speaker 2: I'm a result of that myself. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, I didn't wanna say that, but you're not alone. Speaker 2: Right, no, no--I mean(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You're not alone. Everyone who entered that institution-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --was a part of that process-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: No one just walked in. You know, that's why we had a hard-working--I mean we, we spent hours and hours and hours reading applications and rereading them, you know. And we, we finally, we would say this is the class. Speaker 2: Now the twenty, your--when you say you increased it from twenty to 155, that was per class--per, per year, right? Speaker 1: No, that was a total, the, the-- Speaker 2: That was the total? Speaker 1: The total. Speaker 2: The total, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it was the total. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 64932 Speaker 1: Now, the other thing, when you look at--when did black--when did you convene the group, Blacks Incorp--you know, Black Lawyers in America Today? When was that-- Speaker 2: That was 1970. Speaker 1: Oh, so that was a year after--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, year af--year af--year after I arrived. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Yeah, after--how did I do that? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: And why did I do it? It was for two reasons: it was inspirational and therapeutic. I was still getting little conversations, sidebars from time to time about my efforts and particular recruiting and pushing and pressing women and black students to apply. And I thought it would be appropriate for students at the Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], all students, a general student body, as well as some faculty members, to, to meet practicing lawyers, working administrators, people who in government, legislative workers in government, people with whom they had only had newspaper information and conversation. You know, they had talked to these people through newspaper (unclear), you know, as the only thing they knew about 'em. And then there were, at that time, two or three organized efforts. Martin King [Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been dead two years. The country sort of discovered the presence of white folk after Martin was assassinated. So it's a little over a year now, almost two years that he's been gone. So the, the old habits which had never died had suddenly come to life again. And some of them felt cheated that they had been in some ways not able to trample on any of the efforts to honor him at that point. So I began to feel this--I knew about the effort that was going on in the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington], DeFunis [DeFunis v. Odegaard], that there would--see, the Department of HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Wellness] was just beginning to push and press for affirmative action programs. And there were people who were saying they were gonna stop that in its tracks. So they went and they found this little obscure--to there, to there thinking--obscure school there after the University of Washington. Nobody's gonna watch this. And they're going to have this student charged at this school, which by the way had graduated 12 black students in its sixty-some years of existence, and decided that it was going to recruit black students and said so openly. They decided that they were going to use that as a test case to stop the movement that some of us had begun. And they were really aiming at Harvard and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. You know, they, they, they weren't, they weren't concerned about University of Washington; they were aiming at us. In fact, that chief advisor--one of their chief advisors was on our faculty. Well, so it's all of this coming, and so I think that it's going to be important for some people to see how lawyers, black lawyers function. So I wrote to the Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.]. I had met the Leon Higginbotham through Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.], which is a great story by the way. And so I wrote to him and told him what I was planning, and asked if he would serve as our keynoter. Of course he said he was happy to do it. He had never been invited to do anything at Harvard, so he was delighted. So then I wrote to other people like Bill Coleman and Raymond Pace Alexander, a lot of other people. And after I got their blessings, I then wrote the National Bar Association and invited them if they would--asked them if they would send representatives or send me their mailing list. They did both, and then I began to write to professors at various schools. Story_ID: 64933 Speaker 1: Well, the next thing I knew--and then, of course, I wrote institutions and asked them if they would support some of their students to attend. So the next thing I knew I had about 400 people, and I think we wound up with a registration of about 350. To my great surprise and my great joy, as the panels unfolded, as these people spoke, many of the Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] faculty members were in attendance. And many of the students, both sides of the racial divide, so to speak, were in attendance. And so as a kind--and, and, and I think that Derek Bok was just overwhelmed. And I do believe that a mem--a lot of the people on the faculty, when they had a chance to sit and talk with some of the practicing lawyers and some of the sitting judges, they--and some of the reading materials referenced about which you--some of them didn't, had not paid attention or did not know, I think that there was--at least the whole atmosphere was one of appreciation. And it, it then began to feel as if we were doing the right thing. So the, the numbers were, as I say, they were up in the 150's. We had gone in a period of about five years from maybe six or seven black students in the entire school, now to 155, second only to Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] at that point. Story_ID: 64934 Speaker 1: Which is pretty amazing, and it created, that conference then help create the understanding that a black lawyer was not an anomaly. Speaker 2: Precisely. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That was, that was what we were. That's--we were trying to say that a black lawyer is not a figment of the imagination, that they exist, they work, they produce, they know the law, and in many ways, but for the black lawyer, the American constitutional system would have been a farce. Charles Hamilton Houston breathed more life into the constitutional structure of this country than any other law alive--to have lived. And then you had people like Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.]; and you had John Rock; and you know, you had Raymond Pace Alexander. You had all of these people who, who, who, in an effort to gain full citizenship for the black American, expanded the meaning, and the, the approach, and the, and the comfort, and the coverage of the law for everybody, you know. But for the fights in 1954, there wouldn't have been a "Roe v. Wade," you know. There wouldn't have been a number of other cases which have expanded and which have given life and support to people who were ready to challenge the system every step along the way beginning with the Civil War, the way of making this country anew, and a way of making the country live up to its precepts, making the word that this country's actions in some way meet its words, they were black lawyers. When John Rock appeared before the Supreme Court back in 1865 they didn't know what to do with him, you know. They didn't know what to do with him. And when Charles Hamilton Houston stood up and told the United States Supreme Court that the only way that the Constitution should be applied was to look at every word of the Constitution, that the Preamble of the Constitution is just as meaningful as the latest amendment. You know, folks said who is this guy? When Macon Allen appeared before the Supreme Court along with General Fessenden [General Francis Fessenden], you know, and argued that if this country is to be as great as it ought to be and could be, it has to believe the Declaration of Independence. Now if you don't believe the Declaration of Independence, then you can become just another tribal kind of existence. But if you do believe that all men and all women were created equal, then that's the charge before the court. You don't try to find weasel words to get out of it, you know. Folks said who is this guy? (Laughter) You know, where did he come from? So over the years, the, the, the black lawyer has stood before the bar of justice and argued for justice for all, for (unclear). It's easy to understand because if all people don't get it, it's clear the black folk are not gonna have it. And so I thought that it would be appropriate to have these black judges and black lawyers appear, where? At Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. After all, the first chair in law was funded by the sale of slaves, the Isaac Royall Chair, which is the first chair which is in fact at Harvard. It was funded when Isaac Royall sold some of his slaves in Barbados to establish a chair in law at Harvard. So why shouldn't we be there? And there were people who found some of my language somewhat disturbing. For the most part I was very well supported-- Story_ID: 64935 Speaker 1: And then when Derek Bok was named president of the institution, I think he looked at what I had done at the law school and then invited me. I was the only person to have received an invitation to go with him to the president's office, and he put my office immediately next to his in Massachusetts Hall, which probably caused some people to turn over (laughter) in their grave a little bit, but he had no problem with it. And so then we began to work on an expanded plan with respect to equal employment opportunity and looking at the entire structure of the university's faculty. That's when we began to get some resistance. There were some folk who said well, you know, it's all right for that to happen in the law school, in admissions, but you know, we-- Speaker 2: Not within our family. Speaker 1: Yeah, not within our family. And to some, to some extent I replicated my law school efforts with the greater faculty, got through a lot of support, got some resistance, and by and large, it worked, it worked. And so by the, by the time I'd been there a little over six years, it was, it was--I could have gone into, I could have gone back to the law school; I could have gone into some--but it was probably time to move on. Story_ID: 64936 Speaker 1: And then that moving on, when you--that's when you went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, I want--okay, can you just tell the story of, of Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.] and, and Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I, I first met Leon Higginbotham at Clyde Ferguson's home. He owned Kalmia. And Dean Ferguson, as I called him in public, invited me to come by his house. He said I have someone that I'd like you to meet. And I went over there, and it was a Saturday. And he introduced me to this, this giant, you know, big man and just booming voice, you know, just friendly, great handshake, all over that. And he said to, to Leon Higginbotham: Walter Leonard is my assistant, but he's also my research assistant, then he's a person whom I have a lot of hope for and you know, confidence and etc., etc. And so that was fine. What he was doing--what they were doing is that they were practicing judicial writing. Higginbotham would write maybe two or three paragraphs as a judge with respect to a particular case. He would write two or three paragraphs of a decision, and he would hand it to Clyde Ferguson. We would-Clyde, he would read it over; then he would give it to Clyde Ferguson, and Ferguson would rewrite, or to the extent it needed rewriting; then they would read it together; then they would decide, well, maybe rather than that particular word, you'd want to use the word radiate, you know. And if the word you have used is fine, but maybe you'd want to use the word radiate. That, that has a more far reaching sound to it. And then they would get to another word, and he said well--Clyde would say well, now let me see, let's think about the etymology of that word. When was it first used, and how was it used? What was its meaning? In what context was it taken? Who were the people that used it? Did they have anything to do with what it is that we want to say now? And Leon would say well, I think it was used in this particular, in this particular, in this way, in this way now. He'd say well, maybe we can let that stand. But just in case, when you rewrite it, after you've thought about it, and before you get--reach your conclusion, you might want to think about that one again. Now, now what is it that we really want this decision to do? Are we concerned about--obviously we're concerned about the two people, the adversarial relationship that we have here as a--which in fact produced a case. Story_ID: 64937 Speaker 1: --Is that--okay, okay, well, then you were talk--okay, but this researching, the writing and you know, was--at that time was, was Judge Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.], was he sitting-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at that point? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Well, this was fascinating. So they were--he was practicing this. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yes, he was, he was sitting in then. And part of--he--well, it was a great respect that he had for Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.]. That's part of what I wanted to--he was, just had incredible respect. So, consequently, when I went to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and decided on a major conference, the first person that I invited was Clyde Ferguson was always there, I mean in, invited. The first person I invited was Higginbotham, so his first trip to Harvard was that invitation. And his, his keynote speech to the group of black lawyers, that black lawyers' conference, which was in many ways a kind of bridge that then sort of brought other people into Harvard. Story_ID: 64938 Speaker 1: Some of the people who came in under my recruitment were people like--in fact, there's a great story about Randall Robinson. I had gone to the Ford Foundation and the, the--and talked with them about the fact that at that point many law schools were sending lawyers into Africa and other places. There was only one black lawyer who was being invited, and his name was Charles Quick. And he was also being invited to spend the semester or so, so at various law schools, so--law school, because they had this black professor, and it turned out that one person was doing all of this and that was Charles Quick, very fine man Charlie Quick was. So I went to the Ford Foundation and talked with Wilbert LeMelle and Christopher Edley, Sr. and others about funding a program for African Americans to go to Africa. And I was finally told that the International Legal Center was then charged with sending, the quote, unquote, "a sailor program." So I went and talked with people at the International Legal Center and said to them that this is what I'm planning. Well, Wilbert LeMelle called in a friend, Badi Foster [HM]. And so Wilbert LeMelle, Badi Foster, and myself sat at Harvard, and we identified people whom we wanted to support from the funds that we were able to get as a consequence of my inquiry. And I said well, my first selection would be Randall Robinson. And then my next selection would be Henry Sanders out of, out of Alabama and his--and at that time was his girlfriend, Rosemary Gaines. She's now Rosemary Sanders. And Randall said to me: What am I gonna do in Africa? I said well, your life will never be the same. So he went to Africa as a consequence of that, and came back and founded TransAfrica. But talk with Badi Foster, if you will. Speaker 2: We did interview him just this--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, well, well, talk with Badi Foster about, about me and Harvard. I, I think you'll get some views that would be similar, but (unclear)-- Speaker 2: But what-- Speaker 1: --but expand on my own (simultaneous). Story_ID: 64939 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are there any other stories you'd like to tell, any other? Speaker 2: Well, there, there, there are several (laughter). Speaker 1: Can we, can we just-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and--but that--but what I'm also leading up to is that the, the Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.] story, when, when he came to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as our, as our speaker, he just mesmerized people. And he had this great history of his own educational experience from Antioch to, to the Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], and how people looked at him and treated him when he first entered Yale. And the person who was his constant supporter was a janitor, a janitor who would always ask him how he was doing and always tell him I'm glad to see you boys here, you know, and it was constant, and just how magnificent that was. Then I would talk with Raymond Pace Alexander about his experience at, at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and how he had to live in a boardinghouse, and how he spent his time in the library, between the library and the boardinghouse when he was a student at Harvard. Story_ID: 64940 Speaker 1: Another story is, or--in, in '69' [1969] when I had these three offers, Monrad Paulsen said, we really would like to have you come to the University of Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia]. And Robert McKay said, I'd like to have you at NYU [New York University School of Law, New York City, New York]. Well, of course I'd been offered the position at Harvard, and I was already at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. So interestingly enough, when I accepted the position at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard did not pay travel and moving expenses. But what Harvard said that they would do is they would put me on the payroll on July 1, and then I could report at the end of the summer, August, September--fine. Howard's--my contract with Howard ended the end of July, and the program at University of Virginia began in July. So for the month of July I was teaching at the University of Virginia; I was appointed assistant dean at Harvard; and I was finishing my appointment at Howard. It was absolutely magnificent, but it was also historic. It was also historic. Story_ID: 64941 Speaker 1: And then, of course, I then became, I guess to some extent, and somewhat unique, in that I (unclear)--I served as assistant dean at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and assistant dean at Harvard law schools [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So that, that might have been somewhat unique, but it was, it was a great experience. And at the University of Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] I moved into the Colonnade [The Colonnade Club], which had been supervised and built according to the specs of Mr. Jefferson. The colonnade over sort of looked over the campus, in the heart of the campus, and it sort of looked up at Monticello. And on the Sunday that I moved in, the, the caretakers had gone to church and had come back to the Colonnade, and they were waiting to watch me move into the Colonnade. It was incredible. It was absolutely incredible. So I moved into the University of Virginia's Colonnade, and one of the men came up and he said, I never thought I'd see the day. I said oh, well, you know, we're gonna see some more days. He said, I just never thought I'd see the day. So that, that was one of those moments that, that was quite, quite moving, very moving, very moving. Story_ID: 64942 Speaker 1: And I knew then that I had to go into Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and try to find some way to increase my numbers, not only increase them, but increase them with the, with the credentials, so that when they appeared a person couldn't say well, I don't know whether or not they are qualified; that they would appear with the credentials. Speaker 2: Well, that, that, that helped ultimately, you know, when your--with the "Bakke" [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke] decision. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: Because it, it was a plan that could stand up. Speaker 1: Yes, still does. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --still does. So they--I mean when someone said we're going to--shouldn't they reverse "Bakke." What is there to reverse? Every--there is nothing in this country in its history that doesn't have somewhere within its makeup, if it's serious, something about race. All you have to do is look at the population. You have everything from mestizo to absolute black, within what is referred to as the African-American community. Now I don't believe that two native Africans who were pure ebony got off a ship and then began to have mulatto children. I mean maybe they did. I mean, you know, maybe there's one of those, maybe that's one of those great wonders of the world, but I don't believe it. So now, when someone says that we are going to be race neutral, how can one be race neutral if--when I was in Columbia, South Carolina, in the 1950s, I was introduced to a woman who was, who was, whom I was told was the daughter of, of Strom Thurman. I had no way of knowing, and no one's ever refuted it. I said how are you gonna deal with race neutrality? You know how--I said that's crazy to waste the time, and energy, and money, start talking about we're going to have a colorblind society when the whole society has been based on and built on color. You know, he folk who built the canals were put there to build those canals because they were black. And when the people who built the underground, the undergirding of Wall Street, whose cemetery was just recently found, they were put there because they were black. The folks who picked the cotton, they did it because they were black. They were enslaved because they were black. And there women and their wives and daughters were debauched and molested because they were black, helpless. So all of this foolishness about we're gonna have a colorblind society is probably the biggest lie that this country can tell itself, and it's a waste of time. You know, let's, let's, let's get on with, with--and, and, and I just heard this farce about the Latino community now being bigger than the African-American community. All you have to do is ask those 10 million black folk who are passing to identify themselves. That's all you have to do, you know, ask him. You got about 10 million out there passing, and you have another 10 million white folk who are passing. Ask them to identify themselves, and you'll have 55 million African Americans if they accept their African heritage. So all of this, it's a waste of time, you know. Story_ID: 64943 Speaker 1: Well, anyway, you didn't, didn't (laughter)-- Speaker 2: You know, I, I wanna ask one other question-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --because Professor Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] had, you know, been your mentor-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and he was there. And I'm wondering what role he played, you know, during this time. Was he there the whole time you were there? Was he-- Speaker 1: No, he was, he was at-- Speaker 2: Because-- Speaker 1: U--Uganda. Speaker 2: He was--okay, okay, okay. Speaker 1: He was in Uganda, and then when he came back, he came back to the state department-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: --and the United Nations. And it was Derek Bok who asked me to come down to Washington [D.C.] and to invite Clyde Ferguson. Well, it was, it was Derek Bok, Jim Vorenberg [James Vorenberg], and Al Sacks [Albert M. Sacks] to invite Clyde Ferguson to the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] 'cause Clyde was not going to come to the law school unless he received--and so asked me to invite him. They invited him. They asked me to deliver the invitation. And so Ferguson came back to the law school. But Ferguson's history with the law school had not been the happiest one because, as you probably read, and in fact I wrote about this in the law review, at one point, the Harvard selection system for law review editors was based on the top thirty students. And when Ferguson was eligible, there were--the decimal, the point period--point to a system was introduced. And there were two students tied for twenty-ninth. So as consequence, they took those two number twenty-nine and that made the thirty. And Ferguson would have been thirty-one, so it was a consequence that Ferguson was not invited to the law review. So he went and founded another program, and he wrote the, an analysis of the Massachusetts practice, practice procedures, etc., which became approved and highly publicized and, whatever. And of course Ferguson was, by all intents and purposes, an absolute scholar with regard to accounting, and mathematics, and economics, as well as law. He was a, he was a Renaissance person. So he taught Derek Bok and Phil Arita. He taught them legal accounting. And he left the law school and went to rut--well, he went into the justice department and then from there to Rutgers and became a full professor at Rutgers [Rutgers School of Law, Newark, New Jersey], youngest in the history of the school at the time. And then he was later named to the Department of Justice in the Civil Rights Division. Then he became Dean of Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], and Ambassador to Uganda, and then to the State Department, and then back to, to Harvard. But, so he was away. We stayed in touch through letter and through telephone. Story_ID: 64944 Speaker 1: And the interesting thing is if while we were developing these plans, I would call Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] and we would chat a little bit about what I was doing, and then we'd talk about his daughters, and talk about him, and from time to time about his late wife. I, I can't recall a time when he made either a recommendation or a criticism with regard to what I would say to him about the Harvard Plan. So I knew it was okay. I mean I, I knew, knew him. When, when I took classes from him, he would--he had this, this way of--he would take Saraskinsky (ph.), he would take one of the cases, and he would, he would dissect that case from day one, you know, right through to the, through the Supreme Court's holding. And some of us in the class would raise a question, ask, now how does this rule fit with rule X or rule Y? And would (unclear)--how do you think it fits? You know, and you give a response. Now if the response were okay, he would move on to the next thing. So I would, so I, I, I learned that what you do is that you would say to him, well, well, Clyde or, or dean, you know--when I was at a point when I could say Clyde--let me tell you what, what I've thought about with regard to this whole admissions process. Let me tell you about the steps that I have designed, and he said okay. And I would talk about the steps. And he said: Hmm, I see, okay; and by the way, how is your son (laughter), you know, how is your daughter doing, or has she had another surgery, you know? So I knew then that what I had done was fine, was, was great. And he didn't want to--he was, he was not of a point or position or of a mind to, to interfere with it. It was fine--incredible man. Story_ID: 64945 Speaker 1: He's a brilliant man. Speaker 2: Oh, incredible, just absolutely incredible, incredible. Well, you know the story of his Ohio State [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] experience. Well, Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] was, was in the Army. And while in the Army he met these legendary football players, and he played for them. He was a quarterback/halfback. He also met Brown, Paul Brown, who founded the Cleveland Browns. And Paul Brown looked at Clyde Ferguson and said, my goodness, what--he was so talented, so he enrolled in Ohio State. Well Ohio State saw Clyde Ferguson as, as a possible member of a football dynasty that Ohio State was going to develop. He was, you know, a combination halfback/quarterback; you know, he was just heavy enough; he was fast; he was bright. And so he went there on a football scholarship. And then he asked one weekend whether or not he could spend time in the library developing a couple of theories, a couple of papers. And they said, wait, wait a minute. You know, you are here on a football scholarship. And you're--you expected to be on the field. He quit, and he went and he took whatever examinations they had, whatever it was that they needed, so that he could get an academic scholarship. And he was so incensed--and this is something else I learned from him--he was so incensed. He didn't raise his voice. He went to the library. He finished Ohio State in two and a half years Phi Beta Kappa. Then he was invited to apply for a Rhodes Scholarship. So he would have become their first Rhodes Scholar and probably one of the first African-American Rhodes Scholar since Locke [Alain LeRoy Locke]. Clyde Ferguson said no. Now, I've written about this, and I was surprise at the gentleman that at Harvard picked it up without attribution. But anyway, (laughter) he said no. He said he simply could not wear Cecil Rhodes around his neck for the rest of his life--incredible guy. Story_ID: 64946 Speaker 1: What did he--did he ever tell you what he saw in you, why he picked you out of-- Speaker 2: Well, I have to give you just a tiny bit of an insight. I was an older student. I was the, I think I was probably the third oldest student in the law school at the time, certainly the oldest one in my class. So he--our ages were not terribly far apart. I think he was six years my senior. And I think that played a role. The other thing that played a role is that he knew how dedicated I was to my children and my family. And while people didn't sort of know that about him, he was. And he also knew that I was serious about, about studies, serious about school, and that I would not raise a question with him unless it was in fact a real question. He appreciated that. Then he appreciated something else too. I asked him one time if I could go and search out the Howard family, for whom Howard University [Washington, D.C.] is name, up in Vermont. He was, he was surprised, but he said sure, of course. So I did. I went up to Burlington and found a great-niece and great-nephew and somebody else of the Howard family and talked with them and sort of got them back in touch with Howard. And he asked me: now why did you wanna do that? I said well, I think it's important for us to know the foundation on which we stand. We need to know something about the people who put their, their fortunate and you know, on the line to--it wasn't popular to found an institution to educate black folks in the 1860s. So I just needed to know whether or not the family still lived, and let them know what we, that we appreciated what happened with their forbearers. He never said anything else about it, but he--it was clear that that resonated with him. So he asked me to serve as his research assistant-- Story_ID: 64947 Speaker 1: You said he was impressed--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he was impressed by that, so he asked me to serve as his research assistant. He gave me a couple of things to check out. I went to the Library of Congress, went to the Supreme Court Library, checked these items out, and then to our own Howard Library, gave him a memorandum. He shook his head and thanked me. I said now, Dean, I really wish that you would send me--send these back to me with the red pencil. He said oh, don't worry; (unclear) I will, and he did. He sent it back with a red pencil--red, excellent (laughter), excellent, you know--C. C. F., Jr. And I--just blew my mind. Story_ID: 64948 Speaker 1: So, and then when his wife became ill, and clearly his wife was, was ill and it was terminal, he wasn't sure what to do. And we would go to a restaurant. They called it Murphy's. And I would often go down there and sit with him, and then make sure that he got home okay. And as a consequence, when his wife died, they sent funeral cars. And he said no, Walt, I'll ride in your car. So he got in the front with me, and his three daughters in the back, and drove to the cemetery. And it was that--it ja, ja, ja, just grew into, to that kind of friendship. When he was with the United Nations there were a couple of times when I went up to New York, and there's, just across from the UN [United Nations] is a place where he stayed a lot. A couple of times we had dinner together and just talked about how things were going. But we, we just had a good relationship, you know. Speaker 2: We're gonna change tapes. That's--what did his wife die of? Speaker 1: Cancer. Story_ID: 64949 Speaker 1: So, I want--we're at you're leaving--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --the circumstances. And so-- Speaker 2: Well, let me move from the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I, I can do it, I can do it shortly. The--after leaving the law school, after Derek Bok was named president, and I had predicted to him I told him, I said you know, they're gonna--when Mr. Pusey [Nathan Marsh Pusey] retires, it's clear to me that you're gonna be named president of this institution. And he said ah, no, no, that's--I said no, it's gonna happen. I said part of the reason is we had at--one of my suggestions was that we would develop something called Operation Dialogue. It's really quite simple, but think about it, Operation Dialogue--and that is that we would ask faculty members of the law school to meet with student in a non-class setting; maybe have lunch with them; or if they felt comfortable, invite a few students to their home, and that we would use some of the dean's budget to pay for it if they wished us to. I said now I realize that I'm voting money out of your pocket, Mr. Dean, but I think it's for a good cause (laughter). And so, he, again, he said, he said, you know, you come with so many things. He said that's a good idea, it's fine. And so a few faculty members took us up on it. Well, the word sort of got around that--you got student (unclear) and all of this, but, but the dean of the law school has made it a part of his plan to meet and to get to know his students, and it's just that simple, you know, outside of class room setting. So we did that in a number of instances. So when Pusey announced that he was leaving, it was almost automatic. No, they started doing search--searching. And how far do you have to search when the institution has pretty much become to know and endorse the dean of the law school? So as a consequence, I went into the law school, into deans--the president's office with Derek Bok. Story_ID: 64950 Speaker 1: Well, now, once in the president's office, he put a number of things on my platter. We learned one thing that me--immediately we had to develop an affirmative action plan. So what we had been doing at the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and doing through memoranda, etc., had to now cover the actions and activities of the entire faculty, the whole university operation. So we had to move from memoranda now to developing a publish--publishable and published plan, a program. And that plan was, was to eventuate into a program, a program which would in fact then be implemented. That was my task. My next task was to serve as chair of the university-wide committee on e--on equal employment, affirmative action and general personnel matters and conditions, all right, university-wide. Now I don't know if anyone realizes how big Harvard is and how resourceful Harvard is, but that was another one of my tasks. Another task was to troubleshoot for the president in and of and for those matters to which he could not reach (laughter). Now in addition to that, I had my own feelings about my own continued, continued, and continuing academic growth, so I agreed to teach a class, which I did, through the Department of Afro-American Studies and the--then I was named to the Selection Committee of the Nieman Foundation, Nieman Fellows, a news, newspaper. Story_ID: 64951 Speaker 1: And I think part of what got me named there was that I met with the director one day, and I--we were chatting about it. He said well, Walter, what do you think about our program? I said well, I, I think it's a great program. The only problem is it's too male and too pale (laughter). He said what did you say? I said there the only problem. I said here you are at this institution, where there is a decided effort to make sure that we have everything of importance reflect the total institution. And here you are representing newspaper writers, reporters, editors, and you're almost all pale and male, and that's not right. Well, the next week I got a letter inviting me to become a member of the Selection Committee of the, of the Nieman Foundation. I couldn't turn it down. I mean, I'd opened my mouth, got myself into trouble. Story_ID: 64952 Speaker 1: So I served on that committee, and then I served on the committee on, on parts for the graduation. What do we call it--commencement parts. It's a very interesting committee, because we decided who was to speak, and where, and who was to be honored and you know. And I carried the university's flag, mace. That was quite an experience. I'd also served on the Phillips Brooks Committee. All of these were not all the full years that I was there, but I served on--and I served as a trustee of the Coup, which was--Louis Loss had put me in, in. And Louie Loss was truly a great friend. And we had a situation involving the Native Americans. And there was a play, "The Indians," and the play included displaying some artifacts. And the Native American community just went up in arms. So I met with the people of the museum and suggested to them that there isn't any reason to keep the bones and things from, from Indian graves. Why not photograph them, make those photographs a part of your archives, and return, repatriate, these artifacts, these bones. That's--I mean, what, what does it mean to, to rob graveyards? Well, the--Steve Williams, who was the director of the Peabody [Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology], thought about that, and he called me about week later at home one night, almost midnight, said he had just been going through a kind of--these are not his words--kind of decisional mid-passage, and he thought that my suggestion made since. I said fine. He said well, I'm going to make an announcement with the presidents and the deans and the okay that we're going to develop a program returning these artifacts, these bones, to the Indian burial grounds. Do you wanna be a part of that? I said no, I don't need to be a part of it; that's your job; that's your--that's Peabody. I mean that--I said I'm a facilitator. You know, don't, don't make me a part of that. So they did that, and it became big headlines around the country and the world, you know, that Harvard was repatriating these bones and declaring that they were not going to, to go into Indian burial grounds to remove artifacts, as they're referred to, anymore. So that happened. Story_ID: 64953 Speaker 1: And then there was a story of the, the task that women who were in school and working at the school having, particularly in childbearing age and raising their children. So there's a woman named Francis Howe (unclear), and whose husband was president of the Provident Bank, and we met and we talked about how we could do something about this. So we started the first daycare centers. In fact, we used Everett Street, which had been my--which was admissions office, where the office had been early on before the Towne Building it was constructed. And that became the first daycare center in the university system. And people were predicting that it would be, you know, it wouldn't work. It was overwhelmingly successful. So the next, we went to Gund Hall and then--then I don't know how many there are now, but we started that system. Story_ID: 64954 Speaker 1: Well, the next thing that we knew, the president said to me, Walter, we have--by faculty legislation the Department of Afro-American Studies has to be reviewed. And the decision has to be made as to whether or not it will continue as a department or whether or not it will become a program. He said, I think you know what my thinking is. I said well, I know what it should be, but I believe that it's probably what it should be. We said no more about that, until he said to me: I have decided that I would ask you to serve as executive secretary to the committee to review the Department of Afro-American Studies. Now, what I'd like you to do is to recommend names of persons who could serve on that committee. And the task of the committee is very much what we have talked about. Now we hadn't done a lot of talking, but we, we understood. And so I went to the archives and read the debates, read the arguments, read the, the recommendations, and some of the ugly things that have been said and all of that, and we put together a committee to review the department. The committee met for year. We asked Wade McCree to serve as chair. We put a number of other people-Kilson [Milton R. Kilson], Gwineare (ph.)--we had all of the, all of the segments involved in that committee. And I asked Joyce Hughes [HM]. Joyce was at that time at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Law School, Minneapolis, Minnesota]. She had not yet gone done to, to Northwestern [Northwestern University School of Law, Evanston, Illinois]. And that's another story. But anyway, we, we did that, and so I wrote the preliminary report for the committee and all of our meetings and rec-- records and notes, gave it to the committee members, Wade and others, Wade McCree and others. They made recommendations, changes, etc. Then I took it, and my office took it, and then we wrote the final report. And we began it by saying that the faculty, in its wisdom, had established a department for Afro-American Studies, and that we saw no reason to change that, so that we saw as our task not to change it, but to strength it. And then we began that, that, you know, that, that--my dear (laughter), if you don't mind me saying it that way, was in fact revolutionary, because there were those within the faculty who said that it shouldn't be a department; it ought to be a committee; you know, ought to be a program, etc., and including some people who had high melanin were saying that. So, following that--well, within that report, we wrote this: If the department is to be truly academic, as it must be, and if it is to be a credible department within the Harvard family of departments and the educational system of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it must have appropriate research and that appropriate research institution, or vehicle, or engine, must be the W. E. B. Du Bois Institute for Afro-American Research. And to my surprise, I was surprised when it was presented to the faculty, it was adopted. I think there were two dissenters; in the full faculty meeting there were two dissenters. Story_ID: 64955 Speaker 1: So following that, the president asking me what do we--what is our next step? I said our next step is develop the Du Bois Institute. And he said well, let me think about it. The next week I got a letter from him, memorandum, asking me to serve as chairman of the committee to develop the du--the Du Bois Institute. Again, we selected appropriate people to serve on that committee, Preston Williams, Cornelia (ph.), Kilson [Milton R. Kilson], and others. And that committee met for about six months. I drafted a report and submitted it to the committee members. Again, they did their due diligence, and we completed a report, and sent it to the president. And the president said we--I said well, if--about money, I said well, the first thing we have to do is to make sure that Harvard places some of its resources behind this, and then we go over to foundations. And to my great surprise, we went to the Loose (ph.) Foundation and got the first money from outside of the institution to support the Du Bois Institute. And then there was a new building going up, and I asked the president if we could put the institute in that building. And I then met with the architects, the builders, and we carved out the space in that building for the institute. For the first year and a half the institute was on my desk, if you follow me. We named the first fellows, and then we named Preston Williams as an acting director, because I simply couldn't, couldn't carry it. But the first fellows were named through my office, and that, that was truly, truly a labor of love. So the, so the institute was up and, and, and, and running. Story_ID: 64956 Speaker 1: Then there was the relationship with the greater community, particularly the black community, and to some extent through some parts of the, of the Caucasian community, which had not seen itself as a part of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And you know, one would be surprised to know that--no, I don't suppose one would be surprised if there were a lot of people who felt that Harvard was that institution that simply did not welcome people from various strata, whether race or economic. And so we tried to, to bridge those gaps; some people would say chasms. We tried to bridge them, and I think we did a, a pretty good job of that. I had a tailor, the Schoffel Brothers. And I would go in and talk with the Schoffel Brothers about clothing, but also about life. And I would ask him what do you think about Harvard? And boy, would I get an earful. And then I would ask him what can we do to change that? Are you serious? I said yeah, I'm serious. So went to a couple of churches, a couple of masses, talked with a couple of priest and others who had never had anybody from Harvard come and talk with them at all about anything. They just knew that Harvard was--I said oh, no, no, no, no. I said the problem is that the people of Harvard don't know how you feel, and you won't tell them. He said they never asked (laughter). I said well, I've asked. But you are different. I said how am I different? I said how am I different? I said I'm in the president's office, so what's different about me? You know, so we would laugh about that. But anyway, so it was that community relations, you know, that became a part of my mantra, so to speak. And there were a few other things that went blowing. And one thing and then I'll stop. Story_ID: 64957 Speaker 1: After the Conference of Black Lawyers ["The Black Lawyer in America Today"], it occurred to me that, for the most part, even though there had been a number of women involved in law, we, we still hadn't done anything that addressed the presence of black women, and Radcliffe was still viable. So I spoke to Doris Mitchell, who at that time was the either assistant or associate dean at Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], suggested to her that it would be magnificent I believe if you could do a conference on black women. And she took the idea to the president of Radcliffe. She said well, I don't know whether we're gonna get the resources for that. So Doris came back and said the idea seems to be acceptable, but why won't--we don't know what we're gonna do about resources. I said well, let me talk with the president and see if it's possible to use some of my budget, and I really didn't have a budget. (Laughter) My budget was the president's budget, you know. So let me see if we could use some of my budget (laughter), which was a joke. She said fine. So I went and I spoke to the president. And I said, is it possible for us to help Radcliffe develop a conference on black women? I think that that would just sort of round out some of the things that we had been trying to do and just, in my judgment, make for a great atmosphere, you know. And he said yes, incredible, said yes. I said okay. I said--he said, do you have any ideas of what we're talking about? I said no, I have no idea. I said but I think that, yeah, I think people will be fruitful to the extent that you can be. So I told Doris why don't y'all go ahead with the plan. And we worked and I worked with them a bit wound up being the only man to address the conference, but the conference was magnificent. And out of that grew the Oral History program. And my wife [Betty Singleton] was then asked to coordinate the development of an oral history program. And out of that came--we--what is it--we seek a world. What is the name of the book? Speaker 2: We-- Speaker 1: What is it? Speaker 2: "I Dream A World." Speaker 1: "I Dream A World." Out of that came the book "I Dream A World." And so then immediate--shortly after that we moved. I, I always regretted that because she had--she was enjoying that so much, and we had--she had such a great experience. But we moved there, out to, to Nashville [Tennessee]. Story_ID: 64958 Speaker 1: Well, you asked me to speak to the time that I was leaving. Two or three board members and people, visiting committee, had said to Derek Bok--and I don't think the man would mind--I don't think one of them would mind me saying this now. One of 'em was Amo Houghton [Amory Houghton, Jr.], Corning Glass, had said that if I decided to leave, they would like to know; they would like to talk with me about it. And there were a couple of people at law firms, and a couple of other folk with, with companies who were very much, very well placed in family organizations, like the Houghtons. And so when my name was put in play, so to speak, and it was sort of put in play by the late Dr. Montague Cobb [Dr. William Montague Cobb], who was then chairman of the board of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], who, when Roy Wilkins announced that he was leaving the NAACP, wrote me a very nice letter asking me--told me, didn't write, didn't ask me, told me that a committee of the, of the board of the NAACP had met, and they had decided to request of him to request of me my--a copy of my materials, resume, etc. I sent it to him. I later had a meeting with the committee, and I said no, I'm not sure about--I said I, I really am sort of comfortable at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. (Laughter) I mean I--you know--in fact my friend, Louie Loss said, Walter, I understand that people are trying to take you from Harvard. I said well (unclear)--he said look, he said you're where everybody else wants to be. So, you know, why would you think about leaving? And I said well, Louie, you know, I've been here now a little over eight years. And there are those who feel that maybe, just maybe I have an obligation to, to find a way if I can to help in some other way in, in my community. He said but you, he said look at what you've done. I said well, you know, that--most people don't know what I have done, you know, what we have done. And the next thing that came is I sort of thought about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Dr. Benjamin E. Mays, Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], called me, and he, and he said I think you ought to give some thought to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. We are about to lose that, that school. He said it's, it's, it's, it's really, really going down the tubes, and we need somebody to save that school. There's too much history there, and there's too much meaning there. That's Du Bois' [W.E.B. DuBois] school, you know. I said well, why do you think I'm that person? He said I know you can do it. Well, I talked with my wife [Betty Singleton] about that call. She was right there. The next week, man--John W. Davis--John W. Davis was the dean of black college presidents at the time. He's the man who had stayed at West Virginia for years. John W. Davis came up to Cambridge [Massachusetts]. He was, he'd just passed eighty, came up to Cambridge; came to my office, and he said I need to talk to you about Fisk. He said my first wife was a graduate of Fisk, and then he went on about his involvement in the history of Fisk and why it was important and necessary. He started with the American Missionary Association, and he came up to the Jubilee Singers, and he just went on. Story_ID: 64959 Speaker 1: So we are now at-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. In any event, Dr. Mays [Dr. Benjamin E. Mays] called me and then Benjamin--Dr. John W. Davis, who was at that time working with the Legal Defense Fund, but who was very, very, very much involved in the Urban League and--but he came up to Harvard by train. And I understand--I later learned that he had left his office and had walked down to the subway, that the escalator was not working, so he walked down to the bottom of the subway--and he's eighty-ish now--and went down and got the train, came up to, up to, up to Boston [Massachusetts], got a cab out to, to Cambridge, and came in to see me. He had, he had talked to my secretary, so I knew he was coming. And he just said I need to talk with you about Fisk. And then he said, Benny and I, which was about Dr. Mays--Benny and I have thought about this, and we've prayed about it, and we believe that you are the person who can save that institution. And he said we, we, we know what we're asking. We know that you're comfortable here, and they love you here. And he said then your family is probably very comfortable here, so we know what (unclear) asking. He said we know that your two children are in college now, you know, and he said but we really, really, really need you to go and give serious consideration to save that institution (laughter). And well, I, again, I called my mother [Rachel Jewel Kirkland], and I called my father-in-law, and I called some other--my father-in-law said well, I'm not gonna vote on that one (laughter). He said I'm not gon' vote on that one; and my mother said I guess they need you, son; I guess they need you; and my wife [Betty Singleton] said I'm gonna leave it up to you; and my children said, are you sure you wanna do that? So I didn't have whole lot of help to make that decision, and Harvard made it clear that you have a home; you know, you, you, you're not like the boll weevil anymore, you know, looking for a home. You remember Brook Benton's song, don't you? He said you have a home, you know, and you're, you are truly a part of the fabric of this institution. I mean, look around. Badi Foster [HM] makes this statement: Walter, you've changed that institution. Well, I don't know about all of that. But any event, I thought about it. I went down to visit Fisk. I almost cried. Story_ID: 64960 Speaker 1: See, I had first seen Fisk when I was a boy. My grandfather, who had lost his eyesight and I was his seeing eye, had taken me to--we had traveled by bus. He could travel free, and I could half-price if space were available on the Greyhound at the time because he was a minister and because he was blind. And we took a three-day trip. We went up to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], 'cause he wanted me to see Morehouse, and see Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], see Clark, See Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And then the next day we went over to Nashville 'cause he wanted me to see Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. He wanted me to see Jubilee Hall, you know, and so--and the Fisk chapel. And he talked with me about these places as (unclear). And so I saw these institutions through the eyes of a blind man, so that--so they were--there was something in my history that, that appealed to me when--but I realize the, the depths and the extent to which the institution had been neglected. Story_ID: 64961 Speaker 1: In fact, some people got very angry with me because I said in a couple of reports that the institution had been exposed to administrative vandalism, and that unfortunately there had been acquiescence by the board of trustees. And indeed, in one report that I wrote, a copy of which I think you have, the "Message and the Dreamer," I just said publicly, you know, this is what we face, but all is not lost. We still have some life, and we can still save the institution. So for six years I worked at doing that, and I made trips after trips. I finally said look, I just cannot take it anymore. And when "Time" magazine interviewed me, they wanted to know, well, why are you leaving, and I said well, it's really very simple. I am tired of begging. I am just tired of begging. And I was also convinced that there were people who really, really wanted to see that institution collapsed; and there were others who were willing to help keep it alive; and there were some who were in position to make it whole, but they were not, they were not moved to support a black institution which had over the years, along with a few others, produced some of the great critics of this society, they did simply--you know, let it go; we don't, we don't need it. So after six years, I, I decided that: one, I had made six years of decisions, and I had probably lost between ten and twenty percent of supporters each year. So after that period of time I had pretty much (laughter), I had pretty much played all of my trump cards, and it was time for me to go. Not only that, my doctor said to me, now, we can, we can do a couple of things with you. We can help you walk out now or we can take you out later. So I was beginning to develop some physical reactions to the pressure of the institution. And, and then there were people who were not very kind, who were not very kind, and some of whom were members of the alumni who were very upset that I put the linen out to, to dry or to be cleaned or whatever. And so I left, and when I left I wished the institution quite well. Story_ID: 64962 Speaker 1: I was not treated well by some members of the board of trustees who were quite angry because, about the fact that I had exposed their--not only their refusal to help to school, but in some instances, they're actually working against the institution. They were, some people were upset because I insisted that Fisk would not sell its art collection. I mean, how, how are you gonna have a school of arts and sciences if you're gonna sell your art? And how are you going to grow something in the future if you sell your seed corn? You know, it was (unclear). You can't do that. You just simply can't do that. And then there were those who said well, you know, he, he's really a Southerner with a Northern flare. He's--came out of, came of these schools I the South and then went to Harvard, and he doesn't quite see things the way we see them. Well, I thought that the way I was seeing 'em for Harvard is that you preserve that which is important, and you worked toward producing students and graduates who, who further expand opportunities for themselves and their people. Story_ID: 64963 Speaker 1: Now, what, what are the things that you--the, the--just talk about some quantitative things. How far was the, the, you know, university in debt? And you know, what were some of the challenges, and what were some of the things, you know, success? Speaker 2: Well, the institution I, I learned after I got inside, and one of the things that I learned about Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] is they're four sides to every question. This business about two sides, that's not accurate; they're four sides. There is a wrong side, a right side, then there's an inside, and an outside. And often you think that you're on the right side until you get inside. Well, I learned after I got inside of the institution that the institution was using a kind of recordkeeping system that showed that some debts had been paid, and indeed checks had been written. Only problem was checks had not been what? Hadn't been mailed. Well, anyway, we, we learned shortly after getting inside that the institution's endowment, which just ten years earlier had been about $16 million dollars, which was the, the highest of any Historically Black College in the country at the time. And the potential was, was just almost unlimited, and also because it had been under some assault from other communities. The highway system had been run almost through the campus, you know, through--helped cripple it and all of that. So it had many assets, including assets that were negative from other positions, but positive for the institution, and they simply had not been, been exploited, positively exploited. And in fact, what we found is that the $16 million dollar endowment had been, had been spent down to about $3 million dollars, and part of that had been done because it had not been replenished as the monies were being used. The school decided--you know, here's Fisk, this magnificent little gem of an academic liberal arts institution, deciding that it's going to become a football giant, so it's going to give grant and aid, grants and aid to football players and to basketball players. And then it's going to decide that all student leaders is going to have scholarships. And at the same time there isn't the accompanying effort to raise money to support that, not that those things should have happened in the first place. But there was not an accompanying effort to support that, and so funds began to, to just drift away. And at the time, the country was really open to support Historically Black Colleges. But for reasons that I still don't understand, those funds were not being, were not being sought in the same with any great alacrity at, at Fisk. And then, unfortunately, as the institution began to do some building, the $3 million dollars left in the endowment were encumbered, completely encumbered for by buildings, etc. So for all intents and purposes, the school was, was insolvent. One couldn't know that until one really got inside, insolvent. And so as a consequence, in 1978, one year after I arrived, I talked with local banks, one of which had a short-term note on that school, about lending the school $2 million dollars. And a portion of that was to pay off that short term, such should the banker would not try to foreclose on us. In the meantime I've asked my assistant--in fact, one of my stu--one who had been a recruit that I had brought into Harvard Law School to do three things for me. One was to research how we could put the institution on the, the entire institution on the National Historic Register, which would be obviate and slow down and stop any efforts to try to foreclose for development; and second, to see if we could take the Jubilee Singers' name and make, make that a registered property of the, of the university, and then to see how other, other ways that we could raise monies and stop efforts to close the school. And we were able to do those things. Story_ID: 64964 Speaker 1: We were able then to meet with the Ford Foundation and meet with a couple of members of the trustees who assisted us with nice sized gifts. I was able to meet with Georgia O'Keeffe. I actually went out to New Mexico and spent a day and an evening over there with her. Such that she would leave the Stieglitz Collection [The Alfred Stieglitz Collection of Modern American and European Art] at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], and then in addition to that, to give a $150,000 toward the development of the art gallery, the refurbishing of the art gallery to reserve that, that art collection. And we were able also to get several foundations to make gifts to the institution. We were able to get some individuals who had been friends of mine at Harvard to make gifts of books as well as money to the institution. So over the six-year period, we raised a little over $12 million dollars and we, we saved the school. We, we made a lot of people angry, particularly some of the members of the white community, local white community, who had wanted to see the school, school gone anyway. And they were--they said that I was too pointed in my discussions and my talk about the institution. But finally we, after six years, we left, and I--the year before we left we bought this house. In 1983 we bought this house here, and the house stood vacant for almost a year. And then in '84' [1984] we, we left and came, came here, and we've been here since that time. Story_ID: 64965 Speaker 1: Now, tell me what you--I mean you had--you know, you were--you served as a Distinguished Fellow at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you, you know, you've been employed at various times as a consultant, education--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right. Speaker 1: And then you were at the--you went to the U.S. Virgin Islands for two years. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, a little over two years, yes. Speaker 1: And then you were national executive director of cities and communities in schools--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, it was citizens schools. Now it's named communities and schools. Speaker 1: Okay, oh, it's--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What--how would you talk about these periods, you know, which is--you know, what things were significant and what weren't? What added to-- Speaker 2: Well, the--when I came back--when I left Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], I had done a couple of speeches that seem to have resonated with a lot of people, including Jim Cheek, president James Cheek at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. And he and--with the assistance of Michael Winston, who was then the vice president of academic affairs, offered me a position at, at Howard as a Distinguished Fellow at the Institute for Educational Study, and I accepted it. It was really very much a, a bridge. I, I left Fisk and I took some time off. My wife and I went to Malawi, and then we left and came back from Malawi; we went to Spain. So we took some time and tried to refurbish and rethink. And I did a little bit of writing and then I went to work for, for Howard in the institute and essentially was a research, a think tank. And so I did some writing there and very much enjoyed that. Story_ID: 64966 Speaker 1: While I was there, I was invited to come down to the Virgin Islands by the then just recently elected governor of the Virgin Islands, Alex, Alexander Farrelly. I was only to do one thing there, and that was to help him organize his cabinet. Well, then he asked me to become secretary to his cabinet, which would have meant being secretary to the governor really (unclear). A couple of month later he asked if I would serve as his executive assistant. Now, that was a very smart move on his part. I lived in Washington. The Virgin Islands are under the Department of Interior. I could come to Washington [D.C.] and stay at home. I could do business for the Virgin Islands, so there was no hotel cost involved. The only cost would have been airfare, which I would have had to pay anyway, and--but--so money could be saved. I would have the comfort of being at home, so I could very well then be productive for the, the islands. I'd spend three or days at home here working each day downtown. And so it worked out quite well, and we were able to get a few things--several things done. I suppose the--I finally persuaded the government of the Virgin Islands to buy the West Indian Company. The West Indian Company had been that company that had been of years and years and years owned by the Danish government. In fact it had been a company that had brought slaves into, into the Virgin Islands. So--and it owned and controlled the ports. The cruise ships and all of that had to pay duty to the West Indian Company. So it really was to get them to do that. That's probably the highlight of my, of my service there. But I traveled with the governor, and I, I did go to Asia to develop a line of, of communication which turned out to work out quite well because we were able then to get some Asian companies to supply companies in the Virgin Islands with jewelry and things of that nature. And there were a few things that the Virgin Islands produced that the Asian company would buy, particularly rum. And I was also able to go to England and representing the governor, and was able to do some similar, some of the same things there. But the island economy was small, but nonetheless, we were able to do a few positive things with that. Story_ID: 64967 Speaker 1: I suppose the, the fellowship at, at Howard, the (unclear)--I was able to do some research on educational problems, educational activities, particularly related to black colleges at the time because there was this, there was just then beginning to mushroom this whole question about whether or not these schools should exist. And I think that we add to some of those questions. And, and I took off--I mean I took off times and just served as a consultant to two or three--one was the Ford Foundation. I did a report to the--on the Historically Black Colleges for the Ford Foundation (unclear) a report about--of which I'm pretty proud. They used that as one of their means of making grants to Historically Black Colleges. And then on a couple of, couple of instances I actually worked with schools like the University of Northern Kentucky [Highland Heights, Kentucky] on problems that are involving black students and the whole question of affirmative action. I worked with those institutions to do that. Story_ID: 64968 Speaker 1: But essentially I've, I've taken it easy, and then eventually I was invited to Oxford [Oxford University, Oxford, England]. Speaker 2: And talk about that. Speaker 1: I was invited by the Aspen--combination of Aspen Institute and the Institute for Socio-Legal Studies. I had served as an Aspen Fellow for three or four years at their various institutes, and then (unclear) that this institute in conjunction with Oxford, so I was invited. I was surprised when at the end of the institute, the director of the Center for Socio Legal Studies asked if I would consider returning. And I said no. When is the next institute? He said no, no, no, no, would you consider returning as a visiting scholar? And sure enough, I received an invitation, went back as a visiting scholar the next year. The next year I was elected a fellow of the institute. And the next year I received a letter from Wolfson College [Oxford, England] advising me that I had been selected as an honorary member for life for the college. So now I'm a fellow and visiting scholar of the institute and an honorary member of Wolfson College. And what has happened there is that they have--I've gone each year and I deliver a lecture the (unclear)--write a paper. I talk with students from a number of programs. Some of them are American programs like the Ohio State [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], for example, law school has an annual program, prelaw program there, and usually talk with them. And then the--my fourth year I was advised that the school, was planning to establish two fellowships in my name. Now they have done that, and probably this year, that is for the next school year, the first Walter J. Leonard Fellow, Fellow will be named. Eventually there will be two each year, but for next year that will be the first Walter J. Leonard Fellow. Story_ID: 64969 Speaker 1: It's exciting and that--and what you're not saying is that this is a lifetime-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --appointment--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's a lifetime appointment, right, for as long as I'm able physically to go to Oxford. And, and the interesting thing too is that Oxford [Oxford University, Oxford, England] has what they call a Battel, B-A-T-T-E-L, Battel's program, that just has to do with your identification number. Well, when they established this new system, my number is 0001. You follow me? My number is 0001. When you check the--at Wolfson College [Oxford, England] when you check the number of persons who are visitors, and scholars, and students, etc., common room members, it's amazing. And you put in your number. Mine is 0001. So it's, it's really quite, quite, quite an hour, you know, particularly when one looks back at--you know, I just had a birth in Alma, Georgia. And he looked years later. And there are letters from, from the Royal House, and letters from the president of Wolfson College, the director of, of the Institute for Socio-Legal Studies, and letters from the vice chancellor of Oxford, or welcoming you to "the family," as so to speak. It's, it's daunting. Story_ID: 64970 Speaker 1: So I was asking, you know, the question was what does Walter Leonard still wanna do that he hasn't done? Speaker 2: Walter Leonard has to do about three or four things. One is I had promised my wife [Betty Singleton], my children that I would do a memoir, and I have even promised myself that I would do that. I have written what would amount to two or three chapters. But, as I think about things to which I've been exposed, my life, so to speak, I realize that I have to revise as I go. So I wanna get that done, and it's going to require some quiet time to do that. That's one of the things I'd want to do. The second thing that I want to do is to make very certain that my children are comfortable in their lives and what they want to do so that whatever happens to dad, they're going to be comfortable in their lives, in, in their pursuits, and will have, as Martin King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] once said, I won't have a lot of money to leave for them or to give to them, but I can give them encouragement and give them support in whatever they're doing. The third thing is that over the years I have accumulated a goodly amount of things, and particularly in my library. We are very fortunate to have first editions example of "Souls of Black Folk," which by the way is a hundred years old this year. And "Uncle Tom's Cabin" and a number of other things that, that are considered rather his--historically valuable. We have been very fortunate. And because of what I have done over the--several years, I have a fairly good collection of memorabilia that relates to years at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and the years Har--at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And the Harvard years just keep looming bigger and bigger and bigger, my years at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], and of course, now my efforts with, with Oxford [Oxford University, Oxford, England]. And the--but I have to go back to the years at, at, at Harvard because this whole matter of how we develop a nation of people who are going to find it not only possible, but absolutely necessary to live together as, as not necessarily brothers and sisters, but live together as neighbors who will understand, and tolerate, and, and build on the energy of each other. I've had some experience in that. And the more I read about what people are saying about how this is to be done, for all intents and purposes, as the current vernacular would state, I've been there. I have written it; I mean it's there. I, I have friends who say: Walter, you know, you've, you've written about all of this. Why don't you enter the fray? And I have not done that. Maybe it would be appropriate to do a couple of memoranda, a couple of articles about what I believe this whole question is about. And maybe since I was a principal crafter of the Harvard Plan, people who are talking about what it is, and what it isn't, and what it should be, maybe I should tell them what it is, maybe. So, I think they're probably under some obligation to do that. Story_ID: 64971 Speaker 1: I also want to make certain that the Oxford Fellowships are alive and well, and that they are used by people who will take advantage of an opportunity to look at the world through the prisms of an Oxford University and to determine how best to use the skills and that learning to help further some comfort for our fellow people, our fellow human beings. So I'd like to see that done. Now two years ago-- and this is something that I have not really talked about, but I, I will now--I received an urgent letter from a member of the United States Congress who said to me that after several hours of discussion, that he and some fellow students/graduates, alumni of the Harvard Law School had decided that it was essential for them to get together and develop either a fellowship, or a plan, or a chair in my name. I don't look for honors, but I was obviously very, very much moved by that. And I don't know what happened, but almost two years have passed, and I have heard nothing from them since that time. A couple of people asked me if I'd heard something, and I said no. Now, if that is to happen, and I would like very much to see it happen, then I would want to have enough energy and enough involvement to try and help to the extent that, that I could, if it is to happen. I can't initiate it. The person said it had already been initiated and that he had already talked with the dean and talked with the Office of Alumni Affairs and all of that. And that was to be on the--that that was a go. Well, I have no idea as to what happened, no (unclear). But if it--again, if it is to happen, then I would want to see, to see that. So those are some of the things that Walter Leonard would like very much to see done. And I would suspect that the--if one would say well, first things first, it would be to begin a bit, with a bit more energy on the, on the memoirs. They have begun, but I, I have to confess that I have not dedicated the kind of time that I must, and I will do that. Story_ID: 64972 Speaker 1: What advice do you have for young black people coming up now? Speaker 2: I have three things that I would suggest. And some of my former students laugh when they get near me, and they begin to quote me in many ways. And there was one that I still hear from, some, some of former students who are now members of the judiciary and other places. And that is that irrespective of what it is that you do or you plan to do, make sure that you're prepared to meet whatever the challenges are. In other words, you should have a fetish for preparation. Try to, to ask of yourself every conceivable question that someone else might ask of you, and try to answer those questions to yourself. And if the question demands research or reading, or demand, if the question demand that you face yourself, then do it. Have a fetish for preparation so that then when you face the actuality of an individual who is an adversary or who is a friend, you will not be a stranger to the question; you will have prepared for it. And that, that's across the board, okay. But that's, that's one thing. Now if that seems obscure and indirect, then you know I will try to work on that. Another thing, another level of advice, and usually advice is worth what, what it cost. And so free advice often is seen just that, with what it costs. But I would suggest that--I, I think I said this earlier, that the greatest gift that anyone can give to a people or to a person is education. And that is not to say that education is a panacea, but you can't reach whatever else it is that you need to have if you don't know what it is, or if you don't understand it, or if you don't know how to get there. And you can only know those three things by education. Participate in the learning process. Story_ID: 64973 Speaker 1: I think I might have made a few people angry from time to time when they have talked with me about what it is that they can't do. And I ask them: what is the location of the library nearest your house? And they simply do not know. I said well, this--one of the things that has happened in this country since Andrew Carnegie is that there has been a free library system which represents the accumulated wisdom of the ages, and there's one that's not far from your house. And the librarian will welcome you with a smile and open arms if you go there, and you can do whatever it is that you wish. You can travel to San Salvador, or you can travel to, to Rome or to Venice, or you can walk through the streets of Durbin in South Africa all by opening a book. And there's no one in that book who will tell you, black boy, you can't read me. In fact the book will open itself welcoming you in. I said DuBois [W.E.B. DuBois] said it well: "I can sit and I can have consultation with the greats of the world by just opening a book." So that's another item--read, go to the libraries, take advantage of them; they're yours. Story_ID: 64974 Speaker 1: And then a third thing that I would suggest is that there is in fact no one who is, who is worthless, who is invaluable, who doesn't have something to offer, no one. And all one needs to do is to say that I'm gonna carve out of this incredible mountain of opportunity that which I can do and then do it well. You know, take the words of Benjamin Mays. You know, do it so well that the living, the unborn, and the dead will look down and say that person did that job well, okay, all right. Now lastly, I don't propose, nor do I suggest that I have any great adviser to people, but I do firmly believe this, that it is almost impossible to reach a goal at which one does not aim. Now, it is much better to aim for a star and fall short and hit the moon. In fact, it is better to aim for a trip to New York and make it to Philadelphia. The fact is you have moved. And the worst thing in the world is not to miss the goal toward which you're working, but to have no goal at all. I mean one becomes less than valuable to one's self if one does not think of him or herself as being valuable to the world. And I have no problem with the world saying that: what is it that you think of yourself, fellow? And my response is very simple. I think that God never made a mistake, you know, and if God decided to spend whatever time it was to work on me, that was valuable time that could have been spent elsewhere. But at that point, that was the most valuable thing in his repertoire, and I'm not gonna waste it, and I'm not gonna let you waste it, you know. So, some people can say well, you know, that's kind of arrogant. But it's not. It's pride, it's pride, and if one does not have some pride in him or herself, the world is not likely to have very much pride in you. Story_ID: 64975 Speaker 1: And my statement in one of those writings that I gave you I think sums it all up. And it summed it up in this way, and that is that the story of this little boy and this man. Said that this man was seen every day at a certain place, and he would preach, and he would cry, and he would sing, and he would preach, and he would cry, and he would sing. And the little boy said to him, Mister, what are you trying to do? He said, well, I'm trying very hard to find the just people in this society. Maybe they can help me to change this society. The little boy said you're crazy. Ain't nobody gon' help you change anything. He said, why do you still do it? And the man said simply this: I will continue to do it because if I don't, I'm afraid that society will change me. So I work to try to keep society from changing me. Speaker 2: That's beautiful. Story_ID: 64976 Speaker 1: You know, what strikes me is when listening to you and Badi Foster [HM], and the enthusiasm that accompanied what you did and the progress that you made. So you have--do you think--I'm just--how do you feel when you--when people don't recognize those--the people who were the exact beneficiaries don't recognize? Because I--there is something happened in our window of time as African Americans, you know, between the '50's [1950s] and now. Something, I--me personally, think went awry, mainly in terms of, of people understanding, the understanding. And I'm just wondering if you have a comment on that. Speaker 2: Well, I, I would be dishonest if I would say that I--it doesn't concern me, because it does concern me. I think that there has been an effort by people who are not shall we say a part of us to say to others that that was yesteryear, that was yesterday, and you are different, you are a today person. And so you shouldn't be associated with or identified with those efforts because you're likely to be labeled as being radical or not being acceptable or not assimilable, you know. You know you--so I think that there's probably some weakness of mind in some persons who for whatever reason decide that the best thing for me to do is to put distance between me and the bridge builder, you see, the person who gave me a hand to pull me across (unclear). I'm over here now, so I don't really need that person anymore. I don't, I don't wanna be identified, 'cause that might hold me back. I don't wanna meet someone up in front and have them ask me how did you get across the bridge, and I tell them that dust and soul helped me. And they wanna know, well, what do you think about that person. So I, I don't want that, and that's unfortunate. It's unfortunate because we operate on a continuum. The extent to which one goes up a ladder--you know, there's an old statement that was made by one of the writers about African proverbs that there were--there was a group of elders sitting around discussing the future. And the noted that there was one who said absolutely nothing. And finally this one who said nothing got up and decided to start climbing up the next hill. And the only thing that this one had to exhibit was as high up that hill he went, the more his tail showed. And he was in trouble because since nobody knew his value, when there was some attempt to do his tail end nobody was there to protect him. Now that is told with a bit more graphic language than I had used. So it is essential, in my judgment, for us to recognize that we are bound, and there's a demand that we protect each other. And the only way that you can be sure that you're gonna be protected is that you remember that you're part of a continuum. But there are those who simply don't know that and don't believe that. Story_ID: 64977 Speaker 1: Then there's the old legacy of slavery. It's still alive and well, divide and conquer. I think Harry Belafonte [HM] and Colin Powell [HM] had a little discussion about some of the terminology that's used in that regard. And unfortunately it's alive and well, and, and it's--I refuse to let somebody tell me that I can't be involved with a friend who is a shoeshine, you know. And in fact, I have looked my, my best sometimes until the guy who was, who volunteered to do my shoes made me look all right. And how, how, how can I then ignore him, you know? And then that's putting it as far away as I possibly can. So there are those who--and to bring it even closer to what you're talking about, there have been times when I wished that I could share the, the, some of the days and thoughts that I still remember so clearly in our efforts to develop the DuBois Institute [W.E.B. DuBois Institute for Afro-American Research, Harvard University]. and to save the Department of Afro-American Studies. But I realized that the people who are involved now are quite busy, and they have their own--they have agendi that just simply do not permit them to even think about the fact that at one point there was somebody who actually started this thing, and the same would be true at the law school. You know, there, there are, there's a history, and I think that--I don't recall right now the name of the person who made this, but the person was at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who made the statement that if those who ignore history are bound to repeat it. And so it would be, in my judgment, appropriate and good to build on that history and to make sure that it's captured, that it's a part of, of, of what it is that you're doing and what it is that you're about. But there are those who were told, and for whatever reason, they yield to that teaching that you simply don't need to recognize, or be a part of, or in any way acknowledge or participate with those who have gone before. And in many ways that's sad. In other ways it's tragic. I don't know what to say to folk about that except that I have always tried very, very hard to make sure that I'm standing on the shoulders of people, but for them, I wouldn't be where I am and what I have. And I want them to know it, and I want them to appreciate it. We are all stronger when we do that. Story_ID: 64978 Speaker 1: Two more questions. What about Bok [Derek Bok] and your relationship and what that created? It was one white man, one black man, one white man with a lot of resources, you know, and in a position a black man with a lot of talent (unclear). So I'm trying to--what did that partnership create? Speaker 2: I think that's probably described very, very, very well in, in two or three writings. I believe that Derek Bok, when one looks at his background and his history, one sees that here is a person who is quite sensitive to what the world is all about. When I first met him and had a chance to sit and chat with him, I, I better understood that at one point in his life he--Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham] worked for his father. And Higginbotham used to write letters to Derek Bok when he was at Harvard School out in California with his mother from his father. Now the beauty--part of the beauty of that is his father was one of the few, if not the only at the time, who would give Higginbotham a job. Higginbotham had finished Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] with honors and all of that, and he arrived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and couldn't get a job. And so Derek Bok's father gave him a job, as his father was a judge in Philadelphia. His mother and father had agreed to disagree, and his mother became--his mother married Efrem Zimbalist, Sr., and they moved to California. But, but Derek--so Higginbotham wrote back and forth to Derek for his father. And then when Derek went to finish college and Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], he had thought in terms of then being a basketball star. But he had a legacy to live up to, so he went to Harvard Law School. And then, of course, later he married his lady who was just a magnificent person, who was a daughter of Gunnar Myrdal. And, and there you see it as a, as a, a joining of sensitivity, and concern, and history and all of that. And so when, when he then looked at the world, he had the American dilemma, and he had his father's history, and he had all of this in front of him. And I think that in many ways he was very much awaiting, maybe without knowing it, for someone to come along who could help put into action some of the things about which he had thought. Story_ID: 66139 Speaker 1: So I was just asking--you were describing one part of the partnership. What about the other? Speaker 2: Yes, well, I think the other part of the partnership came about because I had been pretty much conditioned. I think my mother [Rachel Jewel Kirkland] made it, made it clear that you have been, you have been raised, you have been trained all your life to do that. Now I'm not sure that she knew exactly what that was, but she knew that whatever it was she felt anyway that her son was prepared to do it. And I understood, albeit though at the time it was stated somewhat oblique, that Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] has an obligation at this point in our history to do something about the question of race. And if it is to do something about a question of race, there are three things that it can do: one, it can make certain that the children of those who have tasted the, the sting of, of oppression are included in the people that we train and we educate to rule this society, and it does. I mean I just (unclear). And you can do that. We can find a way to do that. The second thing that we can do is to share the impact of our resources. So we develop plans whereby we made sure that suppliers to Harvard's--to the millions that Harvard spent, that some of those suppliers were described through the euphemism minority, but that they were black, and to some extent, if there were available Latino or Native American. And so we could do that-- Story_ID: 66140 Speaker 1: And one of the things that we did, I wondered how Harvard's [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] sort of big money could be used to help leverage things. So I went in to the president [Derek Bok], and I said you know, we carry 45--no, 40 and 50 million dollars in life insurance on our employees. Suppose we put 10 percent of that with black companies. Suppose we put 10 percent with black companies. And he said how do we do that? I said it's very simple. They can do it by participating with our major carrier, or we can place it directly. I said but we prefer to ask our major carrier to participate with them. He said fine. So I went to Atlanta Life and North Carolina Mutual and advised them that we were going to make this, this effort. And our major carrier at the time was Aetna, and that we advised then Aetna that we were gonna do that. Aetna screamed. Remind you now there are five--there are $450 million dollars, and they're screaming as if it was, it was theirs. Oh, no, no, no, no, it's ours. And you're gonna have 90 percent left. Think of yourself as a 90 percent return on a 10 percent investment. And so they calmed down, and we transferred $45 million dollars of Harvard's insurance to two companies, North Carolina Mutual and Atlanta Life. And guess what? Floodgates opened, next thing MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] did it, then others did it, then others did it, all right. So the use of our resources, that's affirmative action. And who is harmed by that? A lot of people are helped. Nobody's harmed by that. Okay, so the president said--we had a signing and you know it had been out over the airways and over the press, and (unclear) the comp--you should watch the institutions, they're like dominoes falling in line, doing the same thing. If Harvard can do it, we can do it, okay. I knew that. So then, what is the other thing that we can do? The other thing that we can do is that we can become a moral leader. Let's do things because they are right, they are the right things to do, like the support of a program for Ellen Jackson, honoring her for her bravery, for her courage. And then suddenly all of the, the hypocritical statements, all--they, they ceased; at least they went underground, you know. (Unclear) you mean to tell me Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is recognizing this woman? We did, okay. Story_ID: 66141 Speaker 1: Another thing that I, I understood from Derek Bok was that he has a legacy that he wants to leave. And that is that on his watch the institution did not fail to grasp the opportunity to do something about the society in which the institution lived and was a part and developed, 'cause had it done so, it would have just been looked upon as a parasite. And he wanted to do something about that, and he felt that I could help. I felt that I could do it. I needed the opportunity, and he needed somebody who needed an opportunity. And he pretty much said--Nike wasn't around then, but he pretty said what Nike says now, what? Do it, do it, and as long as you do it with the skill and with talent, and do it with the kind of equanimity, the kind of savoir faire that speaks to this institution, no problem. And so, I did what I could with what I had, as Thurgood Marshall used to put it. And fortunately having Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], that's a fairly good amount with which to, to operate. Story_ID: 66142 Speaker 1: Now, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Well, you, you, you cut to the quick there. I don't know. I, I guess first and foremost, I want my, my son and my daughter to say, you know, he was a pretty good guy. And then I would suppose I want my former students to say he followed his advice, and he prepared for things. He had this fetish for preparation. And then I would want my family to say when it was necessary, we could count on him. And then lastly, I would want to go back to a statement that I once wrote, and that is he, he refused to stop preaching, and praying, and crying, and pushing, and trying to--because he was afraid that the world would change him. And he thought that maybe the direction in which he was going was the direction that the, the gods of our ancestors would have wanted him to go. Speaker 1: And what would you-- Speaker 2: That's that. Speaker 1: --what would you want your mother [Rachel Jewell Kirkland] to say? Speaker 2: Welcome home (laughter). I guess I would want her to say that she didn't live in vain. And one day I'll tell you that story about my mother. That's, that's quite a story. Story_ID: 66143 Speaker 1: That photograph was taken in Atlanta [Georgia] when my wife, my son, and my daughter--that must have been 1960--that was about 1961, about 1960, 1961. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Okay, and could you give the, the names? Speaker 1: Yes, my son is Anthony C., Anthony Carlton, C-A-R-L-T-O-N, Anthony Carlton Leonard. And my daughter is Angela Michele, M-I-C-H-E-L-E--it's one 'L'. And my wife is Betty S., Betty Singleton Leonard. Speaker 2: Now this was shortly after our son was born. That was taken in Washington. My son Anthony was born. He was at that time about six months I believe, shortly after he was born. Speaker 1: This was a reunion. This was--what was the date of that reunion for the Harvard black students? Speaker 2: Was it-- Speaker 1: It was a black alumni of the law school. Speaker 2: Right, it was 2000, 2--2001. Speaker 1: In fact you have it in-- Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Yeah. The, and the--this is the wife, Betty Vorenberg, who's the widow of one of the former deans, James Vorenberg. Speaker 2: V-O-R-E-N-B-E-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Vorenberg. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --V-O-R-E-N-B-E-R-G. Speaker 2: The person who's signing the document there is Walter Washington, the former mayor of, and the first black mayor of Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Okay, and the year? Speaker 2: And that was 1967, and the, and the person who is to his left is Elwood Chisholm, and that was me. I was the president of the, of the law--Phi Alpha Delta law fraternity here at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. And Walter Washington was being inducted as an honorary member of the fraternity. Speaker 1: This was in the office of the president at the Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. And the person visiting was Congresswoman Shirley Chisholm. I was present at Fisk at the time and that was a visit by her. She was going to at that point, speak to students at Fisk. And we did that in conjunction with what local women's organization. Speaker 2: That photograph is taken at Harvard. We had organized an Alex Haley Day at Harvard. The person on the left is a reporter for the "Boston Globe," and Levy and, and Alex Haley is in the center there in the darker suit. And I'm accompanying them. When--we're walking in the front of the--(widen the library)--at, at Harvard. I don't recall the name of the man on the right. Speaker 1: This is--we had a--we organized a Cicely Day, Harvard Cicely Tyson Day at Harvard to honor Cicely when she, after she completed two films, one was "Sounder," and the other was "Jane Pittman," and it was the first time that the University had given a day to a honor an artist. But we brought her up and spent, she spent a full day there. Speaker 2: Is that when you first met her, Sir? Speaker 1: I had met her earlier, but it was the first time that I had really gotten to know her. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): In what year? Speaker 1: This was--hmm, when was "Sounder?" That must have been 1970--probably 1975, I guess, about '75' [1975]. I'm not, I'm not--don't hold me to that date, but it was-- Speaker 2: The smaller is, is a photograph of my wife, Betty shortly after we married, and she was walking downtown Washington. Speaker 1: The photograph on the right is one of me when I was 18 years old. I was 18 years old and just about to enter college, and dressed in the uniform of the day. Speaker 2: That was a concert at Fisk. And Vernon Jordon [HM], whom we had known for years, was there as speaker, and my wife, and the gentleman on the left is a concert artist, a tenor whose name slips me right now. But that was at Fisk. That must have been 1980--'82' [1982], about 1982. Speaker 1: This is the Alex Haley Day at Harvard. The man on the left, who to my, to, to the left there is Louis C. Brown. Interesting story about Louis C. Brown. He was on the--he was a medical doctor. He was on the staff of Harvard's medical center there. The woman to his right is Bernice Moss, and directly behind her is Professor Louis Loss. The woman to her right is Betty Harwell. And standing directly behind Betty Harwell is Alex Haley, to his left is my wife, Betty. I am standing next to her, and directly in front of me is a Harwell, is Harwell, the husband of Betty Harwell. John Harwell is his name. The one far in the, far in the corner I can't see right now, but then to the right-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, no, no, no, no--yeah, that's Poussaint and the--yeah, that's is Pusey [Nathan M. Pusey], that's Poussaint. And then all the way over to the right here is yeah, Poussaint. Speaker 2: Okay, Dr. Alvin Poussaint? Speaker 1: Yeah, Alvin Poussaint [HM]. Speaker 2: This was in the president's office at Fisk. That must have been about 1980, about 1980. Speaker 1: This was 1967, and again, this was the law fraternity, Phi Alpha Delta law fraternity, and Justice William O. Douglas is--I'm at the mic. Justice William O. Douglas is next to me, his wife, Mrs. Douglas, and I can't read the name of the gentleman who is sitting next to him. I think--can you read that name? I think it's a Whitecamp, but I'm not quite sure. I'm not sure about that. But that's William O. Douglas, Justice William O. Douglas. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): And the year? Year for that one? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): You remember the year that was taken? Speaker 1: Yeah, that was 1967, 1967. Speaker 2: This is in the Virgin Islands. This must have been 1988 or '89' [1989]. I'm to the left there, and then the person who's standing in the far back in the center is the bodyguard for the governor. Directly to my left is Governor Alexander Farrelly, F-A-R-R-E-L-L-Y, Farrelly; and to his left is the lieutenant governor, Delbert Hodge, H-O-D-G-E. And that's the Virgin Islands, U.S. Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: There we are presenting a plaque of recognition to Congresswoman Shirley Chisholm at the office in, in Fisk, at Fisk. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Okay, year? Speaker 1: That must have been 1980--about 1982, there in the 1980s. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is Clarence Clyde Ferguson. That was 19--that was approximately 1967, about '67' [1967], '68' [1968]. And Ferguson was the dean of the Howard Law School and advisor to presidents and also advisor to Rockefeller. Speaker 1: Yeah, this one is convocation I believe at Fisk in 1978. I was about to speak to the students at opening convocation. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my wife and I on our 49th wedding anniversary. And we were at the Greenbriar, just Greenbriar. I think that's what they call it, just Greenbriar. Speaker 1: Is that the famous Greenbriar? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This is the widow of George Edmond Haynes, H-A-Y-N-E-S. George Edmund Haynes was the co-founder of the National Urban League. And his widow was talking with me at a National Urban League conference. And I believe that was 1977. I was, I was then president elect of Fisk University. George Edmund Haynes was a graduate of Fisk. He'd also help to found the Fisk Department of Sociology...