 Story_ID: 14682 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Rae Parr Moore. Sir could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Norman Allan Van Lier the third--like that--and my last name is spelled, my last name V as in victory, A-N capital L-I-E-R Speaker 1: Alright, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 1st, which was Fool's day, 1947, and I was born in East Liverpool, Ohio, which is near Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], where I grew up. Speaker 1: Alright. What is your occupation? Speaker 2: At this time I am a broadcaster for Fox Sports Net [Fox Sports Interactive Media, LLC, broadcasting network]. I do Bulls games, the pre-game show, the half time and post-game show, and I do a little radio work on ESPN [Inc.] radio post-game show--I'm dealing there--and desire to become a DJ [disc jockey] and play music. Speaker 1: And you are known as a former all-star guard with the Chicago [Illinois] Bulls [professional basketball team]. Speaker 2: Yes sir, I played eleven years in the [National Basketball Association] league, eight of those years with the Chicago Bulls. Story_ID: 14683 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I have to say lobster tail, a little drawn butter, a little spinach on the side. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Jamaica. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, I like to say, when people talk to me they say, "Good morning," and say, "How are you doing?" I say, "I'm above dirt." Story_ID: 14684 Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Helen Van Lier, former name Helen MacMillan Van Lier. Van Lier, V-A-N capital L-I-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: That's a good question (laughs), I know her birthday is March 2nd, I never got the date of birth. My mom's about 78 years old. So we can subtract from there. Speaker 1: About 1924 [sic, 1925]? Same as my mother really, '23 [1923] or '24 [1924]? And where was she born? Speaker 2: My mom was born in Midland, Pennsylvania, where I grew up. Speaker 1: What do you know about her side of the family, how far back can you trace that side? Speaker 2: Well, I can go as far as to know that she's had three sisters growing up, my mom is the fourth child, and two brothers, and--. Speaker 1: But do you know anything about her parents? Speaker 2: I never got to meet my parents [sic, grandparents]. When I was born they were deceased. And I really don't know a whole lot about that side of my family with my mother, more about her sisters, brothers, more than my grandparents. They were not living. Never hear about them as often as maybe I should, I don't know. Just--I didn't know them as I said, they were deceased. I know more about her sisters and brothers and how closely knit they were. Speaker 1: Did they talk about any family history? Speaker 2: Not as much as my father's side, no. Just born there, surviving. Lot of women in the family. Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they got to Midland, Pennsylvania? Were they always there in Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) They were always there, far as I know. That side of my family honestly, I don't know a whole lot about the history of that. All I know, when you go further back, the great-grandparents were--some were Indians, of some Indian descent from that--American Indian, native Indian. Of what tribe, I don't know about that. I know there was Indian blood on that side of the family as we go back. I think there are some people from that family around Jackson, Michigan--MacMillans up there. I do have cousin--distant cousins here in Chicago [Illinois], Ernie and Lonnie and Shelly MacMillan, who played at Bradley University [Peoria, Illinois], and Ernie who is an All-Pro with the St. Louis [Missouri] Cardinals [professional baseball team]. So some background's in that area. Speaker 1: Okay. So mostly relatives on that side are in the North? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father is Norman Van Lier, he's a junior. Spelled the same--actually my father changed the spelling of our name, the correct spelling was V-A-N-L-E-E-R, with a small L. For whatever reason my dad changed it when we were growing up, in that area. Speaker 1: So you have relatives whose name is spelled the other way ? Speaker 2: Yes, I ran into a relative on the el [elevated train] here in Chicago, a Phil Vanleer, and he said, "We're relatives," and I looked at the spelling--"Yes", and when he told me he was from the Kentucky area, I knew the history, 'cause on my father's side, I do know a little more about the history. Speaker 1: Okay now what, what do you know about that history? Speaker 2: Well I can tell you the name Vanleer came from the Dutch owners, slave owners, from eastern Africa to western Africa, of the blacks conquering blacks at that time and selling them to whoever needs slaves. The power of whomever controlled--won out, when we talk about coming over. The Dutch went over to South America--is where it started, in the history of giving us that name, in our family, from South America, to New Orleans, Louisiana, as slaves moved up, from there to Kentucky, to Pennsylvania, Kentucky, Tennessee area. That's the background of my father's family, moving from slave-owners all the way up to Pennsylvania, which is still called the Quaker State, or Quaker States from that to the Dutch is the history of the name, the slaves and how we--probably the light-colored skin of--how that progressed, to where we are today. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you know your grandparents at all? Speaker 2: I knew my grandparents on my father's side, maybe that's why have more history of where I came from. My grandparents were preachers, both my grandmother and grandfather. I was living with them my first six years. I was about four years old when my grandfather died, somewhere in that area, but I lived with my grandmother all through my teen-age years. Maybe I was a little older than that when my grandfather died, but I remember going to church, to their church, in Midland, Pennsylvania. I remember that well. Having to be there at church, listening to the history, talking to my grandmother at night about history, and the Bible, and different things, and challenging things. I think that was the education and why the background is well--more known on my father's side as opposed to my mother's side. I don't want her to get upset, 'cause I don't know her history, 'cause I never sat down and just talked about her side of the family, like I have with my fath-, 'cause I lived with my grandparents 'cause I was around them quite a bit. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Now, are there any stories from that side of the family about people, you know, from the early part of the century, the nineteenth century, or anything? Any stories about slavery in Kentucky, or--? Speaker 2: Not really stories about it, I just know this--those are the things I learned where we came from, at least the Van Lier family and--on the father's side, but not any stories about anything. My grandmother would just kind of put emphasis on working hard, and I'll never forget the garden in the back of her house. And of all the people on the block we lived on she had the cherry tree in front of her house and I found all this fascinating--person--of farming and her to have the type of land behind the back yard that you would raise a few crops and stuff in the neighborhood that--fenced in, and then have a cherry tree. And one of the big jobs I had was watering the plants, keeping the place fresh and beautiful and my chore of turning that dirt over. My grandmother canning all the food, after the harvest of what little property they had in the back there. That was--I think that's where I learned my work ethic also to do that, but those were the days you say, "Yeah, we had to do this," but do it for our own sake now, as opposed to doing it for someone else, raising crops or whatever. Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story about how the family went from Kentucky to Midland, Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: I know they did it but I never heard any stories of anyone telling me anything other than that. And what brief moments my grandmother would bring up--'cause there was land in Tennessee, Kentucky, that was given to me. First thing I thought about was Jed Clampett (laughs), 'The [Beverly] Hillbillies' [television program]. Let me shoot a gun and get some oil, coming out of there. But the family seemed to be very uptight. Why do I get the inheritance of the house, the land and everything from my grandparents, when I'm playing pro [professional] ball at the time? They seemed to be a little jealous of that, or upset. I said, "You can have it. Go ahead. Doesn't bother me," but that's how close I was with my grandmom. Story_ID: 14685 Speaker 1: Tell me about your, your mother [Helen MacMillan Van Lier]. What was she like growing up, and what did she do for a living? Speaker 2: It may be difficult for me to say, being that's my mother, I love her dearly but (pauses)--early days I thought that--now I can say it as a grown-up I thought, in my selfish way of thinking, very unfair for me to have to be babysitting my brothers all the time. I had three brothers--older brother who had left home early and he was parented by another man. He had a father, not the same as my father [Norman Allen Van Lier, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Were there just four of you all? Speaker 2: Four boys and one sister who came a lot later, as my mom said, "It was a pleasant mistake." She was born--I was going off to college [Saint Francis College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania] basically when she was born, so I don't know her as well as I should, 'cause I haven't been home that often. But I felt I was more responsible for babysitting than being allowed to be a child. I have always had that sense of negativity in my life about that situation. Because, I mean, I guess you did things in those days. I wondered, "Well, why can't you be home to deal with this most of the time?" And I just didn't like that, and the responsibility of always, maybe getting spanked or something for something they did that I didn't control. I thought it was definitely unfair. I hated that and resented that to this day. But that's just my growing up, and what I think about things. At the same time, I think--. Speaker 1: Was she away at work or something? Speaker 2: Well work, or, just out and about, or wherever it may be. I just thought it was--took some childhood time away from me for what I wanted. Speaker 1: Did you spend a lot of time with your grandmother? Speaker 2: Well my first six years of living, I lived in my grandmother's home. I didn't live at home. I was there, then when it was time to go to school, I had to get back home--it was only a few blocks up the street, a few houses up the street, but that's where I stayed. For what reason, I will never--never touched upon that, but that's where I stayed. And enjoyed it--seemed to be a happy life. When you live a life with religious people, I think there is a calm about what's going on, and up every morning, and people singig spirituals, aunts and everybody kind about things, explaining things, not close to doing spank-you things, but explaining things--of what's right and what's wrong. And those are the things that I remember in the fundamental foundation of how to grow up, I think that just stuck with me more than anything. Story_ID: 14686 Speaker 1: You said you had a chance to like, kind of debate about, you know, the Bible and history and other things and talk about it. Now that,k that is kind of unusual in some--well, it's not the normal thing in a lot of black households. Kids aren't allowed to debate these things. Speaker 2: Well, that's what my grandmother did. We could sit down she'd read the Bible, "Well, what do you think about this? And where is your opinion on this as you read it?" I think that came from history and reading classes and one reason I majored in history, maybe. 'Cause I just, "Okay, well this is interesting." But I was always allowed to explain what--or my thoughts on the situation and my grandmother explained to me what she felt, that whatever the Bible was quoting. What story line would come from there. And no, we had some challenges. I didn't believe in everything. And one thing about--"I will turn the other cheek when you hit?" I said, "Grandma, I don't believe in that." And I said, "For me, I think black people are set back because we keep turning the other cheek. I'm not turning the other cheek. You hit me, I'm gonna hit you back." She said, "Well son, we don't want to go that way, but if that's your opinion." I'd say, "Yes it is my opinion. I'm not gonna get hit in my cheek and keep turning it, 'cause I think it just sets us back, more and more. We gain nothing." That was my opinion. "I'm not turning the other cheek." Speaker 1: Okay, where do you think this attitude came, from? It's, it's yours, it's been yours all your life apparently cause you have that reputation, but was there anybody around you who kind of inspired that kind of--or modeled that behavior for you? Speaker 2: Just everyday living. Living right there where I grew up in Midland, Pennsylvania and around--and I got lot of people of a different color, we all are close friends, 'cause I based it on the individual. But the way I saw black people basically being treated, what they were allowed to do and not do, I thought was, "I'm not buying this." Speaker 1: It was Midland--. Speaker 2: This was not Midland, it was just--'cause I love Midland, Pennsylvania. I love my people and everybody I went to school with and what I grew up with and I don't think it's as redline of a town as say, Chicago [Illinois], Boston [Massachusetts]. It was just that, "Okay, you're in the back of the line, you're in the back of the bus, your this--." This was the '60s [1960s] when I grew up. And seeing that, I wasn't going to accept that, "This is just the way it is." No, I don't want to hear that. This is the way it is 'cause we as black people allow this to take place. That's the way I thought. So therefore when I think about having--conversing with my grandmother about these things, "Hey, well this is my belief." And, no I'm not going to turn my other cheek, and she is one of the few religious people I know would turn the other cheek. A lot of people talk this game, but my grandmother was real religious--Baptist upbringing, truly to the grit, everything that we're supposed to be about religious. She was that. And I respect that, but I just had other ways of approaching it. Speaker 1: Okay, the reason why I ask about Midland specifically like that, is because a lot of people think that discrimination only occurred in the South, you know. Young people now don't have any idea that that could go on in Pennsylvania or Ohio or Michigan someplace, you know. Speaker 2: I don't think young people have an idea (pauses), even about what discrimination is about. In my opinion, we are so busy fighting each other and killing each other we have no idea what's happening in the outside world, as far as what I've seen. I don't think we've progressed a bit. Story_ID: 14687 Speaker 1: Let me ask about your father [Norman Allen Van Lier, Jr.]. I don't know, is there anything--well, the original question was about your mother [Helen MacMillan Van Lier]--do you have anything else to say about your mother's personality? Speaker 2: I think my strong personality is about my mother. I want to give some kudos there about--she's very aggressive, usually says what's on her mind. My only situation that I thought was different, if I had grown up to be a schoolteacher or whatever, I wonder how the devotion of being aggressive and in fair play in real life, how far that would have gone. But I became this celebrity and I saw my mom change a little bit on that area, and I'm not saying all for the good for me, selfishly speaking. I'd rather have the low-key, not the boasting bragging type of thing, or the over-aggressive, what I can do for this family and that family. First of all, I didn't make that kind of money, and I'm still--reputation as if I got millions and millions of dollars in my pocket, because you're associated with the NBA [National Basketball Association]. That's not true. I work hard, very hard--raise a family and fifteen years ago, I was digging ditches. Not everybody is a--. Speaker 1: Actual ditches, for real? Speaker 2: I dug ditches in Seattle, Washington. I was laying cable on the ground there. Trying to get a job in the NBA coaching, and everything. I had seventeen (unclear) for head coaches, not one returned a call. And I was desperate to get a job at that time. But, growing up the way I did, I was first at work, last to leave. And in between all that, trying to move on. Because when I feel sorry for myself, I had to put food on the table. I grew up learning how to work, once again it all goes back to my grandmother--planting the garden, getting up, doing the chores. If you don't do your chores then, "Let's sit down, let me talk to you, you didn't do your chores. You gotta do your chores everyday." Then you had the freedom to go out and do some of the things you should do as a kid. Speaker 1: Okay, now what about your father, what kind of personality did your father have? Speaker 2: Well, my father was completely opposite of my mother, I thought. Very laid back, didn't say much. Worked in the mill. My dad passed away in 1988 a very--worked every day. Typical Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] steel worker out in Midland, Pennsylvania. Went to work, came home, had a cigar, couple drinks. But didn't miss a day. And loved sports. Would get into a mood, a cheerful mood, we'd joke and clown and talk about things. And demanded that you respect your mother. I mean, that was always--he would say, "Well, this is your mother, but this my wife, so respect that." Speaker 1: Okay. How did your parents meet? Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: I don't know how they met. I guess there in Midland, I would assume, (pauses) I honestly don't know how they met, any romantic story, or all that I just--I don't know that. Speaker 1: Okay. So you and your father close? Speaker 2: Very close. My mom and I were close I mean it was--thought should I say now that, that like I said as a grown-up being fifty-six years old I would bring up situations where I didn't think I'd be baby--the babysitter of my two brothers underneath me and my oldest brother was basically gone with his father at that time so, no, I just thought it was--gave me too much responsibility of their character of what they did it reflected to me 'cause I'm the one got the spankings. And I resent that even to this day that I would get a spanking 'cause they did something it wasn't me I didn't do it. (laughs) Story_ID: 14688 Speaker 1: Tell us something about growing up in Midland [Pennsylvania] now, now you were actually born in Ohio right? Speaker 2: Well, a couple of miles away--the nearest hospital. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: That's all that was. Midland didn't have their own hospital the other hospital right over there--was born on April Fool's Day a few weeks before I was supposed to be born it was kind of--couldn't find my father [Norman Allen Van Lier, Jr.] when they did and he'd joke and, "It's April Fool's Day." (laughs) Speaker 1: That part of the country is like all football. Speaker 2: Very much so. Speaker 1: You know, that's Ohio and Pennsylvania up in there that's football country. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: So, what was growing up like, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: The greatest thing I thought about growing up in the small community outside of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was the friends you got to have, to grow up with--to watch them grow, every little thing in town everybody knew about. I think my biggest heroes I had a kid were my high school [Midland High School, later Lincoln High School, Midland, Pennsylvania] heroes. The pros [professional athletes] had nothing to do with anything. I love Roberto Clemente, the greatest [base] ball player who ever lived in my opinion. And the kindness that he gave back to the human race, all of that. And his having some tough times in Pittsburgh being that he was Latin--I forget exactly what country he came for but, all those things were neat. But my greatest heroes were high school guys that you looked up to. One in particular, I loved, was a guy named Richard Lake who--across the street--now his nephew is Cornell Lake, who played pro football for the [Pittsburgh] Steelers for a number of years and I think he's still in the league, but. Speaker 1: He's a defensive back? Speaker 2: Yes. Rich Lake, he was a good-looking guy. He played football, he played basketball, and he was kind to everybody. No ups and downs about him. He was a nice human being, had something to say, never mean to us as kids, he was a little tad older than us, just a kind human being. And that touched me, 'cause his family is well known in the town as great athletes. Brett, who we played--we called him 'Fatty' (laughs)--who played on our state championship team together, these guys had mean streaks in them. His brother Gene, who's the father of Cornell, Cornell Lake, maybe that made them tick or whatever. But Richard, was the kindest human being and a great athlete--but he took time with us kids. And that was always important--just took time with us, to be a part of us as kids. And that I will always cherish, and I thought he was a hell of a ballplayer basketball and football. And I just said, "I will be like Richard Lake." Speaker 1: So that was--Midland's the kind of town where high school football's a big deal, and basketball--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Football. Every weekend, you talk about weekend--and shut down and get ready. People change shifts in the mill to get to the football game be it Friday or Saturday night to go watch that football. And if anyone have watched my career closely in playing basketball, all the things I did on the basketball court are from playing football. I was defensive back--know how to fall, get in the air, get flipped, knocked down, fall on that wood floor, never break anything, get bruised--'cause that's football tactics. You know how to fall, you know how to go after it, you're gonna be aggressive and you cause the action, that's football. And that's what I grew up loving more than basketball. I loved baseball more than basketball. Basketball was just a sport, I fulfilled for the winter months. I just happened to be a pretty good play-maker to go along with that, but football was the game. Speaker 1: Okay, so you--when you were a kid, as you say you worked hard, and then you enjoyed sports, you had time to play sports? Speaker 2: I worked very hard. But there was also--and one thing about my mom [Helen MacMillan Van Lier]. Now this was the one thing I truly love about it--"Now you're gonna to sit down, and you're gonna study and read this book, and get your grades." And then my dad would couple that by saying, "Okay, your grades are one thing, we can always work on that, your citizenship is more important to me. You represent this family, my name." And when I see the citizenship, which I think today in school they don't even have citizenship grades--your conduct (with emphasis), your conduct is important--"If you want to act up, then we have a problem here." So that was the balance of my parents' approach to what you need to do. And, "Yeah, we'll work on your grades. Citizenship? You better act right, every day, be a gentleman." And that was the name of the game for my mom and pop. Speaker 1: So I guess you'd say you had a structured upbringing. Speaker 2: Very much. Very lucky to have family, very fortunate to have family. A lot of kids today just don't have structure. Which is the biggest problem we have in the black community, far as I'm concerned. Story_ID: 14689 Speaker 1: What grade school did you attend? Speaker 2: Well, Midland Elementary School [Midland, Pennsylvania], then I went up to Midland Junior High and Senior High [later Lincoln High School, Midland, Pennsylvania], which was a combined school. And when I look back on these particular things, probably some of the greatest times of my life was just going to school. But communities like that you remember forever, every song that was a hit that year, the girlfriends you had, your buddies--falling out--your enemies or rival people in the town, you had that. I mean we used to play Ohio Avenue in Midland against Penn Avenue. We used to have rivalries just to play each other in a small town like that--that started that. Then you extend that togetherness with the rivals of the next town over. Speaker 1: Well what was the rival school--high school for Midland? Speaker 2: Well, we had several 'cause we were such a good basketball team and football team at the time that just about everybody we played--you had Beaver, Pennsylvania, Monaca, Rochester, New Brighton [towns in Pennsylvania]. The team that was bigger than us, and the label of the high school is Aliquippa [Pennsylvania], where Mike Ditka [former coach of the Chicago Bears pro football team] is from--Man, great rivals. But you know, friendly rivals--we would go at it and pal around after. It wasn't like we wanted to fight each other. The only town that seemed to be so distant from us--Midland, with a good mixture of black, white, whatever, growing up--Beaver, Pennsylvania, the county seat, seemed to be distant. I thought--they always thought, in my opinion, they were better than anyone else around. The county seat--mostly white people going to that school. But I always got along with the Coutries and MacIntyre--I just talked to him the other day, Tommy MacIntyre at a charity thing, and his brother. But that town seemed to be distant from everybody 'cause, "We're the county seat. We're above all this, we don't have steel mills in our town. We have a working class of a 'white collar' against the 'blue collar'." I think that's like Green Bay [Wisconsin, Packers] and the [Chicago, Illinois] Bears [professional football teams]--nasty rivals. But ours was tough, nasty, but not unfriendly, as I put it. We weren't unfriendly with each other, we just kind of, "You--this is your class--," maybe it was a battle of the classes. Maybe that's better put, if I say it like that. That was my first experience of, "Well why do they think they're better that we are?" Maybe that was the first experience for me of the battle of the classes. Story_ID: 14690 Speaker 1: We were talking about just the bigness of high school sports in that area, in that area between Pennsylvania and Ohio, around those legendary schools and so forth--. Speaker 2: Well (pauses) it was big, you didn't realize how big it was 'til maybe you left home. And in the community of, of all the black, great athletes that were coming out of Midland High School [later Lincoln High School, Midland, Pennsylvania]. No one really going off to college, I think the first, he's a distant relative of mine, Leon Love, who went to school with Oscar Robertson [professional basketball player]--best man at his wedding, out of Cincinnati, Ohio. Went on--education--and that was the first. I think my group of people in the '60s [1960s], now we're starting to go to school. Thanks to [Dr.] Martin Luther King's preachings and moving on. But we would play before fifteen thousand. I mean--something like you'd go over to Canton, Ohio, twenty-three thousand. Altoona, Pennsylvania, twenty-thousand. Johnstown, Pennsylvania, twenty-five thousand. High school, high school--and this, I thought was normal. To get on a plane to fly to play somewhere, we did that. Both basketball and football in Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: It's gotta be--it's kind of a--today, in Chicago [Illinois] Public League football, you may have a stadium, (unclear) or someplace where teams are playing, and there are like ten people watching the game in the middle of the afternoon. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. I don't now what's happening in the inner city. When I first came here, Man, they'd pack Soldier Field [stadium], to watch high school football. I don't know what happened, what happened to that. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well, I think the Catholic schools are still like that--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Catholic school's still strong. [Frank] Lenti over at Mt. Carmel [Mount Carmel High School, Chicago, Illinois], where I taught a little bit, over there when he gave me an opportunity after coming back here--very strong. And that Catholic organization is strong. I would have people coming down the street, "Norm, the Caravan, Mt Carmel!" "Whoa, you remember that?" That's how strong their alumni situation is, which is good. But at least public, back in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] where it's kind of lost some of it's luster a little bit in high school, but it's still strong. Used to take Pennsylvania and New York, and now Florida I think has taken over producing and California has a share--Texas, can't forget about Texas. We used to play the big thirty-three games against those guys. So it was a very strong force, the high school sports. Very well organized. You didn't hear much about athletes getting in trouble either, in those days, 'cause they were well controlled. And if you wanted to play I think the community at that time was a little stronger about taking care. And the sport wasn't as commercial as it is now. We used to wonder why we didn't get in trouble back in Midland, Pennsylvania? Well, after the game the dance was called 'At the Canteen'--it was above the police station--how you gonna get in trouble? (laughs) It was right there. The police officers in our community, they would take you home at 9 o'clock [P.M.] curfew if you're an athlete--that's how the coaches had it connected. "Hey, you're out a little late there Norm, let's go." I have a great friend that passed away, George Moseley, who was a little more on the shady side of doing things, but a kind human being. He would stop and say, "Hey, hey, I'm out here doing my thing, but I'm gonna tell you something, you get home, you got a game tomorrow." That's the way the community was. [Nicholas] Nicky Vuckovich, these guys, I mean, white, black, polka-dot or pink, we were, we were a community. That you took care of your athletes 'cause you had a job to do, you're entertaining us and, "You can't stay out here and get in trouble like us. You're not allowed around this pool hall." Things like that, so that was unique, that was different. And a lot of these people, now that I'm getting older and where I'm at, are passing away. But you remember uniqueness, the barber shop where you used to hang out, Mr. Clark and everyone, "Boy get home, go call your mom [Helen MacMillan Van Lier], we're going to see the Brooklyn [New York] Dodgers today." And I would say, "Mr. Clark it's not the Brooklyn Dodgers, it's the Los Angeles [California] Dodgers." "As long as I'm living, it's Brooklyn. Now call your mother and let me talk to her 'cause I don't believe you," you know. So those things are so great in growing up, your experience in being around a community of people, that's what Midland meant to me. All these things--and at least where I've gone in my life. And it's such a treasure to go back home and people say, "You know, we think about you all the time 'cause you're an extension of what we can brag about, as an athlete that's gone on," and things like that. So that's good, it kinda softens your heart about people that think of you in that way. Story_ID: 14691 Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers, or people in the community that kind of inspired you, or took an interest in you in particular? Speaker 2: Well, the one teacher--first of all the assistant coach we had [at Midland High School, later Lincoln High School, Midland, Pennsylvania], [Edward] Eddie Olkowski, was one of the good people in my life. He was assistant coach when I was playing basketball--the basketball coach. And he's won about six, seven state championship titles himself. I played under [Henry] Hank Kuzma, who was more of a strict father about what you had to do. Eddie would come in and buffer that, but he also brought the education. Now a little story about Ed, one time. I'm in junior high [Midland Junior High School, Midland, Pennsylvania], he taught junior high geography. I am sitting at my desk fascinated with the swastika sign--don't ask me why. Just drawing it on my book. I said, "That's a Z turned up, or like--" I was just fascinated with, "Well, how did it get that sign, that symbol?" Which is fear to me--it's a symbol of hate anyway, but I'm drawing it, and he decked me. Knocked me right out of my desk. I mean he, Pow! I was like, "Whoa!" I guess he lost three brothers--two brothers in the war, to the German situation out of Poland. And that was my first understanding of what this meant. And the whole World War II, which I majored in history and concentrated on, that started it right there. But, picking me up--I guess he lost it--took me outside, apologized, he was saying why he was this. And I think around that day I did that, was the remembering of it, the death of the brothers. I guess it was near that death, I guess it touched him, hit him. But boy, he explained it, talked about it. "Yeah I understand--lost control. Something that was not good in your life, or the rest of the world as far as that goes." But I learned in a hurry, as a black person, what that sign meant. And I love Ed Olkowski for that. He's always been a good human being, a good person, a caring person from that point. He taught geography, and he was my assistant coach, so I truly enjoyed his presence. This next teacher, an English literature teacher, Mr. [Melvin D.] Laing, taught me more about race, and here's a white man, he always taught with the pointer, and a pulpit, the desk up there--not normal, more of a professor. Speaker 1: He had a little lectern? Speaker 2: Yeah, whatever. I call it a pulpit--preacher man, with grandpa and everybody. Hey, he took me one day, out of class. We're golfing. He said, "This is what I think you're going to be in, one of these days. I just want you to venture out and learn what other people do in life." I'll never forget that. Then one day he stood at the board, he drew a line like this, then he drew another line like this, and he circled where the two lines met, "This is your life, this is another person's life. It doesn't mean anything out here, but when you meet, circle that, 'cause that's what tells what kind of person you're going to be and that other person to you." White, black, polka-dot or pink if you know the English language, what you need to do and you can explain yourself. "It's not about arguing, it's about debating and talking and listening. If you can do that you're going to go so far--forget your athletic skills because you have a tendency to be a friendly person, a people person, but you've got to master the English language and learn." [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was so right get this education and go forward 'cause you can explain yourself without arguing about it. Negotiating I used to call it, or debate but have a passion to listen with it. Mr. Laing taught me more about that and he would sit there sometimes in class this little--see, you don't have to get in one's face all the time to get some attention or whatever it is--he would set there like this, and look at you 'til it got quiet 'cause you knew he wasn't saying anything, everybody's noisy throwing paper at each other all of a sudden you, "Well, okay." He'd say, "Now that I have your attention and since I'm here as your teacher you should respect the fact that I'm here and I'll respect the fact that you're--" he wouldn't yell at me. I loved that and that's what I learned from Mr. Laing and also would teach, make you read, get in front of the class. He made me come to school one hour early before school started just to read and go over whatever you need to go over to help you. My high school basketball coach Hank Kuzma was like that, but Mr. Laing started that he started that and he started pushing what Martin Luther King was talking about, "Just give me my respect and I'll give you respect, and I'll give you respect and you give me respect." It started with him. He never was nasty to anyone but firm and stern about the teachings and that will always remain with me the way that man was in life, Mr. Laing. Story_ID: 14692 Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Midland High School, later Lincoln High School, Midland, Pennsylvania], now you were an athlete when did you start athletics, formal athletics? Speaker 2: Oh, we started that in grade school [Midland Elementary School, Midland, Pennsylvania]. Our town was such as system when you talking about--see there's no accident you get fifteen, twenty thousand people watching you play in our town, for instance it was maybe six thousand it was a little smaller than most, but we could have easily gotten that many if we could seat that many people. Our town wasn't but six thousand, seven thousand compared to some. Well, grade school the system was already set for you especially basketball. You were running the system already then in grade school, junior high before you even got to the varsity, 'cause this is the way it was run. You got summer league programs that you were already running the system. Small town can do that. You're getting ready to represent and be there and the high school ball players had to be around--be your coaches, and be part of the playground system, to keep you out of trouble, and earn a little money for the summer. This was the way the system was, the structure was. But you don't have the big sneaker contracts coming in grabbing kids like you do today with stars and changing the whole system. No, your parents were involved, if your parents didn't attend some of the meetings on Thursday nights or something, you might not play that week. Your parents had to be involved--reason why you're doing something or not doing something if they didn't show up they didn't care, or somebody better show up for you at those meetings. That's how tight, the way we grew up, back in Midland, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you entered high school, you knew you were going to play sports, I guess. At this point you knew what you were going to do on some level. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, I wanted to play--not say you were guaranteed to make it. I don't think I was that good that "Let's get the attention of Norm over here." I'd play hard. I left Little League to play junior high. I had eligibility to still play Little League football, but I wanted to be with the big boys. At the time, junior high was the big boys. I didn't get to play, I sat on that bench. As a matter of fact, the most disturbing thing that ever happened to me on that level, I got in a game that was--people--we were getting beat so badly, so the coach started putting in the substitutes and whatever, and I was running the half back at the time--I was very small. I was running an end sweep, and this guy grabbed me from behind from my jersey and slung me like a dishrag. The thing that disturbed me, was my teammates were there laughing at how I got tackled--and we're getting our butts kicked? I think I developed an attitude after that. "You got nerve to laugh, and we're getting our butts kicked, and I'm just out here trying to play. It's not funny." From that point on I said, "I'll never have anybody laugh at me again." Even if I have to go over there and kick one of my teammates' butts for laughing. That's what bothered me more than anything. And I'll never forget that--playing Beaver Falls Junior High School [Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania], at our place in Midland. Never, will I ever forget that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a back, in football. Speaker 2: Well I played back, eventually, quarterback in junior high [Midland Junior High School, Midland, Pennsylvania]. My last year of eligibility in junior high school I was a quarterback. We did pretty well--my first venture in that area. Not bad. I always wanted to play quarterback. I had dreams of being the first black quarterback in the NFL [National Football League] that would be successful. That was my dream at one point. First of all, it was a thinking man's position. I always wanted that challenge. Speaker 1: I think at that point there hadn't been one, had there? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, please. There were no black quarterbacks over there. Speaker 1: I think there was like Briscoe--. Speaker 2: Look, they had of factor (unclear) black quarterback in high school. Speaker 1: I think wasn't it Marlin Briscoe? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Briscoe became a wide receiver for the Buffalo [New York] Bills [professional football team]. [Sanford] Sandy Stephens from Uniontown, Pennsylvania, one of our big rivals, was a quarterback with the Canadian [Football] League. He was at the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Golden Gophers. Speaker 2: Yes sir, and there's a couple that surfaces then. Speaker 1: Sandy Stephens, you don't hear much about him anymore. Speaker 2: Sandy Stephens was one of my heroes because he ran it and did it. Speaker 1: That jump pass. Speaker 2: The, the smarts, the thinking part was what intrigued me. The physical part, "Oh well, I can play that. I can do it. I can throw a ball. I can run a ball--desire to do it." But the thinking part--the plays, the set up, "I ran this play." "Why did you run that?" "Run deep. Let me throw a long pass. You just stretch this out. Now I can throw a little flare out here to one of my teammates." Just thinking about the game was always two or three steps ahead of what you wanted to do. Anticipating. That's what it was all about to me, because that's what makes quarterbacks (pauses)--and I don't understand today why they have to have the offensive coordinator call the plays, I'm out here running it. Speaker 1: Right, in those days that wasn't that--I think Paul Brown was the only coach at one time that did that, that called all the plays. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, he sent guards in, he was the first. Every play he sent a guard in, or a tackler. Speaker 1: Messenger guards. Speaker 2: Messenger guards is what you called it to give the play. Speaker 1: The [Baltimore, Maryland] Colts's [professional football team] Unitas [Johnny Unitas] called his own plays. Speaker 2: Right Terry Bradshaw [of the Pittsburgh Pennsylvania Steelers, professional football team] called his own plays. I think you get more into the game of what's going on-- and if you need help go to it. I just think that's so overrated today. I think a lot of things in sports are overrated. You got fifteen thousand coaches on the sidelines in a few groups and, you know--and I learned that in basketball you look at the benches today in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. There's more coaches sitting on the bench than ballplayers. Ridiculous. Speaker 1: Okay so when you were playing you had like a coach and the assistant. Speaker 2: And a trainer, that was it. And they got more done too. Story_ID: 14693 Speaker 1: I was asking you about the various positions you played in these baseball and sports, baseball centerfield and shortstop. Speaker 2: Right, I played centerfield and shortstop. We had a gentleman who passed away [Samuel] Sam Zigerelli, great athlete, great hitter was a shortstop. Sometimes he would pitch or do something else and move me to shortstop--really was my position. Quick, lanky, can field and to be honest was probably the most natural of all the sports that came to me. Baseball was simply easy to play--I switched hit. George Bradshaw was my legion manager he said, "Hey bat left-handed 'cause of that curve--you've got a problem trying to hit a curve." First time at bat I hit a home run 410 feet up in Highland (ph.). I realized I got a little power left-handed, and I always remember using a Brooks Robinson bat left-handed but a Jackie Robinson bat--thick handled bat right-handed. I always--'cause I just felt more comfortable with a swing for whatever reason. But that--and I got a '65 [1965] offer to go to Little Rock, Arkansas minor league for the St. Louis [Missouri] Cardinals. And my mom [Helen MacMillan Van Lier] said, "No, you've got to go to college. You got to get an education." Story_ID: 14694 Speaker 1: You were interested in history in high school [Midland High School, later Lincoln High School, Midland, Pennsylvania] or geography? Speaker 2: Yes, when Mr. [Edward] Ed Olkowski kind of brought that along with that swastika sign that kind of, "Okay what's the background of all this, did they--." When I was born just right after World War II years--couple of years removed, just growing up, talking about "The War" stuff, I guess it got me interested. Just my background as a black person, the history of it all, I kind of wanted to know. And it got me interested. Speaker 1: Okay now, did you--when you were in high school did you envision yourself as becoming a professional athlete all the time, or did you think that you would do something else, or be a coach or--? Speaker 2: I dreamed of being a professional quarterback. Because there was this--no one black played the position, basically, that you could look up to. And I thought, "Oh, I'm getting a chance to do it." I dreamed that. I used to dream all the time about doing it. I never envisioned that I would actually play professional ball. It never dawned on me 'til I got to college [at Saint Francis College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania] that I got a shot at this. I never--my thing was to get an education and go back and teach school. And maybe coach along the levels of high school. Like I said, that was the biggest thing going on then. Professional sports was not even close to my being as big as (unclear)--being around the high school area. Speaker 1: Did you know anybody from your area that went on to play pro ball? I mean, when you were in high school, did you see any--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The only people growing up were the Mike Ditkas [former coach of the Chicago, Illinois Bears], the Joe Namaths [former quarterback for the New York Jets]. And Mike Ditka has always been a hero of mine, and it's funny we end up in the same city. And same temperament, basically, you know. I love that. Story_ID: 14695 Speaker 1: In high school [Midland High School, later Lincoln High School, Midland, Pennsylvania] you all won several championships when you were playing. Speaker 2: We won a lot of conference championships. We won one state championship in 1965, 31 [wins] and 0 [losses], still considered one of the best teams to come out of Pennsylvania basketball-wise. Great All-American [Simmie] Sim Hill, I played with and Ron Brown, Brent Lake, Steve Alston were the starting five, good friend of mine, Joe Prodonovich. We had a nice, nice, close knit team, and at one point in time Joe Prodonovich was caught smoking a cigarette from the head coach, and demoted to the second unit. We had five blacks starting now and once again, not really heard of in our area growing up. The town basically--when I started seeing something that was always together, all of a sudden kind of, "Ooh, five blacks." Little grumblings, in other words. "No, we can't start five blacks, that's--No!" Well we started five blacks and didn't lose a game. And that's after a couple games into the season. And that's--now that was the first time the prejudice type of things were starting to creep into my life that was very noticeable. 'Cause now I'm old enough to--"Well, what's wrong with--just start the five best people you got. Let's go." And Hank Kuzma, didn't give a 'mmph' about what the people had to say. He put it on the court. And I admire him for saying, "This is just who I'm starting, take it or leave it. This is who I can win with." Wherever he went through as a head coach to do that--and it seems silly to talk about it at this time, but that's what happened in my lifetime. Speaker 1: You won the division championship playing football too, right? Speaker 2: Yes, my senior year [1965], we won our conference, baseball we won our conference, and football we won the state championship. That was part of the highlight of my career in high school to be a part of all those three conference championships. Story_ID: 14696 Speaker 1: In terms of your social life in high school [Midland High School, later Lincoln High School, Midland, Pennsylvania], how was that? It was a small town, you know, with some racial division, but how was your social life? Speaker 2: I kinda did what I wanted to do, you know, that's the way I felt. Interracial dating and stuff, people still look down on that. You kind of had to sneak around and do it. And I was with several young ladies--houses, I just went there. To their houses. "Hey what's happening? How you doing? What's going on?" I just thought, "How silly is this? We all live here. This is the United States." A lot of blacks would disagree with me, and maybe a lot of whites disagree with me. You can't help but mingle. This is my life, my thought on it. And I like to be around people I like. They're nice to me, I'm nice to them, and what color they are, I don't know. As long as you're nice to me and respect me, I'm going to respect you. That was my way of thinking, 'cause I thought, honestly I went in a different direction more than most of my buddies and other people, 'cause I did what I thought I felt was right. And that's just the way I approached things. Story_ID: 14697 Speaker 1: Now you mentioned music, I think, when you were taking a break. What kind of music do you remember from those days? Speaker 2: I love music. I remember one--there's a young lady that I used to be crazy about named Maria, I won't go any further with her last name or whatever. 'Be My Baby' by the Ronettes, 'Ooo Baby, Baby', by Smokey [Robinson and the Miracles], that was the Motown/[Phil] Spector years of music. And all of that, I still remember. Some song will come on and I'll say, "Man, I was doing this at that day, I was doing this." Herb Kent, right here in Chicago [Illinois]--used to hang with him when he was on 'VON, [WVON-AM radio]. Man, the music I remember so well, but then when I went to college [Saint Francis College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania], I went into the rock and roll thing. The Beatles entered the world of my music. The Rolling Stones. The group Chicago, I think changed more than anything. Earth, Wind, and Fire and Chicago. Man they brought that jazz/rock/soul rhythm. Speaker 1: Horns and all that. Speaker 2: Horns, man. And that's still to this day my favorite group, Chicago, the Rolling Stones, Earth Wind and Fire. And I went into a different bag in college. I remember when I came home, I had the sideburns. My dad [Norman Allen Van Lier, Jr.] said, "What are you, black Elvis, now?" (laughs) Okay. "What did you do to my basement down there? This parachute thing hanging out of the, out of the--?" So it was, it was a change in my life from experimenting with everything out there from the college world. And I loved the Beatles only because they said, "Hey, let's stop all this fighting." 'Cause you gotta remember from this point on, I watched four people get assassinated in this country. Place is going crazy. [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], the Kennedys [President John F. Kennedy and U.S. Senator Robert F. Kennedy], and Malcolm X, who is one of my heroes. Speaker 1: Now he was assassinated the year you graduated from high school [Midland High School, later Lincoln High School, Midland Pennsyvlania], right--'65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Yes, '65 [1965]. And only to learn from a man that had such anger about the way blacks were being treated, but then goes on to get more educated about the world, and then retract some of the statements about maybe how he felt about whites, that not everybody is bad. And then some of his approaches to the Muslim faith, of being truthful about things, which really got him assassinated. I gotta admire a man who just tells the truth, and lost his life on just being honest and straight up. That meant more to me in life because all of a sudden, "Hey, I gotta look in the mirror." This is what I believe in and I gotta stand for. I'm not harming anyone or whatever, but man, we gotta try to live together here. Gotta try to get this in order. I admire that. Speaker 1: Did you and your friends talk about Malcolm X ? Did you--I know Malcolm X before he died was--in '64 [1964] he was linked to Muhammad Ali, bringing him into the Nation of Islam, and Malcolm X was separated from the Nation of Islam. Did you and your friends talk about that, or did people in the barber shop talk about it? Speaker 2: Well, a little bit. For some reason, the Muslim thing scared the everyday black person, I think, 'cause it was a voice stepping out--a very religious sect of our life. I think people got a little afraid to deal with that. I found it interesting that somebody's speaking out and doing something, but in a different way maybe than Martin Luther King at times. And being brought up in my grandparents' church--upbringing--so there were a lot of things pulling at me. But once again, I'll get back to Malcolm X. He's an individual, he said, "Go out, put the best foot forward," and this is the way it is. But stand up for you, the person, who you are by being a man, woman or whatever. That's what I learned. That's what I took from it. Speaker 1: It's unus-, I don't want to say it's unusual, but it's different for a young man in '65 [1965]--if your parents weren't involved in that to be involved, to idolize Malcolm X, 'cause so many black people as you say were afraid of Malcolm X. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well you got--I always was told to tell the truth. Church--not always told the truth. You would see things happening here--small towns and activity going on here, "Whoa, whoa, whoa! You're supposed to be about religion and everything else, and then you're doing this and that and well, you're a hypocrite then." You were afraid to say that 'cause you belong to the church? Well Malcolm X wasn't. That's why I loved him. 'Cause he told the truth and lost his life on just being honest on what the truth was about--we all know the history of that. So who's going to argue with that? So therefore I honor at least myself for stepping forward and being who I am. Probably was held back from getting coaching jobs--being put here. 'Cause I just always said, "Hey, this is the way it is, whether I did wrong or not. This is the way it is--you're a racist, you're a racist, or you're a hypocrite or you're a friend or you're friendly." Whatever it was. "Here's the truth, live with it." Story_ID: 14698 Speaker 1: When you were a senior [at Midland High School, later Lincoln High School, Midland Pennsyvlania], now how did you choose--now you ended up going to Saint Francis College [later Saint Francis University]. Speaker 2: Saint Francis, yes, in Loretto, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: And this is a small school and you were a--you were the biggest star in a small town. But, but you had a lot of offers. You said that you got an offer from the St. Louis [Missouri] Cardinals [professional baseball team]. There had to be some football offers too, I would guess, even though you played quarterback and people were--they probably wanted to make you something else. Speaker 2: Well that's true, I got most of my scholarships from football in major schools--USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], [University of] Nebraska [Omaha, Nebraska], [University of] Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], a little story about that. Coach came up to Midland High School, and Joe Namath, as everyone knows, is from our area. He just had had a great, successful career at Alabama--with the New York Jets [professional football team]--bonus. I'm graduating in '69 [sic, 1965] by then--Super Bowl whatever the deal was with that--but before I went to college--high school, coach came up, "Norm Van Lier, throwing that football like it, however son I didn't know you was colored." And my name being Van Lier, I guess the scouting wasn't the way it was. I said, "Yeah, I am." And I'm not going to Alabama in 1965. You had no one there, forget that. Now that started it, right there. I went to Arizona State [University, Tempe, Arizona], recruited, and a guy named Frank Kush scared the hell out of me. The way he--too military. But in our day, most coaches had that, but he was over the edge as far as I was concerned. Successful coach, and I do believe he was from Pennsylvania. No way. My mom [Helen MacMillan Van Lier] kept saying, "You're too small to play football." I said, "Look, I can put it on." I'm twenty pounds lighter than I was, you know, the weight for TV purposes, but (pauses) and then baseball came along, offered--but you can't go to college. So I end up going back to my high school basketball coach Hank Kuzma, he said, "Go to Saint Francis, start anew, stay in the state of Pennsylvania, everybody knows you from that area. Go to school there, you will get an education, and let me tell you something, you're a better basketball player that you give yourself credit. You are a great basketball player." Story_ID: 14699 Speaker 1: What was Saint Francis [College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania] like? This is a small school, I know. Speaker 2: Oh, it was a small school, had about six thousand students (unclear) residents there and commuters. Speaker 1: That's about the same number of residents that Midland [Pennsylvania] had. Speaker 2: Yeah, but you look at it from my point of view, that was huge to go--and this is your college. You didn't know everyone on campus but it was the first time--how can I put this?--that my self-esteem was beyond anything I could imagine. Everybody loves you 'cause you play sports or not--they looked up to you. You were their celebrity on the campus. You felt pretty good about yourself. Now the job is to perform. And once again, some of the closest friends I have is because I went on to Saint Francis College and that relationship. Not only passing the athletic skills around with everyone else and dealing with it, but the mind, the education, the talk--it was the sixties. We were still talking about what's gonna make the world better, and what we're all about. Let's face it, in those days, now you're talking about drugs entering that whole scene of everything. You had the riots taking place. And all the things that were going through from the high school [Midland High School, later Lincoln High School, Midland, Pennsylvania] days, watching people get assassinated, people at least on the campus were starting to give a voice about what was going on. Story_ID: 14700 Speaker 1: Now this is 1965 when you're a freshman? Speaker 2: '65 [1965] when I went to school, yes. And I'm now, I'm now at this point in time [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] had not been assassinated. 'Cause there was both good and bad when I went to college [Saint Francis College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania], by way of thinking, where everyone's coming from. I came to Chicago [Illinois] here, Easter vacation. And went I went back to campus, I had no idea Martin Luther King had gotten shot that day and I was on a bus. When I got to campus that evening, I was, "What's going on?" This is Ebensburg, Pennsylvania where the bus stopped for me to go to Loretto [Pennsylvania] a few miles away. People were out celebrating. I said, "What's happening?" "Martin Luther King got shot." Speaker 1: They were out celebrating? Speaker 2: Celebrating, yes. Yes. "Whoo man, that--" Speaker 1: Now that's an ugly part of this that we dont--that a lot of people don't know about. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, once again--. Speaker 1: A police officer in Chicago told me that on his radio--he's a black officer, one of the few--and his white partner got a call on the radio, and the other white cops were on this going, "Yay, Martin Luther Coon is dead!" That's the kind of thing that--. Speaker 2: Yeah, well I heard them say, "Well that nigger's dead." Whoa. Dr. [John] Powers of--my history teacher there, lived in an apartment right there and he saw me trying to get there, and he brought me in his apartment and told me this. He said, "Do you believe this?" And I said, "No," and I became very, very--it was my junior year, in '67 [1967], am I correct on that? '67 [1967] '68 [1968]--, Speaker 1: '68 [1968], yeah. Speaker 2: --'68 [1968], and I was a very, very bitter person at that time. Now believe it or not, maybe that--'cause I focused on playing basketball only, and I didn't want to be bothered with anybody. And it wasn't the campus people as much as it was just the townspeople--had to realize that, it was the townspeople and not our campus. 'Cause everybody would come and they would--and be it white, black--we didn't have many black people on campus, and very upset at that. And that's when I realized, "Well, these people are strong to the point, you know, about what they believed in. And some of the families they've come from--making their parents think differently. 'Cause I've gone home with some of them. Just like my father [Norman Allen Van Lier, Jr.] wasn't very receptive to a lot of white people coming to my house in Pittsburgh--in Midland, Pennsylvania at the time. Then maybe the trust of what was going on in those days. So it was some times--and sometimes I try to get everyone to understand why I act the way I do, and why I feel the way I do. And it bothers me when they say, "Well let go, let go of the slaves, or let go of this." Every year, there's stories about the Holocaust, and God bless you, you should have stories. Well why in the hell can't we have stories about slavery? No, I'm not going to forget. No I wasn't part of it, nor were all these people in the Holocaust. But there are stories every year about it. You won't let go of that, nor should you let go. But please don't tell me to let go of two hundred years of this and that--in 1865 when you free everybody to go up there, now it's time to work, you build a railroad across this country, but you hire Chinese. A black can't get a job. No. No, that bothers me, so I get uptight that we can't cling on or hold on to those 'yesteryears' of why we treat or why we are today, as black people. And I still say we haven't progressed in a lot of areas with this. Which is a shame. Story_ID: 14701 Speaker 1: Well, how was your--was college [Saint Francis College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania] life for you, from '65 [1965] to'69 [1969]? Speaker 2: Basically great, changes in the world that we had to deal with. I lost a dear friend in a car accident when I went home [to Midland, Pennsylvania] Christmas night, as a sophomore, actually going out to see two girls. Hitch-hiking to go meet them at a party. Got killed by a drunk driver--and I got scars on my hand now. My mom [Helen MacMillan Van Lier] called me to tell me that my friend 'Sandy' Morris Martin was his name, died in the hospital after getting hit. I reacted, hit a phone booth--didn't have cell phones in those days--I hit the (unclear) with that. They said, "You'll never play again." I put a gap that big, and broke this finger, and this was hanging off. They sewed it back together, and I played that next week. I went on a vengeance of that. 'Cause it was a drunk driver--a white man, that got off. But it was our fault we were on the road. But a drunk driver killed my friend. That is something I think about every single day. His death before me and, you know, it's something that (pauses) is tough. But you go on, man, and you take that and then pray, and say, "I'm gonna play." 'Cause he was telling me something that day, before he got hit, and I don't know how I didn't. Eubie Marshall, the All-American at LaSalle [College High School, Wyndmoor, Pennsylvania]--we were getting ready to play them. He said, "You can't watch Eubie Marshall, man, he's going to eat you up." And I said, "Man. I'm going to D [defense] him up, like he's nev-." BOOM! That's exactly what was--I was airborne--death, then the car slides. And, I had to go back to school and maintain. The sad part about all this, and sometimes I wonder why I bring it up, is that his mother never spoke to me again. 'Cause she thought it was my fault that we were out--just going. And a good friend--a relative of everybody, Chuck Gomez--Mr. Gomez is a wonderful man. Every time he sees me he comes and gives me a hug cause he's consulted me, "Hey man, come on, people act strange toward death of this type. We know he loved you, you two were the best of friends that you could find. So keep getting on with your life and, don't let this ever bother you." Speaker 1: Yeah it's a tough thing to go through. Speaker 2: It's very tough to go through. And so don't think I don't think about that every day 'cause--but we have challenges every single day. And when you start standing around feeling sorry for yourself, you just go outside and see how some people have to live. And you'll back up off that. Speaker 1: It can be worse. Speaker 2: Oh yes, it can be worse. I think the saddest thing in my life is to look someone in the eyes, and they don't have a dime, or anything to eat that's legit. Not that fact you're out here running a scam, or doing this and that, and you're healthy enough to go to work. Like I said, I dug ditches, you can go do it. And people, "Well Norm Van Lier, you're digging--," "Yes, I gotta work." But to look in someone's eyes that shows hunger, and you don't know where your next meal is coming from. And I mean really, the brain is gone, the mind, the thinking is not rational anymore. That to me is the toughest thing in the world.. And for us as human beings being in this world and basically not do a damn thing about it, is, is really sad. Really sad. So things could be a lot worse than whatever I've had. Story_ID: 14702 Speaker 1: Let's change gears a minute, and go into the lighter stuff, which is actually basketball. Now, how did things go at Saint Francis [College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania] in terms of--. Speaker 2: Man, I had a ball up there playing and it was like--I felt good. For the first time playing basketball, I realize, "I'm good. I'm good. I'm better than what I thought I was. I'm ready to go." Speaker 1: So your coach [Hank Kuzma] was right. Speaker 2: He was right. And my college coach played for my high school [Midland High School, later Lincoln High School, Midland, Pennsylvania] coach at another college. Steubenville, Ohio. Johnny Clark. And that extension of what I was about just went right on into that. And the minute I--well, we couldn't play as freshmen in my day growing up, freshmen, which I think is still a good rule. About if--you're about academics. Now we know that's all out the window. Speaker 1: So now we know you can be a pro [professional]. In 2003 you can be a pro. Speaker 2: You can be a pro at eighteen years old if you leave school, you know. But it was different, 'cause it was about academics then also, which I cherish. It's a joke today, especially the football world. Only because they use that system in the basketball world, because you have to use college as your springboard to move on. And we know it's all been a joke in the academic realm. It's not fair to the people who really want to get and achieve their academics. So it was a learning process for me to set the freshmen--hunger to want to play a few freshmen games. I think we played about six or seven games as freshmen--and that desire to get out there--once I got out there man, there was not one person--I said, "You know I'm a sophomore, but you better come join me. 'Cause I'm about winning, and we're going to play." And I was in that gym every night, in between my hours of having to study. 'Cause we had study hours for us, the athletes. Story_ID: 14703 Speaker 1: You were a History major [at Saint Francis College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: I majored in History and also Special Education, 'cause I went to school all year-round. 'Cause my dad [Norman Allen Van Lier, Jr.]--"If you come back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], you will go to work, and you will go to that steel mill." And I didn't want to go to that steel mill. I did, I stayed in school all year round, and I made two majors and a minor there. So, because I'd stayed in school, and with the help of some of the professors--and being maybe as a small school, they helped you. You wasn't lost in the shuffle--here's a major school, but a small school. And it--that was a great thrill. You know what's a great thrill, is just to go to class and achieve and pass. 'Cause I felt, "Aww man, I'm accomplishing everything I want." Struggle here and there in certain topics, but everybody's willing to help. That was such fun to do that and achieve. Because at that time, blacks were not going to school as a whole, for what we were doing on the athletic world--and getting an education and going back and help. I became this history teacher which I used a small bit of my life, 'cause in the off season we weren't making the money young men are making today, so we had other jobs. And one of them I taught summer school. And that was, that was a great thrill for me to have left Midland, Pennsylvania, to get my degree, and leave out of there graduating. Speaker 1: You taught summer school in--? Speaker 2: Cincinnati, Ohio. And off-season, I sold time for Avco Broadcasting [Corporation] before Phil Donahue moved to Chicago [Illinois]--out of Dayton, [Ohio]. And that's what I did. Speaker 1: Right. That's when Phil was in Dayton. Speaker 2: He gave me a little, little view of the real world that's out there also, without the athletic continuance of--so it was worthwhile to me, and I loved going to Saint Francis College. It was just--first of all, it was one of the most scenic, beautiful places I've ever been, up in the hills and mountains. Now, Pittsburgh has the same setting basically, but with the steel mills and stuff, you didn't appreciate it like you did when you got away. I mean, when it snowed up there--you know snow didn't melt 'til May 'cause with that cold and elevation, you're up in the mountains a little bit, just gorgeous. Absolutely gorgeous. All these pine trees, deers running by, and the setting itself. So, "Oh, this is all right." Story_ID: 14704 Speaker 1: Did you all win any, any titles or anything at--[Saint Francis College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: We, we--you gotta remember in those days only thirty-two teams went to NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] tournaments. UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles] dominated, 'cause they should have with the talent, but you win two games and you're in the championship already. It wasn't like today, you gotta win about six or seven games to get there--a little more difficult to get there. But, independent--we didn't have many conferences in those days. Being a small school, we were twenty [wins] and five [losses] my sophomore year. Nineteen [wins] and six [losses] my junior year. Eighteen [wins] and eight [losses] my senior year. With people leaving the, the institution, and the talent trying to come in, but nice recruiting and good winning but if you didn't have the backing--NIT [National Invitational Tournament] was just as big as NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association]--if you didn't have the backing--there's teams with less records than we had, and we played maybe a better schedule, believe it or not, than some, but we didn't have that following that you need to pack that Madison Square Garden [convention center and sports arena] and all those places at the time. We deserved to go to tournaments, but we never got invited. One opportunity we really had a chance to go, we were twenty [wins] and five [losses] that year, we were going on only two losses at one point, and we lost back-to-back games to small schools--Steubenville, Ohio or Geneva College and Westminster [College, New Wilmington, Pennsylvania], I do believe. Where [Charles] 'Buzz' Ridl came out of and eventually coached Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. But you talking about rivalries--small or not man, those were some good schools, great schools to play against. And we got knocked out with the committee watching us. And Geneva College, which is in Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania, they didn't just beat us, they killed us--they ran us off the court. I blame you, Geneva for me not getting into the tournament. But that was beautiful. That's what it was all about. Story_ID: 14705 Speaker 1: NBA [National Basketball Association] draft in '69 [1969]--you actually graduated from school [Saint Francis College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania] with a degree. Speaker 2: Yes sir. Speaker 1: In '69 [1969] in the NBA draft, you were drafted by the [Chicago, Illinois] Bulls, is that right? Speaker 2: Well draft day was May 12th actually, the day I graduated (pauses) 1969. Dick Klein--Bob Logan, a local who worked for the [Chicago] Tribune [newspaper], and Bob's still a dear friend, he called and said, "Hey, Norm Van Lier, you've been drafted by the Chicago Bulls." I said, "Who?" "The Chicago Bulls." Speaker 1: The Bulls weren't that old. Speaker 2: The Bulls were two years old. I said, 'Wow! Okay." I had also received a phone call from Tex [Texas Earnest] Schramm [Jr.], the late Tex Schramm of the Dallas [Texas] Cowboys [professional football team], to have a tryout to play football if I would come to camp there. Baseball was done at this point. I think the skills of playing--honestly of playing baseball, you miss four or five years like I did I think it's hard to come back and deal with, 'cause this--when I went to school I stopped playing baseball, which was one true love. And then I got a call from the New York Nets [basketball team], saying I was drafted by them--they had two leagues in those days--the ABA [American Basketball Association]. I said, "Wow, that's good." A week later I got a call from [Richard] Dick Klein who owned the Chicago Bulls at the time. Said, "I want you to report to camp, we got this new coach, [Richard] Dick Motta--August 18th." And I said "Well, Mr. Klein, I can't make it." He said, "Well, what do you mean you can't make it?" I said, "Me and my buddies, we just bought a Volkswagen bus, and there's this concert we want to go to up at Woodstock [New York]." (laughs) He said, "Wood what?" I said, "I'm going to this big concert, now I can come a couple days later." He said, "If you don't come, don't show up." I said, "But, we were planning to go to this." And I missed Woodstock. Speaker 1: So you went to camp, you missed Woodstock to come to camp. Speaker 2: Yes, I did. And I was there--wasn't there an hour and Dick Motta said, "Go back, come in September, you made the team already, I didn't need to see you." I said, "You gotta be kidding me." I wanted to see this group Canned Heat--old rock and roller. And the unbelievable story--a year later, I'm in my Jaguar [automobile] driving cross-country--Route 66, ended up in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Went up into the canyons and this group was playing volleyball, and I stopped and some guy from Chicago happened to be there, "Hey, Norm, Norm Van Lier," 'cause I just got traded back to Chicago. I said "Yeah." And it was the group Canned Heat, playing volleyball. And I got to play with them and stay with them for three, four days. Unbelievable, how life can be. I believe in affirmation, anyway. I just--I truly believe in that. So it happened. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Alright, so you, you were in Chicago, you report back--did you get a chance to report back in September? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I came back. That's when camp started and the season started, it's a lot earlier now. I mean, we were there--we started earlier in those days. They've pushed it back a little bit and bunched the games up now. We started around the first of September in those days, playing ball. You get August, October--I mean in August--months like that you better be ready to play. So I came to camp and Dick Motta came to camp, we started--the exhibition season started. I made the team and was playing a little bit, and the next thing I know I was traded to Cincinnati [Ohio, Cincinnati Royals basketball team] for two years before I came back to Chicago. Story_ID: 14706 Speaker 1: You went to Cincinnati [Royals basketball team] now, in Cincinnati [Ohio] you played--the first year you said you played with Oscar Robertson. Speaker 2: My rookie year was Oscar Robertson--got traded. I get traded--the season was just ready to start. And it took me a couple of days to get down there--stopped to see a friend at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] driving. So when I finally got there, they didn't open up for a couple days later like other teams. I walked in the locker room, I'm ready to play and here's my head coach, Bob Cousy, there's Oscar Robertson, there's Jerry Lucas. I mean you're talking about these All-Pro people here. I just was like, "I've died and gone to heaven." I just couldn't believe I'm playing with these people. I'm part of this. And to play with Oscar, I got to start after the first six games of that year. I'm in the same back court with Oscar Robertson, who in my opinion is the greatest basketball player pound for pound that's ever played the game. Best all-around player, I could put it that way maybe. Lot of people in Chicago [Illinois] get offended if I don't mention Michael Jordan, who's great--I mean he's the best. But Oscar, all around, I loved him. But, I'm loving this, this is great. Then Oscar got traded, I averaged nine points (pauses), maybe about six assists a game that year, my rookie year. Oscar gets traded, and then my next year, the rookie that came in the back court I played with, Nate Archibald. Good buddy of mine, good friend, the most fun I ever had ever (with emphasis) playing basketball that year. Now, I led the league in assists, eleven assists a game. And I averaged seventeen points a game. Speaker 1: Eleven assists and seventeen points a game. Now when you think about those statistics, now--I mean nowadays there's nobody doing anything close to that. I mean, not eleven assists and seventeen points a game. Speaker 2: Well, you know, there are people like [John] Stockton and [Earvin] 'Magic' [Johnson] are gone, but they were in there, but I think what's happened today, and I mean no disrespect for the league, but let's face it, the way they've chosen what direction to go in, youth, taking people out of high school. College people, if you have one good year in college, you're gone. And when I played there were men on the basketball court. Today they're boys; that's the way I look at it. Very rich boys by the way. Speaker 1: What did they pay you in those days? Speaker 2: My first contract, and believe me, I took a pay cut when I left Saint Francis [College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania], was $17,500 dollars. Oh yeah, they took care of me, and I definitely took a pay cut. That was thirty some years ago. I took a pay cut. $17,500 was my first contract. I made more money selling two commercial ads at Avco Broadcasting [Corporation] than I did in my salary. 'Prime Time', '[The] Johnny Cash [Show]', and '[The] Flip Wilson [Show]' were the number one shows at that time and I got some good spots at that time to deal with. So I made a nice buck. And I taught summer school. The most money I made was $250,000 for four years. It was like a million dollar contract, deferred, and I lived off that for a long, long time. And people say that was too much then. "That's too much money you're making." "Okay, whatever." I didn't take no more then $80,000 home at any given time. I make a lot more money now than I did then, I can tell you that. Speaker 1: Cincinnati played with Nate Archibald. They were calling him 'The Skate' then? Speaker 2: Nate 'The Skate' Archibald. Speaker 1: Then they started calling him 'Tiny'. Speaker 2: Well, he was tiny, he was a small guy doing what he did. And don't forget, this man, at one point in his career, led the league in assists and scoring. Nate Archibald, he was overlooked in one of the All-Star games I think. He came back--Whew! Let me tell you, probably one of the toughest guys ever I had to watch, and guard against because of his athletic ability, quickness, and shooting ability outside. A big rivalry was when they moved from Cincinnati to Kansas City [Missouri]. Our assistant coach, went over there to coach them, so we had that similar style. [Ron] Behagen, Sam Lacey, Scott Wedman. That was a great rivalry going on. Jimmy Walker was even on that team, That's Jalen Rose's father. So we had some good battles. And Nate was tough. Nate was just tough. Speaker 1: I don't know if you remember the game when you ran into Bob Lanier's leg, and it took him out for a while. Speaker 2: Yeah he had some injuries and after he got hurt he wasn't the same, but he also went to Boston, I do believe , and won a championship. So, he still had the skills, and the ability to do things. Speaker 1: Yeah that was a great back court, in Cincinnati, with Nate Archibald in it. Speaker 2: Oh! I had so much fun--I had so much fun. Story_ID: 14707 Speaker 1: Now, how did you come to be traded to the [Chicago, Illinois] Bulls [basketball team]? Speaker 2: Well, they needed a big man, and I was traded for Jimmy Fox at the time. And the first trade was, I was traded to Cincinnati [Ohio, Royals] for Walt Wesley, so I was traded for big men all around, so that gave me a little ranking there. It's not often you get a little man traded for a big man, like that, so obviously they needed a big man in the middle and the Bulls needed a play-maker. That was great. It's a lost art now. Play-making. Hey, the off guard, the two guard, give me some ball players, all these numbers, all these extra coaches make everything down to a science. Give me five people who want to play, and lets rock! Speaker 1: Does it really matter how big a guy you have in the middle? Speaker 2: Not to me. Today, you need height, Wes Unseld is one of the smallest guys I know. He'll box you out, and won't let you get a rebound. It's all about right here. The heart. Speaker 1: He was 6'6" and played, Speaker 2: If that, but he was wide and strong, and had a mean streak in him. Speaker 1: [Charles] Barkley wasn't that tall either. Speaker 2: It's all about position, and how hard you want to play to go get a rebound, because the stats will show you. Myself and Jerry Sloan were the top rebounding guards every year we played along with Walt Frazier. And that tells you about the stats. Seventy percent of the rebounds you get anyway are below the rim. Most people that jump high, are not good rebounders. Speaker 1: That's an interesting point, you're right. Speaker 2: People that can really jump are not great rebounders, It's spectacular when they do get one, they might be a great offensive dunk person, or whatever that is, because boxing out, going and contact bodies and squaring up, is what rebounding is about. You don't usually jump over people who can square up. Larry Bird is one of the best rebounders that ever played the game. Couldn't jump this high. I guarantee you when it came to a rebound he'll get it. Speaker 1: I've heard it said that basket ball is not so much an up and down game as it is a lateral game. Speaker 2: Very much so, the quickness and up and down the court, and if you run the straight line, for instance a center, if he runs from foul line to foul line instead of dunking and putting on a show running down the side lines. If he runs straight back down the court, he'll save fifty thousand miles a year if you do that. Back-pedaling. Bringing the ball down the court. Just look over your shoulder, I may give you the ball. Any opportunity to score. And play alert. Most of the things you do successfully in this sport is not about your talent, it's about your brain. Story_ID: 14708 Speaker 1: Now how would you assess your own talent in terms of, when you arrived at the pro [professional] level. Did you think you were as athletic as some of the other guys? Speaker 2: No, I couldn't run and jump like a lot of guys today. Or then. I was very quick, I had desire, and a toughness. That's what it's about. Hit me, hit me again, sock me if you want. I can put a tolerance on my pain, that I'm going to worry about that pain after the game. Right now, you're not going to hurt me. I'm not even going to show I'm hurt. Take the broken finger, put it back in place, let's go. I had that. That was my talent. But as far as the skills of, "I can jump out of the gym, no." The other talent I had, I could use both hands in handling the ball. That was taught to me way back in grade school. And that was good for what I had to do as a play maker. As a matter of fact I was quicker off the left-hand dribble that I was the right-hand dribble. Now for sixty yards, I'll outrun most people. Hundred-yard dash, my brother used to fly by me around the sixty-yard mark 'cause I was done. So quickness was my game. I would look at you like a counter-boxer. Like [Wilfredo] Benitez used to fight [Tommy] Hearns and all these guys, and Sugar Ray [Leonard]. I'd let you throw the punch 'cause I know offensively, I can't go after you. But you throw the punch I'd counter. Bam! I was reaction to what you did. So that made me a great defensive ballplayer. You make a move, I'm that quick, I'll catch up with you. Anticipate. So, if that's talent, okay. But other than that, no. I always like to use, the fact that I was pretty smart on the court. When I went out to do things, how to get after referees. People would say, "Well Norm's crazy." They use to compare Jerry Sloan and I. Where he hustled and had desire, I was supposed to be the crazy guy. It was always a situation with white and black. Don't think I don't remember that. I'm not intelligent enough to coach, come on--I ran the show. But sometimes you had to do things. [Chester] Chet Walker's tired. We don't want to use a time out. So, I'd disrupt something over here to say, "Hey, get a rest." I got a guy kicked out of a game once, 'cause I said "He called me a name." Referee said, "Time out, get security over there." I said, "Yeah, Chet, sit down, rest, rest." So we wouldn't waste our time out. Dick Motta said, "You're pretty smart that way, huh?" I said, "Yeah, gotta think of something." This is what it's about. Story_ID: 14709 Speaker 1: Back to the [Chicago, Illinois] Bulls [basketball team], when you came back to the Bulls, it was like '71 [1971]? Speaker 2: '71 [1971]. November 12th. Played the Baltimore [Maryland] Bullets [basketball team]--I had a helluva game too. Speaker 1: They say you just came right in and started playing. Speaker 2: Well, I knew the system. Just popped in, I got in the game, and had eighteen assists that night. Something like nineteen points, twenty points. Just popped in and said I'm ready to go. I said I'm ready, man, I got talent around me. The only problem I had adjusting was, the Bulls like to walk the ball up the court, and I was this little guy. People forget how small I was, in this league. One of the three smallest guys at the time. Besides [Nate] 'Tiny' Archibald, and Calvin Murphy. Now, height-wise, people are bigger. The adjustment I had to make was, [Richard] Dick Motta believed in a very physical offense, and a very physical approach to defense. I was like, I try to avoid all that. But, I gotta play it. If this is his style, then I have to deal with it. Speaker 1: So you prefer more of a break--. Speaker 2: I prefer to run the ball up the court. Rebound it. Get it out, let me show you what I have with my speed and quickness, cause the less contact, the easier I can get a bucket. But his theory was: The more I wear you down, the more I'm going to win the games. But his system eventually, in my opinion, got to him, even though he won a championship in Washington [D.C.] with that system, with some great offensive ball players. The defense picked up. We had great defensive ball players, and not maybe a great offense. But we won over fifty games a number of years straight, and we were always right in the hunt and always a team you'd better reckon with, as far as the opponents go. So that was the hardest part for me 'cause all of a sudden, physically I had to start playing a different brand of basketball. And also I thought the system eventually got to Dick Motta 'cause he never adjusted his system for the personnel that may not be able to play that system. Like Nate Thurmond, for example. So sometimes coaches are stubborn with their system, and maybe won't deal away from what they just believe in. Speaker 1: When you arrived, [Jerry] Sloan was there, right? Speaker 2: Sloan was there, yes. [Robert] Bob Love, [Chester] Chet Walker, and [Thomas] Tom Boerwinkle. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Tom Boerwinkle. That was the starting five? Speaker 2: Yes, for a number of years. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) [Robert] Weiss came off the bench. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Probably. Bobby [Weiss] came off the bench, [Matthew] Matty Guokas came off the bench, Appleman--[Rick] Adelman rather. You know we had a bunch of guys on this team. We had a bench, for years. It was outstanding. Speaker 1: Later they brought in Nate Thurmond? Speaker 2: Nate Thurmond came in '75 [1975] in a trade for Clifford Ray, and we ended up playing each other in the Western Conference Championship, and Golden State [Warriors, California basketball team] beat us, which is where Nate came from, but once again, in my opinion I don't think Dick Motta used Nate Thurmond to his fullest of a low post center as opposed to a high post center of his style of play that he used. It was Dick Motta's system. That next year Nate was gone. He goes to Cleveland [Ohio]. He gets Cleveland [Cavaliers, basketball team] in the Eastern Conference Championship two years in a row against the Boston [Massachusetts] Celtics [basketball team]. Just to tell you Nate wasn't finished. It was just how you used him. The guy was All-Pro for eleven years. You don't just stop playing and not be good at one point. It's just how you use him in the system. Story_ID: 14710 Speaker 1: We hear people discuss like whether it's the coaching or the player. A lot of times, I've heard conversation where people wonder whether if the player's any good, or if it's just the coaching. What you just described is a prime example of, you got a great player, but that particular coach doesn't know how to use him. Speaker 2: Well it's a combination of both. I don't care how you put it, a coach has to have talent, some type of talent to win. You don't just win on guys picked up here and there. You may have that heart and desire to play tough, and that's why I think the Bobby Knights [former basketball coach at Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], the coach [Mike Krzyzewski] at Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina] are not professional-style ballplayers 'cause they recruit for college. And they play good sound college, some of the best schools ever, to be in the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association]. And that's fundamentally sound basketball, cause that's a different venue. In pro [professional] ball is more of this run, jump, and great athletic talent put together to try to win. That's why I don't feel in my heart, that these guys will be that successful in the coaching of pros. It's a different way of approaching things. But you gotta have some talent, to win in the pros, that's the bottom line. Sometimes you have talent, and you can do nothing with it. By way of the attitude, playing together, sharing the ball. Who's going to take the shot. Story_ID: 14711 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the personnel on those [Chicago, Illinois] Bulls [basketball] teams. The Bulls began to receive national attention in the mid '70s [1970s] as one of the better teams in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. I'm not from Chicago, and I knew the whole starting line-up. Those guys were Bob Love, Chet Walker--Chet Walker, versatile forward, I think. Talk about some of these guys. Speaker 2: I think you remember teams in those days and just about everybody's roster, 'cause it wasn't free agency. And anytime you sat in the back court and play, Jerry Sloan and I had seven years together. We knew what we were all about, what we had to do, and all those things. It was a different time, with the free agency. But it was one of the better teams not to win a championship. Jerry Sloan was the same way with his Utah [Jazz] teams, one of the better teams he had in the past to not win a championship so it extended his approach. But I tell you what, a great team to watch and look at. Fundamentally sound. You knew what you had. You were competitive every single night and if you weren't you'd get blown out but most 90 percent of the time you were competitive. I think that all that you can ask of a team, and basically good people on a team and no prima donnas basically just hard working people that played the game and that's what the Chicago Bulls were about and I think the reflection and related to the city what it stood for--blue collar, hardworking, let's go after it, no nonsense and you will not come in my place and walk over me and we're gonna--when we left the game you knew you were in a ball game you win or lose. Speaker 1: Yeah, before Detroit [Michigan, Pistons basketball team] you know gained a reputation with 'The Bad Boys' as they called themselves, Chicago--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously} We were the bad boys, but we didn't take it to extremes. Bad boys by way of being physical no one wanted to be bothered with that but we weren't quite as bad as knocking you down on the floor because this is the way we played the game and nasty about it this was in the open, this is what we did. But we didn't kick you and do things I think where Detroit went to the extreme a little bit in some cases. I always respected that team though. I loved the Detroit Pistons in that day because they played similar to what we did in the '70s [1970s] in their '80s [1980s] run and well coached. [Charles] Chuck Daly from Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania, where the groundhog comes out, that's where Chuck was from and he had some damn good, you know, basketball teams up there. And Isaiah Thomas was one of the better ballplayers talent-wise to be a part of that team--had a little mean streak in him. And that was to me a fun team to watch, just cause of the way we played. Speaker 1: Well the Bulls of the mid-'70s [1970s], you all went to the Western Conference Finals a couple times. Speaker 2: Yeah we just couldn't get over the hump and that's too bad in a lot of ways because that would have really put a stamp on what that team was about it. It was basically a college attitude team playing in a pro ball of working hard coming to practice execution running your plays. Being just, and we were a little different from most teams I think one of the great teams of the '70s [1970s] that I respected I think that's why Phil Jackson coached so well and his background--[William] 'Red' Holzman, the late Red Holzman that was an outstanding team with a bunch of superstars that played together. Speaker 1: The New York Knicks [basketball team]. Speaker 2: And I'm telling you, think about how great that team was in personnel but they played together and they won a couple of championships I, I envy and idolize everything that Phil Jackson came from in that area. Story_ID: 14712 Speaker 1: Okay, now with your [Chicago, Illinois] Bulls [basketball] team in the mid-'70s [1970s], you are an All-Star three years in a row and I was it three years all together or four years altogether. Speaker 2: It was three years in a row, actually I think I skipped a year there. In '77 [1977] I made the All-Star team and I gotta to tell you the truth, I had no business being an All-Star. I strictly made the All-Star team simply on reputation. I did nothing that year to deserve being an All-Star. The team had changed from the [Jerry] Sloans, the [Chet] Walkers, to the Artis Gilmore, Scott May. I was the only guy around for that, 'cause I was young enough to play on this team--maybe getting a little older, but young enough to play on another team, which was completely different after '76 [1976]. That goes to show you as a play-maker, if you don't have the talent around you, you're just another person on the court. Speaker 1: When you look back on your playing days, what was your greatest game? Speaker 2: I think Mother's Day, when my mom [Helen MacMillan Van Lier] was up here during the playoffs, playing against the Detroit [Michigan] Pistons [basketball team]. And we lost that game, but I had a great game. Since my mom was here and the group. I had a heckuva game. Then I threw a three-quarter court shot at the end of the first quarter. Hit that. I was, I was on! Speaker 1: Now that's a famous shot. Speaker 2: Well, my famous shot which is not on film. Is still the longest shot in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. Eighty-four feet. We didn't have film in San Antonio [Texas]--end of the first quarter, I just threw it like a football player. They didn't have a hanging scoreboard in the middle of the floor. Their scoreboard was up in the corners--a hemisphere down there. So I could launch it even higher than what they show today. The scoreboards hung pretty low in those days. In these new arenas they're pretty well up there. You can do it. Now you may hit the scoreboard the way I've launched it. This was nothing but net. I was sitting on the bench before the ball even landed. That's how high I threw it. I used to practice that. I was a guard. I had the ball. I hit more half-court shots, more three-quarter court shots--most of it was not on film. I always had the ball when the clock was running out. I practiced that. It was always around that rim. Speaker 1: So that wasn't luck, that was--. Speaker 2: No, I practiced that. Probably from my skills as a quarterback throwing footballs. I made it somewhere in the neighborhood there. The touch, whatever. The distance, how many seconds were left. We did all that. We did not have back-courts 'cause I knew I had ten seconds, now I have eight seconds to get over there, the twenty-four second clock. That automatically was in my mind. The twenty-four second clock. That was just a tick-tick-tick in my head, to know where we are at all times. 'Cause [Richard] Dick Motta would not allow a turn-over. He would just scream and yell at you about turning it over and to let a clock run out on you, he says, "It's ridiculous when you know where it is." And we didn't have it up at the top where you could see it, we had it in the corners, then. So I had to learn--automatic in my mind, the ticking of where we're at. Hit the rim, you got it back, click right away and my job--hey, six seconds left click always because if you didn't get a shot off you would look at me it's your fault. And one day he was yelling at me and Bob Logan missed six shots in a row and I said "Yell at Bob, I'm not missing the shots." He said, "Bob's paid to shoot, you keep giving him the ball it's your fault." I went, "Well okay," I said. It's the one thing I love about Dick Motta, his philosophy and the way he handled things. He said, "Bob's paid to shoot, I would never tell him to stop shooting. But quit giving him the ball, he missed six shots and the shots just rolled. Come on here." I said, "Okay, I like that." Speaker 1: Coaching's more complicated than it seems. Speaker 2: Dick Motta was straight and narrow about that. This is what he expected and you better do it. Story_ID: 14713 Speaker 1: You all [Chicago Bulls basketball team] went the furthest in '70-what? Speaker 2: '75 [1975]. The Golden State [California] Warriors, and we had a three games-to-two lead, coming back home. Speaker 1: Sounds like the [Chicago, Illinois] Cubs [professional baseball team]. Speaker 2: Sounds just like the Cubs doesn't it? At the time, what made it more of a hurt, in thinking about it was the fact that we had sixteen and eighteen points respectively, going into the fourth quarter. Think about that one. Speaker 1: How did they do it? What happened, what was the breakdown? Speaker 2: Well I don't want to say we choked, 'cause I will never admit to that. I think we just ran out of gas. And believe [Richard] Dick Motta did not play his bench like he did to get there. And Golden State did. They played twelve people. They ran at us and ran at us, and they were that brilliant to know that don't play but six or seven guys. And we're going to run them beat them to death. And our own theory of wearing you out, eventually winning game down the stretch, close games, worked against us that time cause we didn't play the bench. Speaker 1: That Golden State team was, you're right, almost non-descript except for Rick Barry. Speaker 2: There you go. It was in and out, in and out, in and out--they used two centers, five guards, three forwards. They were in and out, in and out, in and out. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) One of the centers was Clifford Ray. Speaker 2: Clifford Ray. [George] Johnson was the other. They blocked shots and ran and ran. You had [Alfred] 'Butch' Beard, Johnson, and about four guards that came after you, after you, after you. To be honest, we wore down. If you check the record books, myself and Bob Love played all but two minutes of the last three games played in that playoff. We were worn out. After a while, you reach back for energy, and you just didn't have it. We don't lose games down the stretch like that, when we had leads. We won those games. We were not a great come-from-behind team, unless it was an early come-from-behind because we didn't have the offensive explosion that some had, even though we had guys come off the bench who could deliver that. You had Rowland Garrett, Howard Porter, these guys could score. If you let them play that game. And those two probably did not benefit from Motta's system. Howard Porter could score with anybody, anytime, anywhere. But everybody went, "He can't play." "No, he can't play Motta's system." And not everybody can adjust to that. Story_ID: 14714 Speaker 1: You finished [with the Chicago, Illinois Bulls basketball team] in '79 [1979] right? Speaker 2: 1979, yeah. Well actually it ventured in to 1980, but I got credit for 1979. January 20, 1980. The Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] Steelers [professional football team] beat the Los Angeles [California] Rams, Vince Ferragamo. And that team was my last night playing ball, ever in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. I said the Pittsburgh Steelers--that was their fourth Super Bowl [championship]. And I left right after that, never to look back. Speaker 1: Why did you feel--? Speaker 2: Well, I was on so many painkillers, I don't even remember the last two years playing. I started with this league, and that was what you did in those days. And I wasn't smart enough to take time off from bruises and broken fingers to leave. I think that's what got me into one of the nastiest habits I've ever had, the pain-killing thing. And when this was brought up to Rod Thorn who was General Manager [of the Chicago Bulls] at the time, he dropped me like I was a disease. Oh, yes. I don't mind saying it, even though I respect Rod Thorn for what he had to do for his running things, that's what happened in those days. But today, kids can go out, do drugs, get caught, do everything else, they still give them seven, eight million dollars. "Well, we'll give you another chance, 'cause you can help me win, we'll give you another chance, 'cause you can help me win." New rules come up. But they look at a guy like the pioneers--what they used to feed us, shoot us up, tape us up, and make us go on the court. They look at us like we did something wrong. That will always puzzle me, in that approach about drugs or pain-killers or whatever the deal is. That will always baffle my mind--of how dedicated we were to do this. Of course we had no choice. We did not have guaranteed contracts, most of us. We didn't have long-term. We didn't have free-agency. We were used, and I mean used. Then we want to come back and do something, they say, "You got a problem, We can't use you, we don't trust you." Yeah, no kidding. Speaker 1: Give me some examples of how it's different, nowadays the whole medical thing. You see guys taking off a long time--. Speaker 2: First of all you get the guaranteed contract. I owe you sixty-million dollars, I'm not just going to throw you out the window 'cause you got a drug problem. I got too much money invested in you. Then again, and I say this with all due respect to what this country's about, I do not and wouldn't want to live in any other country but America. But we've become a country that wants to win everything. We want to win so badly, that we will hire a murderer to help us win a ball game. That's how bad we got it. And you want to know why the corporate world never takes blame for anything. That's my belief about what's going on--"If you can help me win, I'll take you." Now what does that tell a young kid down here? I can do anything I want but if I play good sports--Boom!, I'm in. Yet and still, we can talk about Darryl Strawberry, Steve Howe, and all these guys. Darryl Strawberry never had a problem until he stopped hitting home runs. As long as he can hit a home run, "Aw, he doesn't have a problem." Steve Howe didn't have a problem 'til that slider stopped going over the plate. "Naw, Steve doesn't have a problem." He had a problem man, take care of it. The owners and corporate world, the people who own teams, they don't look at it that way, and they never get blamed for anything. Story_ID: 14715 Speaker 1: Look at the market we're selling in the NBA [National Basketball Association] right now. It's all catered to the gangs, 'cause they're the ones who can afford it--all the announcers you're hiring just about. If you're not slick, talk to them 'cause people who go to the games are corporate, very well-to-do people, but the people that watch the games on TV, that's a different crowd. All it is, let's keep exploiting that. "We will not take people out of school, man. That's our slogan, 'Stay in School'." Still you're going to draft somebody eighteen years old. Give me a break here. Speaker 2: It seems like very few of those guys actually play, or deliver, the first three years anyway. They could be in school. Speaker 1: You can't stop anybody from going out, getting money--if you're talented enough to deal with it, but stop sitting here preaching about stay in school then. Hypocrites, as far as I'm concerned. I love the league, it's still a great league. Sport, still there. I don't like the direction it's going in. That's my personal opinion about things, in that area. But don't sit here preaching to me about staying in school, then you go through this. Take that slogan off the chair, which they did. Speaker 2: They had it on the chairs? Speaker 1: Yeah 'Stay in School'. In the meantime, "Let's go get this eighteen-year-old kid over here." I don't take anything away from anybody making money, if you're talented enough to do it. In basketball we kind of groan and moan about it because we use the colleges as our minor-league springboard. And it's joke to the academic world for those who want to go. Proposition 48 [National Collegiate Athletic Association's mandate for academic eligibility] to me is an insult to me as a black person. "Let me lower my standards and my grades, so I can go to this school and play for you and make billions of dollars." There's other people, minorities, that deserve that Proposition 48 who do not play sports. They deserve a shot at going to school. I don't ever hear anything about those people, but always about the athlete. 'Cause that athlete can make money for that institution. Where another kid maybe, really wants to go to school and is not anything associated with being in sports. Give him the break, please, 'cause he wants to go to school. And I guarantee you, he'll do more with his education than most athletes do. That's why I have a problem with that. Story_ID: 14716 Speaker 1: Even looking back when you were playing, black athletes have always come under a lot of scrutiny by the black community, as black celebrities always do, about whether they're giving back to the community, how do you feel about that? Speaker 2: Well giving back, I lived in one neighborhood, I don't care to mention this town, it was a black community, every time I went on a road trip I was robbed. So where do I stand with that one? Until we all get together by way of--that's one reason I like Hyde Park [neighborhood in Chicago, Illinois]. Mixed, education, professional people, and mixed with laymen. You learned to live together. I love that. 'Cause this is a very real, live city, Chicago. But I love Hyde Park for that reason. But my point being, that's why I hate trash-talking in basketball. That's why I hate all the gimmicks in the end zone in football. 'Cause all it is, is an extension of what we do to each other in real life. I'm sorry that's the way it is. "Well that's our culture." We're killing each other like, crazy. You wonder why I don't like it? Yeah, well I fought hard not to like it. I have a choice to date white, or what ever I wanted to do, that's my privilege. But as far as black people respecting each other, that in sports is an extension of what we're doing in our communities. The trash-talker ends up shooting you. It's my pride over this, I got more than you, and all this. I can't see myself and the late [Wilton] Wilt Chamberlain, [Walter] Walt Frazier or [Vernon] Earl ['The Pearl'] Monroe doing that. We'd play hard, some of us didn't like each other, but we had respect. 'Cause when we left the arena we didn't know what was going to happen to us out there, in those days. Now today, giving back to the community, I think we can go a little deeper with that. But the community's got to get themselves together too. Don't just put it on athletes, please don't do that. There's a lot of people, professional people also who would leave the neighborhood also, as a doctor or whatever 'cause of certain things happened to them. Hey, you gotta get together, so we gotta start respecting each other before we start talking about anything else. The main reason I'm saying this is because we do it on the basketball court and it's getting ridiculous to me. Speaker 1: You hear it in the neighborhoods. Speaker 2: Trash-talking, drive-by shooting, when's the violence going to stop with each other, before we move forward? Story_ID: 14717 Speaker 1: There are programs I've heard about in the NBA [National Basketball Association], to try to re-culturate athletes, young men who come into the NBA toward more citizenship, what do you--? Speaker 2: Well, here's my feeling on that. The only program that's going to work is the family program. You can give me all the rest of this stuff, especially somebody not of my color trying to tell me how to live and what to do, and setting up some program about that. No, the family program is the only program I know works. You get families right there with respect for each other, and go to work, and be the best person you can be, is the only plan that works. If you don't have that, then we'll end up just like we are now. 'Cause most of these kids--I definitely feel sorry for them--do not have the up-bringing. Even in our day, if you want to go back in the day, the aunt, the grandmother, somebody raised you, with respect. Not everybody was good in the community, but for the most part, if you weren't good, everybody else around you would let you know you weren't good. If you went out and you had a little hunger going on, you were homeless a little bit, "Well come on in, we'll feed Johnny." "Man come on in, sit down, go to sleep." We didn't let you hang out in the streets like that. "But I tell you what, you got about three days to go get a job. And not go out robbing somebody either." But the drugs and everything else has kinda crept into the situation. But the best program that I will ever recognize, is the family program. 'Cause that's what it's all about. Show me a person who maybe gets a big bonus, and he's just out of high school, making a lot of money. If his family's behind him and he's just done something, you don't have to worry about that. He's got his mind together, his foundation, he knows what he needs to do. The family program, man that goes back to my grandmother. But that's what I believe in. Story_ID: 14718 Speaker 1: What position should sports have, in terms of importance within the community? Speaker 2: In the black community, it's gotten out of hand, because this is the way out, these are our heroes, and everything else. And I don't believe in that. You got teachers, lawyers, doctors, dentists and everything who should be more of a hero, and role models than anyone else involved in sports. Ernest Hemingway [author] to me put it best. "There's only three sports. There's motor car racing, mountain climbing and bull fighting. Everything else is a game." You mess up in those three sports, you lose your life. Too much emphasis on sports. I love sports, I make a nice dollar in the sport world, there's too much emphasis on how important sports is. It is important but then again, how important is it in everyday life? It's all on TV, everything we do, commercials. And everybody who's on a commercial is usually a winner. Not a person who's a runner-up. That's not a good statement. In the day of playing sports the foundation was--to play against each other, to learn how to lose, by way of being not a bad loser. You play to win, but at the same time, someone's going to have to lose. And we have to learn to deal with that, as opposed to--"It's your fault, not my fault." Whose fault is it? It's a team game, and it's supposed to be. But I'm telling you, in the black community, it's the way out, to make millions. I resent how they do the draft. You see a black kid sitting there, they very seldom say anything. They go over, put a hat on your head like a label. "This is who you belong to." Get that hat off my head, I'll be home, call me please. I don't need to be here. Maybe I'm resentful of that. It's a modern-day slave trade. I'm a horse or cattle or something. Maybe my thighs aren't big enough and all that. Speaker 1: Like branding or something. Speaker 2: Yeah, like branding. Here's your hat. And most of the time when they give it to you, they put it on your head. Give me a break on that one. Hey, I belong to who? Okay, thank you. And then you look at the people sitting there expecting to get drafted, and all the family sitting there--"I'm gonna get rich, the lottery's here today." And if you don't get drafted, you look at that person as if he did something wrong. Jesus, I'm just trying to play. See that night, when they're doing that, that's money-making for the NBA [National Baskeball Association]. It's making cash dollars. Sit there and have the draft on. Sponsored by: the whip, you know. Story_ID: 14719 Speaker 1: What was it like for you, making the transition from being an NBA [National Basketball Association] star, you were an All-Star and I think considered one of the best guards in the game, and then your career ends kind of unceremoniously there and you--. Speaker 2: Well, for me probably the best way for it to end because I didn't take sports as seriously as everybody thought I should have but I was serious when I played. There were other things to do when the game was over I was--had a day off. Said, "Why don't we practice coach?" (unclear). Say, "Well I'll see you, I'm going to New York right quick, this is where I'm at if you need me." "New York, where are you going there?" "I'm going to see the Rolling Stones. They're in New York tonight." I like doing other things now if everybody thinks that's not serious then, I played serious games real hard didn't miss many games in my ten-year career at all. Now it ended because I was on pain killers. I think I had another five years in me to do something productive on the court and maybe in one way it was good that it ended that way, because when it ended, Boom! I was done. I got married [to Susan Van Lier], moved to Seattle, Washington and was it was very difficult, hard to find jobs there, related. All I thought all I could do, first time in life I'm not playing basketball since I was this high. And I wanted to get into coaching no one would call I thought broadcasting, took a little journalism in college [Saint Francis College, later Saint Francis University, Loretto, Pennsylvania] too just to get a little bit of that experience, and I really wanted to do news, not sports. I wanted to talk about news and things and events that had happened over my life. I thought that would be interesting to talk about. No jobs coming my way and most of the Seattle [Super] Sonics [basketball team] were getting jobs up there because that was their town. This is where my wife wanted to live. I said, "Hey we've got to go back to Chicago [Illinois]." Well from ten years I stayed away from Chicago and I finally got a job with ESPN [Inc., sports broadcasting network] and actually in it's second year in existence doing college games on the West Coast which they reran every night in those days. Speaker 1: This is like 1989? Speaker 2: 1980--'80 [1980], you know, 'cause I'm done in the '79 [1979]-'80 [1980] season and, but the real jobs of getting back in the game just didn't come my way. So I did a little high school here and there and, and--but then I became a house husband for six years just raising my kids, having fun with them out in Seattle. Then I moved out to Los Angeles [California], this is where my wife desired to go and live, and personally I didn't think it was a good move for me. It's too expensive. I didn't have that kind of money and I ran into problems not getting jobs or whatever. My wife would bear the differerence that maybe my concentration was not where it needed to be, but I tell you the difference my concentration would have been in Chicago. And when I decided to leave Chicago for personal reasons, I didn't look back. I came here--actually I went to Boston [Massachusetts] before that, then I worked at Northeastern University, the Study of Sports Society [sic, Center for the Study of Sport in Society] with Dr. Richard Lapchick. I went around this country speaking about race issues, gender rights and all the above whatever can be a positive mode for human beings on this earth and I thank Dr. Richard Lapchick for that cause he gave me shot at doing it, running my own speeches and doing my own approach to things--go over it with him. I came here to DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois] to deliver speeches about these particular things in athletes--how they're used. And I was asked by SportsVision Channel at the time to come to this dinner and get an award--John Tuohey who's now up in Detroit [Michigan] running Fox Sports Net [Fox Sports Interactive Media, LLC, broadcasting network] brought me in there, and I got an award that night for my achievements as a Bull [Chicago professional basketball team] in the past and all those things. And you know I went to make my speech and I looked at everybody and I said, "Well, this is the first award I ever gotten out of Chicago. I can't remember getting an award so I don't know what to say. Thank you and bye." The place stood up, applauded. I was more bitter about it at the time because when I got the award with Dick Allen and Bill Melton [professional baseball players], all old buddies from the '70s [1970s] and stuff getting awards. I just sat there and I said, "You know,"--with a little tear coming out of my eye--"I have never gotten an award of any of the accomplishments I had, and prior to Michael Jordan [professional basketball player], I was the guy that made more All-Star teams, made All-Defensive teams than anybody other Bull, including Bob Love and company, but I never got an award or opportunity to coach or do anything back here and it's been ten years removed. So I said that and said, "Thank you," and the people stood up and gave me a standing ovation and that started it. John Tuohey afterwards asked me would I come back to Chicago and be the broadcaster for the Bulls on their show. I said, "Will you run this by the Bulls brass, 'cause the new people seem to have taken over. They don't return my calls, they don't seem to like me about anything and I don't know what I did to have this." He said, "I'm not worried about the Bulls, we're paying you." I said, "Oh, okay." So it's been a fourteen--I'm going on my fifteen-year run now being their broadcaster, it's been great and all those people that didn't hire me, all those people who never returned a phone call, sometimes I just give a little extra push about what they're doing. Therein lies right now 'cause I'm in control of what I have to say. But you know what my dad [Norman Allen Van Lier, Jr.] taught me before he passed away? There's no need in being bitter, get up and do your job. And he told me one day when we were watching the 'Godfather' [motion picture]--of all the movies (laughs)--he said, "Did you see James Caan [actor], he got shot. Why did he get shot son?" "Chasing his sister around there." "Yeah, his family." Said, "You need to get your family and go about your business." He said, "Do the Bulls pay you?" I said, "Yes sir." He said, "Do they pay you on time?" I said, "Dad what are you getting at?" He said, "They don't owe you a damn thing, so get up off your butt and go to work." And I went "Whoa!" And while he was saying it he was pointing that finger at my chest. I said, "Whoa." No gold watch, nothing else. They did what they were supposed to do--it'd be nice if they'd given you a job, but they don't owe you. Go to work. I've never looked back, I swear I've never looked back. Story_ID: 14720 Speaker 1: One of the advantages I guess of being hired by Fox Sports Net [Fox Sports Interactive Media, LLC, broadcasting network] and not be which is not really funded by the [Chicago, Illinois] Bulls [basketball team] is that you can say you know what you want to say I guess. Speaker 2: Well maybe that's why teams and everybody didn't hire me in the first place because I'm gonna say what is the truth. I'm not here to get a job just to rip you up, no I'm here to make it fun, positive and anyone who knows me knows that's what I'm about. Every show, I don't care--look for the last six years the Bulls haven't done much--I think I'm pretty positive. But I will call out the mistakes or the lack of effort or wherever blame may need to be placed at that time 'cause that's what it's about. And I think I have gained more respect with people--the common man than anyone else because you tell the truth--they don't always want to hear it. I get a lot of young people who call me, especially on radio and challenge me, "Oh you're old-fashioned and--." No, 'cause you don't want to hear that trash-talking monkey-crazy stuff you're doing, and the lack of respect for each other. "So that's your opinion this is mine that's what sports should be about now if you think you're right fine but this is my opinion. Big deal. Sports. You can tell Monday morning you do a game you can tell if the [Chicago, Illinois] Bears [football team] won or lost by the tone of the conversation. "Hey man, Norm I love your show man, really good show. " Yeah you love it 'cause the Bears just won. You won your bet today. "Well man, Norm man, I think you're a little off-beat with that conversation." "Yeah," I said, "because the Bears lost, and you lost your bet today so take it out on me." You know, sports, sports--it's just sports. So I will say and I'll take a page from Malcolm X--"This is the truth, live with it." I'm not degrading or making anybody yea or nay, it's just what's in front of you black and white that's what I loved about Malcolm X. Story_ID: 14721 Speaker 1: I've got to ask this, probably cause people will want to hear, your assessment of the championship [Chicago, Illinois] Bulls [basketball team] what made them a success and about their demise and stuff and--. Speaker 2: Well I think what made them a success first of all, Jerry Krause [Bulls's General Manager] added to what was already there--Michael Jordan. None of the other general managers or coaches did anything with Michael Jordan six, seven years--yeah Michael was doing Michael's thing, but Jerry Krause stopped the merry-go-round. "Let's put some talent around this man and the talent Michael need to have to be Michael still and win championships." Second of all Scottie Pippen, Horace Grant a great addition but Michael Jordan because he scored a lot. This guy was just outstanding (with emphasis) defensively. He would beat you defensively as well as offensively. That led the way for everybody else to get involved here and this is what you need to do then you surround him with maybe some, enough people to shoot the basketball--the [John] Paxsons the [Steve] Kerrs and you bring in [Bill] Cartwright to bring that physical presence in the middle to run the certain system you want and control the boards and get it to Michael and do his thing. That's that was great for me to watch and when they grew up, finally not being afraid of the Detroit [Michigan] Pistons [basketball team], which I thought was Horace Grant's doing because he took and wore those goggles and made a speech one day. "We're not going to do this. We're not going to stand here and take this anymore. They hit you, we hit back." Yes, that's what you need to do quit running for cover and complaining--fight back. And when they did that along with the talent of Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen it was all over that was a beautiful run there. Speaker 1: Yeah that '91 [1991] series with Detroit when they finally win that championship they really run Detroit all over the court. Speaker 2: Yes, yes they did and it was nice to watch, nice to watch and of all the teams that won the championship I still say the '92 [1992] team that beat Portland [Oregon, Trailblazers] was the best team. Maybe not the best records, but it was to me the best team, cause there wasn't one thing that Phil Jackson didn't have on that court that he couldn't turn to if he needed it. You want a physical play you want you get Stacey King and the kid the name escapes me Speaker 1: [Clifford] Cliff Levingston. Speaker 2: Cliff Levingston, there you go. You want to get physical, come on, bring it. Bobby Hansen came off the bench, shooting jump shots like he was going crazy up there. They had a team. [Craig] Hodges--Whew! You want some speed, we'll give you speed. That was a basketball team to me and that was a growing up era we didn't just get by. I thought they'd beat a [Los Angeles, California] Laker[s] team that was really banged up, hurt. I don't know if the Bulls could have beat the Lakers. I really don't know, if they were healthy. Byron Scott, [James] Worthy, [Earvin] 'Magic' [Johnson], all were out. You had a different team they faced, but hey, bless them, they beat them. And that was good to start. But that '92 [1992] team--"Well, okay, there's nobody gonna beat us. There's no one gonna beat us." And for me to be able to broadcast those games, I was a lucky, lucky guy to fall in place with that. And to be part of it. Speaker 1: What about that '96 [1996] team I guess it was that set the record for wins. Speaker 2: I didn't think that the league was as tough, to me. 'Cause as the years went on it kind of expanded out--with players--and not to say the record wasn't a great accomplishment--I don't want to go there. But I just think the '92 [1992] team was the best team. The '92 [1992] team would have kicked the other '96 [1996] team's butt to me, if they had played a game against each other. Story_ID: 14722 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Within the black community I think today, my main concern is, getting back respect for each other as a people. We have to start home first before we start going out there venturing out in the world talking about who else is doing us wrong we have to start there. That's it. The family structure, man we've gotta whew that's a tough one right there we've gotta fight through it. Economic-wise I know we always are the ones here in the minorities, being of Latin or whatever but get that family structure back, and the respect for each other. That is probably the biggest thing I can see, whenever I look at it because when you look at the innocent faces of these kids, man, they want to do right and everything else but you can very easily venture into the negativity and I'm not so sure that's a plan in this country you can just turn your head to, by way of other people. "Let them stay right there, we got control whatever, blah, blah, blah." That's a tough one, we gotta get self-pride. Somebody got to step forward and start bringing that back. Speaker 1: Are you involved in any youth programs? Speaker 2: Every chance I get. White, black, polka-dot or pink. I always say that because I think all youth need understanding about where we're going, what we're doing. But the black community? I think an inner respect for pride--we can preach it, but we gotta do it. 'Cause this black-on-black crime is probably the worst thing that's ever happened--just didn't have that before, in this country. Speaker 1: Do you see any vehicle for that kind of re-education? Speaker 2: Well, education's always the key far as I'm concerned but here's one of the instances we put it above everything else--sports, once again--stop that trash-talking, pointing and looking at each other and acting ridiculous toward each other, I think that could start. You can have fierce competition between each other, but man let's get a little more--I mean that's a start, I'm sorry that's where it is, and sports is just an extension, as I said before, of what's going on I think--that'll help, since we love sports so much as a way out and things like. But education to me is your bigger sense of what needs to be done. It seems to me the more education is thrown into the black community of trying to get them, the more this country kind of backs off. The emphasis is not there the way it used to be, and the rewards of being educated. But there's more than just book sense, also. Education on each other as people. It's not always about the books. It's the tradition of taking care of yourself and the one respect I have for the Muslim world, is also they take care of themselves about getting things and they're out there working, at least trying to get that done. That doesn't mean you have to belong to the faith or whatever faith you want to belong to. But I tell you what, I respect that. Speaker 1: There's a value there? Speaker 2: It's of value, you certainly better believe it. It's a great value. Story_ID: 14723 Speaker 1: When you look back at the things that you've done so far, you're still fairly young, you're not finished yet. Speaker 2: I'm fifty-six going on twenty. (laughs) That's the way I look at it. Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Honest, straight up, forward. I could use the Malcolm X saying, "What you see is what you get." If I think you're wrong, or you think I'm wrong, I'm going to deal with that too. I've been known to say, "I'm sorry." I've always felt, "This is Norm VanLier, this is straight-up what you get. Tell it like it is." Sometimes you tell it like it is with a little passion. Sometimes you tell it like it is with a little sternness. But that's what you get. And I like to feel I'm openhearted about anybody. I love people. People are interesting. People are the most important things in this world and I love people, there's good, bad, and indifferent, but I love people and I try to be as positive as I possibly can, and as open as I possibly can. My wife [Susan Van Lier] has taught me that a lot, too. My wife was an abused person so there's a big thought and difference there. One day I'm driving down the street, there's a black lady--I'm blowing on--"Move! Come on!" She said, "Stop it. You don't know what's on that lady's mind. She may be worried about where her next meal's coming from. You can see the look on her face, so stop it." "Okay." So I started thinking about that. The only negative thing, I think I have in this world--I'm not fond of cab drivers in this city [Chicago, Illinois]. They're the most abusive, obnoxious people in this world. They just use the roads for themselves and don't care about anybody else, and I hate that. If you're gonna blow the horn at me for stopping, then I'm gonna blow the horn at you for getting in my way. That's the only negative I feel I have. Cab drivers, gotta love 'em. (laughs) Speaker 1: Is there anything that you look back at so far is there anything you would do differently? Speaker 2: My life, with my own family, I would have not gone to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. I would have been more stern and said, "We're going to Chicago, where I can make a living." 'Cause I think one of the biggest problems in this world between man and woman, man and wife, husband and wife--financial situations. You seem to lose sight of what's going on, you argue and get into things. Well, financially, to get back on track, I belonged in Chicago to get my game going when I was retired and I didn't do it, and I resent the fact that I didn't do it. I don't blame the wife, I don't blame anybody else but myself for not taking everything by the horns and, "Let's go, this is where we're going to make it." If I'm going to get criticized or everything else that goes along with not getting the jobs and making money, taking care of family, then I'm going to do it on what I feel I'm going to do it on. That's the only thing I look back in my life, honestly and it was sad, I did something that knowing in my heart I should have done and I didn't do it. Speaker 1: This is similar to legacy but not quite the same thing how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Just who I am, that's the only way I want to be remembered, and respected you demand respect. I just want to be remembered, Norm is Norm. "What you see is what you get," like Flip Wilson [comedian]. That's what I want to be remembered by, 'cause that's who I am. No less, no more, this is it. That's the only way I want to be remembered. You can talk about sports, on the court, off the court, whatever, Norm Van Lier, that being myself--and my wife hates the third-party talking--that I was the best person I could be every day of my life, and I am who I am. This is it, man. Like me or not, this is Norm. Story_ID: 14724 Speaker 1: What do you have planned for the future, have you considered coaching or anything, or anything--? Speaker 2: I would like to honestly, get away from sports in some ways. I would like to--a friend of mine is putting out an investment--Sean Alcock, Lenny A. Sirrett (ph.), we're all talking. I would like to have a jazz supper-club in this city. I think it would be great. I mean some real jazz, when we do play jazz, I don't mind country, western music like a Lyle Lovett, people like that. The Dells, I talked to Chuck Barksdale the other day, with the Dells, we're talking about getting together. I would like to have a club like that. We got a supper-club, a little jazz everyday, play it then bring in some big acts along the way, maybe a couple a month. We could have some fun with that 'cause I love music. That's what I'd like to do in the future as I get older. I'd like to sit back, and if some station would allow me to play some music, not just a format, I might throw in a little jazz, come back with some rock-and roll, just let me play some music. And given my personality and my experiences--where I've been out in the music world, where I've been all my fifty-six years--and hanging out with some of the groups, Mick Jagger and some people like that, give me some experience to talk about. But to be programmed, it doesn't happen today, it's so commercial. I would love to do that. That's what I'd like to do, and continue on with that, while I'm doing it, and as long as my youthful play is out there, I'd still like to broadcast right here in Chicago [Illinois]. That's what I'd like to do, cause I love doing it...