 Story_ID: 25384 Speaker 1: I'm Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Speaker 2: Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 1: Ernest David Levert, Sr.; that's E-R-N-E-S-T; D-A-V-I-D; L-E-V-E-R-T. Speaker 2: Okay. And, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: March 14, 1954, born in Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 2: And, Sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 1: I'm currently employed with Lockheed Martin Missiles and Fire Control in Dallas, Texas. My position is senior staff manufacturing engineer. Speaker 2: What is today's date? Speaker 1: January 29, 2013. Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: We're currently at my home at 964 Silverthorne Trail in Highland Village, Texas. Story_ID: 25385 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask; it's kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first question is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I love rib eye steaks. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black and red. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like the fall. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: That's a good one. I don't have a favorite, because I love to travel. But if I had to choose one, it would be Maui, Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I go with this phrase the majority of my life. "With God in your life and faith in yourself, you can set and achieve your goals no matter what you're told." Story_ID: 25386 Speaker 1: Alright, now, I'm going to ask about your family history, I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately so we don't get them mixed up. So, can you give us first your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Gertrude Ethel Johnson; G-E-R-T-R-U-D-E; E-T-H-E-L; J-O-H-N-S-O-N. Ethel Gertrude Johnson. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 26, 1919, Hillsboro, Alabama. Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: As far as my mother is concerned, I know my grandfather, Leslie Johnson, and his wife, I know she was a homemaker and my grandfather was a farmer down in the area of Alabama. Speaker 1: Now, can you trace your mother's side back to any other location other than Hillsboro? Speaker 2: No, I cannot. Speaker 1: Where is Hillsboro in relationship to say, I don't know, the Capital of Montgomery? Speaker 2: It's close to Tuscaloosa; Tuscaloosa, Alabama, about maybe fifty miles from there. Speaker 1: So that's in southern Alabama? Speaker 2: Southern Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. So, are there any stories on your mother's side of the family about emancipation of slavery? Speaker 2: I don't know that much, just know that my grandmother that I know of was Cherokee Indian. She had Cherokee in her blood. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember talking to her when she was ill and wanted to get more details, but her health was--didn't cooperate with us. Speaker 1: Okay. What did your mother say about growing up? Did she grow up in Hillsboro? Speaker 2: She grew up in Hillsboro, Alabama and then moved to Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She met my father in Cleveland. Speaker 1: Now, what did she say about growing up in Hillsboro, what was it like? Speaker 2: I don't recall. I can't recall having a conversation about her growing up; I just knew it was tough with her and her sisters and her brother; her sister and her brother. Speaker 1: Did she talk about going to school down there? Speaker 2: My mom went to school, she graduated high school, Central High School, Cleveland, Ohio, worked hard. Speaker 1: Okay. So she moved up when she was a-- Speaker 2: I would say a teenager. Speaker 1: --Teenager, okay. She came out of Central High School in Cleveland? Speaker 2: In Cleveland. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your mother talk about what she wanted to do? Did she have an aspiration she wanted to achieve in high school? Speaker 2: I just can't--I know she wanted to be a teacher, and she played the piano, and she did--she did very well in playing the piano. She played for our church, New Bethel Baptist Church. She played the piano and she was a choir director for us. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she come from a large family? Speaker 2: No. She had two brothers and a sister. Speaker 1: Okay. So, she played the piano; she wanted to teach? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did she get a chance to teach? Speaker 2: I don't think she taught in the public school system, but she taught Sunday school. Speaker 1: Anything else about your mother's side of the family that you remember that-- any stories passed down about-- Speaker 2: Not at this point. Speaker 1: --Well, what about the reason why they moved, is there a stated reason. I don't want to assume they moved for any reason, so is there a reason that's passed down to you as to why they moved from Hillsboro to Cleveland? Speaker 2: I think, along with my father, I think they all during the time when Teddy Roosevelt had the opportunity for African Americans to move north and some type of work furlough program, something like that, as I recall, a lot of the folks left the south coming to the north for that work program under Roosevelt. Speaker 1: This was under Franklin Roosevelt, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, something he had started, yes. Speaker 1: During World War II [1939-1945]. Speaker 2: World War II, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright; some kind of a new deal program? Speaker 2: I don't recall. I just know that it was some type of work furlough program. Speaker 1: Okay. Like a WPA or something like that? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Story_ID: 25387 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: William McKinley Levert, Sr. W-I-L-L-I-A-M; M-C-K-I-N-L-E-Y; Levert, L-E-V-E-R-T. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story as to the parents deliberately naming him after President William McKinley? Speaker 2: I think that was the case, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, an Ohio president at that. Speaker 2: An Ohio president, yes. But he was born in Hale County, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, your father? Speaker 2: My father, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Hale County is also close to Tuscaloosa. Speaker 1: Is that H-A-L-E? Speaker 2: Yeah, H-A-L-E, Hale County. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your father's side, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Honestly, I go back quite a distance. I am the family genealogist, and I traced my father's side as far back to 1750 to the north west region in Ethiopia, and over the years talking to some of my family members on my father's side and Uncle Harvey that was 100 years old who shared with me some information about a black Juju tribe, dad also emphasized about growing up that he was always a black juju. And I did some research and come to find out that that tribe was from the north west region in Ethiopia. Speaker 1: Okay, now how do you spell juju? Speaker 2: I want to say j-u-j-u for juju. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, can you tell us once again about the juju tribe in Ethiopia? Speaker 2: Well, basically, growing up my dad would always tell us, especially at family meals, that he was from a black juju tribe, and over the course of the years, I was able to work with a co-worker of mine, who was from Ethiopia and he was the one who indicated that he was from the north west region of Ethiopia. So, once again it's called a black juju tribe in the northwest region. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you gave like 1750, is this the first public record, or the oldest record that you were able to find? Speaker 2: That's the oldest record that I was able to find. And over the years of going to family reunions tracing history, that couple that came over had five slave sons, they called them the five slave brothers and they were the first ones born out of slavery. Speaker 1: Now, this couple that came over, they were brought over in chains during slavery? Speaker 2: The way I understand it, my great, great, great grandmother, she came over from Ethiopia. Now, my great, great, great grandfather, I was under the impression, was told that he was a farmer and they came together, when they got to the Alabama area, the Alabama territory and they somehow came together and then they had five sons. And with that being said, you know, the Levert's, I trace it back to the area between Paris, France and Nice, France. Levert is French, it means the Green. So we know we're French descendants from grandfather's side and Ethiopia's side from grandmother's side. Speaker 1: Okay. So the name Levert is a French name? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Are there any stories that have passed down about your relatives on your father's side, about what they actually did? Speaker 2: Quite a few stories, I know out of those five slave brothers, I know one of my great, great, great uncles used to hang out with Billy the kid, and he was, I wouldn't say a bank robber, but we knew he hung out with Billy the kid. Speaker 1: Now, this would be in Oklahoma, Texas, Arizona. Arizona, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Arizona area, yeah. Other stories include that they were all share croppers down in Alabama, and they were doing very well, they owned a lot of timber property down in Alabama; we still own several acres in the Hale County area. And they were prospered from the timber and from the farming they did. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about emancipation on this side of the family? Speaker 2: Not that I recall. Speaker 1: Let's see. Did you know your great grandparents? Speaker 2: No, I did not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do know that my cousin, she had shared with me, my grandmother was a very good cook, and she was very, very adamant about having the family over on Sundays. She could cook up for an army. My grandfather was also a farmer. Speaker 1: Okay. This was your great grandfather? Speaker 2: My grandfather. Speaker 1: And what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: My grandfather's was named Taylor Levert; T-A-Y-L-O-R, Taylor Levert, and grandmother was named Willie; W-I-L-L-I-E. Speaker 1: What did your father say about growing up, did he grow up in Alabama all the way, or was his time split between Alabama and Cleveland? Speaker 2: His time was split between Alabama and Cleveland. He grew up in Hale County, working the farm with his father, and I think one of--the father sent a couple of the boys up to--the oldest sons up to Cleveland, got situated and then the entire family transitioned up to Cleveland and I assume my father was a teenager at the time, because I know when he got to Cleveland, he ended up going to--he joined the army with my uncle, they served in World War II. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your father's birthdate? Speaker 2: My father's birthday is June 16, 1906. Speaker 1: 1906, okay. So he participated in World War II? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: Okay. So he would have been, like in his, well into his 30's, I guess, at that point. Speaker 2: As I recall, dad, he served in Guadalcanal, he also served in Okinawa. Those for sure I do remember him sharing with me. Speaker 1: Was he in the army? Speaker 2: Yes, the army. Speaker 1: Now, did he have a chance to finish school in Cleveland? Speaker 2: No, dad did not finish school. The one thing I recalled is dad grew up here, he always took care of his mom, and he took care mom while his other brothers and sisters got married, he was the one that stayed and took care of mom, my grandmother, and when my grandmother passed away, my father finally settled down and got married, because he was forty years old when he got married. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. What did your father do for a living? Speaker 2: My father worked for Union Carbide for many years as a laborer. Union Carbide was a division that made the batteries in Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. Rail Vac, right, I think. Rail Vac batteries. Speaker 2: And dad, as a laborer, he used to bring home the old copper brushes, and we used to go down in the basement with the hammers and safety glasses on and knock the carbon off and save the copper and go sell for salvage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I sure do. Story_ID: 25388 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I know they got married July 27, and I know talking to my aunt recently, she's eighty eight years old, and they used to double date together. But my mom [Gertrude Johnson] and my dad [William Levert]--dad would never get married to her because he always took care of his mom, but my mom hung in there after him, that's what I remember. They finally got married, and when they got married, he was forty years old, and they had eight children. Speaker 1: Did they go to the same church? Speaker 2: Yes, they go to the same church, yes. Speaker 1: So it's possibly how they met? Speaker 2: It's a possibility. Speaker 1: What was the name of the church again? Speaker 2: Zion Hill Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25389 Speaker 1: One more thing about the ancestry on the Levert side, one thing that I discovered when I was reading the outline, I had a suspicion and you confirmed it when I got here is that you're related to the Eddie Levert of the O'Jays, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that is correct. Eddie Levert and I are cousins. It's ironically, over the years, we knew he was our cousin, but in 1979 we had a family reunion over Eddie's house in Cleveland, Ohio, in Shaker Heights, and it was over three to 500 people in the back yard and many people had no idea that were related to Eddie Levert. And that's what prompted me and my cousin to start a genealogy history going forward from that point, because once again, I wanted to find out how we were related, and I was able--we're doing that. Speaker 1: Okay. So you and Eddie are cousins. Are you first cousins or-- Speaker 2: We're more like second cousins. Speaker 1: Second cousins, okay. Speaker 2: Our fathers are cousins, our grandmothers are sisters, and our grandfathers are cousins, and this is ironically coming back--go back to that second generation to about 1800--19--1850, 1900s, they come down, when cousins are marrying cousins and stuff like that, so our lineage is Texas parallel two ways. Speaker 1: Okay. I was told there are a lot of Levert's in Cleveland, right. Speaker 2: Yes, quite a few Levert's. Speaker 1: And are they mostly related? Speaker 2: Yes. Because I'm a genealogist, yes, they are related. We have a family of eight--eight on one side, Taylor Levert had eleven children, four girls and seven boys. And all the boys had at least seven children. So you multiply--you do multiplication, you see there's a lot of Levert's. Then the cousins had family members, so there's a lot of Levert's. Speaker 1: Okay. So Eddie Levert of the O'Jays and his son, Gerald Levert? Speaker 2: Gerald Levert and Shawn. Speaker 1: And you are the famous Levert? Speaker 2: Yes, we are. Speaker 1: There may be others that I don't know. Speaker 2: There's a few out there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember my brother's side, we used to sing gospel acapella. We were the original Leverts. Cleveland harmonizing Leverts back in the early 70s (1970s) and then not realizing I wish I had trademark that name, patent that name. I could make some money off of Gerald. Speaker 1: Okay, so you all had a group, a gospel group called the Leverts? Speaker 2: Yeah. We sung gospel acapella. That's one thing about the Leverts, 90 percent of the Leverts can sing. When we were members of New Bethel Baptist Church, the choir, 80 percent of the choir were Leverts, and my mom was the pianist and director. So we got our singing career starting off at an early age singing for our Lord. Speaker 1: So did all the Leverts go to the same church, or did most of the Leverts go to the same church? Speaker 2: Most of my first cousins, yes, we went to the church. Speaker 1: But it wasn't the same church as Eddie and his family? Speaker 2: No, it was not the same church. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did he get started in church too, as far as you know? Speaker 2: Yes, he did. He started singing the gospel, also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was in the Canton, Ohio area. Speaker 1: Canton, that's where the pro football hall of fame is-- Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: --It's just east of Cleveland. Speaker 2: That is correct, yeah, southeast of Cleveland. Speaker 1: Yeah, southeast of Cleveland. Alright. Story_ID: 25390 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Gertrude Johnson and William Levert] personalities, you think about their dispositions, their senses of humor, their hobbies, how they walk, talk, look, what they're interested in, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Both. I'd say more of my father because my father was the authoritarian type father, very rigid, very strict. My father was a deacon in the church. I never saw my father cuss, swear, take a drink or hit my mom; he always a straight-forward guy, no nonsense. My mom, on the other hand, she was a very loving mom, and I look more like mom than I do dad, but she was always there guiding us. Because I think for my parents having a good--being raised in the church a good foundation, I think both my parents did a great job raising eight children. But I think to answer your question, I think I'm more like my dad, and my dad, authority, going forward, but I think I have my mom's patience at heart. Story_ID: 25391 Speaker 1: Now, can you name your brothers and sisters for us and insert yourself in the lineup where you fit in? Speaker 2: Okay. My older sister is Diane, and my brother William, my brother Isaac, my sister Onita, myself Ernest, my younger brother Henry, my younger sister Ethel, younger sister Elizabeth. So, four boys, four girls, I'm right in the middle; two sisters older, two brothers older and two sisters younger, right in the middle and I'm at number five. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were growing up, did the family live in one place or did you move around? Speaker 2: We moved around, but initially, I remember all of us, my father and his brothers lived in a place called Miles Heights. And we were like neighbors across the street, next door to each other. They almost had the whole neighborhood, so we grew up at an early age in Miles Heights, that's also a suburb of Cleveland, Ohio, and then from there we moved around. Speaker 1: Okay. Miles Heights, Alright, and where is that in Cleveland? Speaker 2: That's close to Warrensville, Warrensville area, Warrensville Harbor area. Speaker 1: So you were there and I think you mentioned, before we started, something about the Hough area? Speaker 2: Yeah, we moved from Miles Heights moved to inner cities of Cleveland. I remember elementary school, first grade, going to John D. Ralph Elementary School and then from there transitioning to Wilson Junior High School. Then we moved to 77th and Hough. We moved to a couple of places prior to that before we were in High School, we lived in the Hough area, 77th and Hough and Hough Rides took place right there, 79th and Hough. Speaker 1: Hough is spelled, H-O-U-G-H? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: The Rides and Hough, well, we'll get to that later because that's in the '60s (1960s), so I'll just talk about that later, so we'll get to it. So, we always ask this question, when you were growing up, what was the demographics of Cleveland? Can you kind of give us a general sense of it, I mean how many black people were there proportionately to the rest of the population and where did they live in Cleveland? Speaker 2: The majority of the--demographically, the whites lived on the west side of Cleveland and the blacks live on the east side of Cleveland, I can break it down that way. And we lived in a predominantly, initially, black neighborhood, and then as I got into middle school or junior high school, we moved into a mixed neighborhood. And I think that's one of the best things my dad did for us, because once again, going through sixth through twelfth grade being a mixed neighborhood, really helped us with our diverse backgrounds and not being stereotyped a lot of times. Story_ID: 25392 Speaker 1: Considering the places you grew up, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Starting off in elementary school, went to John D. Rockefeller Elementary School right there in Cleveland. Thoroughly enjoyed elementary school, because one of my best friends was Steve Carry, and he was white, and that's one thing my dad taught me about treating people with dignity and respect. That was also the time of Martin Luther King, listen to what Martin Luther King was talking about at the time. I became an advocate of what he stood for, and that was nonviolence; also listened to my parents talk about using your knowledge, thinking with your knowledge, thinking with your head, not your fist, also the opportunity to--I was being taught as having a great Christian foundation. I want to say Jesus Christ, you know, having faith in yourself, praying for the right directions, pray on things, certain things that lead you in the right direction. Having four sisters and three brothers, I learned a lot from my brothers. I had an older brother who was a sports jock, that was Billy. Billy played football, and he was always on the basketball team, and then my other brother Ike, I called him the ladies' man; he was a Casanova, I learned from him. So when I decided to go to high school, I decided to go to a vocational high school, my brother being a sports jock, my other brother being a ladies' man, I wanted--I told my mom, I'm going to school to get my education. And so I learned from them. My older sisters, my older sister Diane was a nurse; I learned from her perseverance, how you can tackle the job; she had a daughter, she got married and had a daughter, and she continued working hard, so, you know, the growing pains of having my mom and dad struggle, because we were, I would consider poor at some part of our lives, because it was just tough growing up in the '60s (1960s). And dad worked and mom didn't work, so mom decided to go to work as a domestic worker to help us grow; so it was just very, very--it was tough in the '60s (1960s). Speaker 1: About what year was it when your mother started going to work? Speaker 2: I would say I was in the fifth grade. Speaker 1: So you were about ten; this was about 1964? Speaker 2: '64 (1964), '65 (1965) mom went to work. Dad didn't want her to but I remember the lady next door, Ms. Davis talked to my mom about an opportunity to go work in Gates Mills, which is a very affluent community of Cleveland suburbs. And that's when we grew up because my sister had to take care of my brothers and sisters and I and as we got older, we had to take care of everyone. My mom went to work dad went to work. They taught us responsibility also. Story_ID: 25393 Speaker 1: I had asked at one point about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up and you started telling me about school, which is all right, because I asked about that later on, but are there--do you remember any of the particular way that the neighborhoods you lived in looked or what the smells were, in particular, or sounds? Speaker 2: Sounds, yes, sounds and smells. Speaker 1: Sights, sounds and smells, yes. Speaker 2: Sights of growing up in Cleveland [Ohio] , it took a village, because we lived on Dibble, D-I-B-B-L-E, and you know, we had great street football games, we went to school together, and the people on the one end of the street knew who you were and the other people on the other end of the street knew who you were. We used to have block parties on weekends and everybody, you know, knew everyone, and that was just, once again, the melting pot of USA. Everyone took care of each other. I remember having the--the family coming by, having barbecues. We didn't have a barbecue grill. My dad would take bricks, we would build up a nice pit, go take the oven racks out of the oven in the house, make a barbecue grill, and we would cook barbecue, chicken and that was great growing up. I remember working very hard in my dad's garden. We used to hate that, but we were able to reap the benefits of the hard work in the garden. We grew corn, green beans, cucumbers, a little bit of everything, rhubarb, beets. I remember we had so many cucumbers we were able to make dill pickles. So, you know, those were the sights and smells; every summer, every spring, we were in the garden planting things. I remember we also had a pear and a cherry tree in the back yard. We were always up there from having cherry pie, peach pie, peach preserve, stuff that my mom would make for us, and so those are the sounds and smells. My mom had four boys; she would put us in the kitchen on the weekends. She made us wash the clothes. We had to go the laundry mat. Then we always had to cook, we also had to clean, she taught us how to sew. She said eventually when you grow up you could either be a good husband for your wife or be a good bachelor, depending upon the women. You can live well. So those were the sights and smells. Story_ID: 25394 Speaker 1: Now was there a main street on the east side of Cleveland [Ohio] that people identified as being the entertainment center or business center of the black community? Speaker 2: Where I grew up, I think Superior was, Superior Avenue. And I remember the bus, the three bus would run from all the way downtown. I would say Superior and Euclid were the two for us; Superior and Euclid. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Some of the sights and sounds I'll share with you is my brothers and I, when we got into the '60s (1960s), we started working down at the Cleveland Stadium and selling--we were vendors, selling peanuts and popcorn. I remember when I was fourteen years old, and I made $4.50 my first time selling popcorn at Cleveland Indians game, and I thought I was rich. Speaker 1: This is when you were fourteen? Speaker 2: Fourteen. And I started working out at Cleveland Stadium selling popcorn and peanuts. That's when the Indians were there Rocky Colovito, Sam McDowell. That was in the '60s (1960s) and going to the Cleveland Brown games, Jim Brown was there, Paul Wolfowitz was a rookie. He came up to me and gave me an autograph, but dad would let us go down there. We would go to Sunday school then after Sunday school we'd go work at the stadium. I remember always giving my dad half the money that I made. Speaker 1: Okay. So you worked at Cleveland Stadium when the Browns were playing? Now, you were born in '54 (1954), right? Speaker 2: '54 (1954). Speaker 1: You were ten when the Browns won the NFL championship, right? Do you remember that? Speaker 2: No. I remember all the hoopla, but, yeah, it was amazing watching all this. Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Jim Brown or Bobby Mitchell? Speaker 2: I remember going up to Mr. Brown, can we have your autograph. I knew I had his autograph, Luke Roser, Walter Johnson, Paul Wolfowitz, Gary Collins, Frank Ryan, not knowing what they would bring on Ebay today. Yeah, I have all of those, I remember Terry Bradshaw, Joe Green all those guys back in the day. Speaker 1: Do you remember that Frank Ryan was a mathematician, PhD. Speaker 2: PhD, I sure do. I says, I remember that playing football, he didn't have to be the dumb jock that people always stereotype you. Yeah, Frank Ryan had a PhD running the Browns. I always thought that was the right thing to do going forward. Speaker 1: He was mentor to a mathematician we interviewed in Houston at Rice University, whose back there now who has been like a world class mathematician. He's back there now as a professor emeritus, but Frank Ryan was one of his mentors at graduate school. Now, Municipal Stadium is supposed to be one of the biggest stadiums in the country, right, for pro sports is it 80,000? Speaker 2: 80,000 easily and then when the Browns came, there were 100,000 people there. And it was a mistake by the [unclear] that was Cleveland, but we would work down there, it was so cold at some of those Brown's games I remember wearing two and three pair of pants and two and three pair of sock. You had to dress, because that cold wind come off of Lake Erie, you were freezing, and it was like ironic, you know, you would want to sell hot chocolate, hot dogs or coca cola. And people would say why coca cola in all that freezing because people were bring their anti-freeze; they would bring liquor and stuff into the stadium, they had to have chasers, so they would always buy coca cola. Seriously, those were the days that taught me a lot about entrepreneurship, taking my money, saving it, I didn't waste my money. I was able to--if I wanted to buy something, I took the money, I gave my dad half, took 25 percent of that put it away in my bank and then took another 10% went to called World Castles or McDonald's and you could buy a coke a hamburger and French fries for $1.20 back in the day. It taught me early on how to be responsible financially. Story_ID: 25395 Speaker 1: Now what school did you start at, was it Rockefeller? Speaker 2: John D. Rockefeller Elementary School. Speaker 1: John D. Rockefeller Elementary School, Okay. Now, what were you interested in as a student in those days? Speaker 2: As a student I was just interested in--I've always been interested in engineering. I knew growing up with my three brothers we all wanted to be engineers. Speaker 1: A lot of kids in the black community don't know what an engineer is. When you say engineer they think of the guy driving the train-- Speaker 2: Guy driving a train. Speaker 1: --Now, how were you introduced to what an engineer really was? Speaker 2: We were watching "My Three Sons". Fred McMurray was a nautical engineer. And I enjoyed watching Fred McMurray, Uncle Charlie. We'd watch Bonanza and watch what engineers did on TV. Those were good shows that my father always men--not mentored but he monitored what we watched on TV. And they were wholesome shows, and I remembered watching "Family Affair" with Brian Keith. Back then they had people with those professions, and I used to work on things at the house. I used to love taking things apart, and that's when I knew my calling would be engineering. I wanted to be mechanical, my younger brother wanted to be civil, my other brother electrical, and the three of us, you know, we were successful doing that. That's when I started off just taking things apart. Speaker 1: Now, did your father work around engineers when he worked? Speaker 2: No, he worked for Union Carbide; they do a lot of different things, but I can't recall him working for engineers. Speaker 1: Okay. I wondered if he ever mentioned meeting engineers or talking to them. Speaker 2: It was Group and Calvary Hill Baptist Church; it was a lot of the deacons that mentored me into where I'm at today. Talking with these deacons and the mothers of the church, Calvary Hill Baptist Church and New Bethel Baptist Church and my uncles and I, hearing what they had to say, because many times back in the day when adults were talking the kids would listen. Not like today kids always trying to jump in the conversations. But we knew our place and listened to them talk and then when we did field trips at school at John D. Rockefeller, you know, what do you want to do when you grow up? And I just knew at a young age, I wanted to be an engineer. I just loved doing things with my hands, building things and I thought that would be the right path to go. Story_ID: 25396 Speaker 1: At some point I read here that you saw a movie about welding, about arc welding or something? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And was this in grade school? Speaker 2: That was in eighth grade. Speaker 1: Eighth grade. Speaker 2: In middle school your seventh grade was in wood shop, eighth grade was in the metal shop, ninth grade was in the mechanical design. And eighth grade in metal shop, Mr. Killmier showed us a 16mm movie on construction jobs and I saw in that 16mm movie, I saw an individual welding. And I was amazed at how the weld joint was stronger than the base material, and I thought wow, that was fascinating. We were building projects in the metal shop with foundry, liquid material, making things. I was just fascinated by watching the material flow and how they came together, and I thought wow, be very interesting. So what happened was in the eighth grade we started looking around, what we're going to do in high school. And then when I got to ninth grade did very well in mechanical design, the guidance counselor was saying there's options to go to Max Haven Vocational High School. You had to be accepted to the program. And so-- Speaker 1: So the middle school is different from Rockefeller? Speaker 2: Yeah. John D. Rockefeller was the elementary school. I graduated then went to Wilson Jr. High School. Transitioned to Wilson Jr. High School; that was three years, from '66 (1966) to '69 (1969), 1966 to 1969. And that's when I really got a lot of skill sets developed in metal shop, wood shop and then mechanical design. And then that's when the transitioned course had came up in ninth grade. What are you going to do in high school, what high school are you going to go to, East High School, East Technical High School and South High School. And I decided I wanted to go to Max Hayes Vocational High School. And you had to apply to go to the vocational high school back in the 70s (1970s)--in '69 (1969). And I'll never forget we got a chance--we got a bus ride--we toured the high school, and my first choice was welding, my second choice was foundry, because I wanted to deal with material science, material joint, material whatever. I was just so excited about that. And I'll never forget as long as I live it's when I got the letter, the card said I was sent to Max Hayes Vocational High School. I gave it to my mom and she cried. And I said, mom, why are you crying, because you followed your dream, you told me you didn't want to be a sports jock like your brother, a Casanova like your other brother, you just want to go work your grades, work your skills. And also I learned from the deacons of my church who were saying, Ernest, to get out of inner city of Cleveland to get out of the hood, go find yourself a good skill. They need good skilled workers in this world. And also I remember Brother Neal was telling me about Ernest also thinking about going to the military. So, you know, I'm getting all this guidance from some of my church members, my uncles, my aunts, my parents, so I was one of the kids who would always listen. Story_ID: 25397 Speaker 1: A couple of things I wanted to ask you about junior high school before I take you to Max Hayes. Somewhere at a period between '66 (1966) and '69 (1969), the riots took place in Hough [Ohio], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So were you living in Hough at the time? Speaker 2: Yes, we were. Speaker 1: Okay. So what year was that? Speaker 2: I can't remember, '66 (1966), '67 (1967), '68 (1968). It was very rough. I remember my brother and I going to the store. The challenge was there was a curfew, the Black Panthers was out there, all these black groups were out there, the fighting the killings. We would, my brother and I, would call ourselves Batman. We would carry baseball bats with us to protect us, and we'd go to the store, we saw individuals coming towards us, we would walk across the street. We would never be confronted because my brother and I, at one point in time was going to the bakery, we got some bread and was coming back and a group held us up, took our bread from us and I said, okay, I'm trying to ease back into the post office and they brought me back and they shook me up a little bit, but at the end of the confrontation, my brother stood firm and they gave our bread back. That was my brother, Ike. So anytime they were after, you know, you just heard about, you know, once you had to be off the street, you're into Black Panthers, Black Nationalists, it was just tough. And that's when I learned, you really listen to Martin Luther King, we don't have to doing this kind of stuff. I remember he came up to Cleveland and something happened, a couple of other folks came up there, got the riots under control. I just remembered that staying my mind that my brother and I carrying bats with us, baseball bats every time we went out on the streets to protect ourselves. Speaker 1: Do you remember what the cause of the riots were? Speaker 2: I don't remember now. I just remember the Black Nationalist rising up against the Black Panthers and the Vietnam war was taking off at that time, so it was a combination of all that stuff in my mind. Speaker 1: There was a movie called "Up Tight". It was made in 1968 with great music score. I have the record at home, but the action centered around the riots in Hough, I think it was 1966 or 1967. Speaker 2: '67 (1967), yeah. That was the time, and they burnt a buildings and stuff like that, it was just bad. Speaker 1: Hough was at the time, depicted by Time Magazine and News Week and US News and World Report as being one of the roughest ghettos in the United States. Speaker 2: Yes, it was. And like I say, I successfully graduated from the hood. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Also, during those latter '60s (1960s), Jim Brown organized black athletes in an economic union and they were doing experimental business activities, a lot of them centered in Cleveland. Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of that? Speaker 2: I just remember, I didn't participate, I wasn't old enough, but I remember he was at the Howard Johnson. That's where he would have a lot of the meetings at, right there in the center of 105th and Euclid, in that vicinity of University Circle, and that's where a lot of the folks came together. There was also a job core that was there. And they were trying to get the African Americans and blacks really to start looking at education opportunities and financial opportunities. I give Mr. Brown credit for doing what he did. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know of any positive results from what they were doing? Speaker 2: I know two of my cousins that were involved right now they did very well in their own businesses in Cleveland, and one of my cousins used to work for Paul--Ar Modell whose the owner of the Cleveland Browns, he and Amos had fair's barbecue, so out of that he got his barbecue place opened up and every Friday, Saturday night, people were in his place getting that barbecue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's his story from that. Speaker 1: I know Jim Brown, Bobby Mitchell, Walter Beach, Kareem, Lew Alcindor, Ali, a lot of people involved; Curtis McClinton, from Witchita. Speaker 2: All those names sound familiar. Story_ID: 25398 Speaker 1: Tell us about Max Hayes Vocational High School? Speaker 2: Max Hayes was a vo tech high school on the west side of Cleveland [Ohio]. At that time I was living in Hough [Ohio], and I was bussed from 77th and Hough all the way over to the west side every day. I think it was the best thing that happened to me, because once again it allowed me to horn in and conquer the skill sets to be a good welder. In my class there's only two African Americans in the class of twenty. Projester Johnson and myself and I remember graduating in '72 (1972), but we went through trials and tribulations in that class, too, because in the '60s (1960s), they were still using the "N" word and people were still hard on us, and the fact that I was accepted into Max Vocational High School was a honor for my mom and my dad because once again, and then free buses--free bus passes to go back and forth to high school was really something that they were very proud of. Now during that three-year period, you spent half the day in your shop classes. So I was in the welding class then afternoon, you did your regular high school, academics, you know, math, science and I was not really a math person in high school. I did the geometry, didn't care for that, but I was great working the shop math. I can lay out--you give me a blue print, I could lay it out with the tape measure and all that good stuff. But doing the geometry and that stuff, I barely made my chinny, chin, chin getting out of high school. I remember I got a "D" in geometry, all those theorems, but I survived. Also, in high school I learned a lot because in 1970 is when I got my first job as a welder's helper at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] at Lewis Research Center. Speaker 1: How old were you then? Speaker 2: I was seventeen years old. Speaker 1: Seventeen, okay. Speaker 2: I was seventeen years old. Speaker 1: This is 1972? Speaker 2: 1970 was the year. Well, actually, I was sixteen, sixteen years old. Got my first job and made a $1.65 an hour as a welder's helper. It's called the School Neighborhood Youth Corp, called "SNYP", School Neighborhood Youth Corp. And I got a job working at Lewis Research Center and that was a great wonderful experience for me. Because once again I think working there, seeing all the wind tunnels, seeing all the projects NASA was working on and my dream of being an engineer really got me excited about the space program now. In high school, we used to build model rockets and stuff and then I started building model rockets, shooting the rockets up part of the classes in high school. So I was really excited and I knew my career was taking off from there. The second year--my second summer I got another job working at NASA. And that summer I met Dr. Julian Earls who was a physicist there. And I remember I had a chance to talk to him, and he mentored all of us, not just me, but all of the students there, challenging us to do things with our lives, taking the next step, graduate from high school, going to college, go into the military. So I'd like to go back and say Dr. Julian Earls, thank you for those words of wisdom. Story_ID: 25399 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about Julian Earls. Who is Dr. Julian Earls, and what was his position at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]? Speaker 2: At that time he was a physicist and he was part of some programs that were motivating blacks into science, engineer, technology and math, that's all I can remember at the time. I think he later on became the director of the facility there. But I remember Dr. Earls and a couple other individuals out there at NASA that were always--we had weekend activities, he was always there encouraging us. I'm going to say it was Dr. Earls and Willy, I can't think of Willy's last name, but I know it was Julian and Willy. Those were the two men that I remember that were encouraging us to do positive things with our lives. And I share with you at this time because it was 1970 I was at Calvary Hill Baptist Church and Mother Smith on a Sunday, called me over, she said come here son, I said, yes ma'am. She said I had a vision last night Ernest. I said, yes ma'am. She said you're going to be an international world leader. I says, me, shy old me? I was a really shy kid. I remember it was 1970 I was working NASA at the time. And she says, yes, you're going to be a world leader because you know, you got a job; look what you're doing, son, you can grow with this. And I said, no, and I walked away from her, and she popped me aside the head, pulled me by the ear and said come back here, boy. I said, yes ma'am. She said, no, seriously, son, I had a vision last night that you're going to be an international world leader. You're going to take what you're learning now and take it to the next level. She said, keep God in your life, and he'll show you the path. And that's where I get the philosophy "With God in your life and faith in yourself, you can set and achieve your goals in no matter what you're told." Story_ID: 25400 Speaker 1: Now, there's a note that I have in the outline that said that you were building model rockets which you just alluded to, and it was similar to or parallel to the young rocket scientist in the movie "October Sky". Speaker 2: October Sky. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That is my favorite movie. That is my favorite movie. I was coming back from an overseas trip, and I'm sitting in business class and watching "October Sky" and when he was going down to the mines watching Sputnik go across, I was sitting in business class when they were playing it, and I'm sitting there with tears rolling down my face, and the flight attendant said, are you okay, I says, then I had to pause the movie and I said, no I'm not okay because Homer in that movie was exactly what I didn't want to be in Cleveland, Ohio. A lot of my cousins, uncles were working the steel mills of Cleveland, Republic Steel. And that's why that movie meant so much to me, I wanted to follow my dreams working with rockets and missiles, and not working the steel mills of Cleveland. And so, "October Sky" to me is one of my all-time favorite movies and I still watch every now and then because, he overcame obstacles in his path and I did the exact same thing, because once again perseverance has come from within, and I learned that back in the day from my mom, from my memories at Calvary Hill Baptist Church, from Mother Smith to the deacons, my mom and dad, my brothers and sisters, all who used to push me, you can do it, you can do it. We pushed each other. Thank you for bringing that up, because that to me I share with a lot of young people, even my boy scouts when we're out in the woods sometimes, I would take them down in the woods and show them on my lap top "October Sky". And the end of the day, he's a rocket engineer for Lockheed for NASA, and I'm an engineer for Lockheed Martin. Speaker 1: Right. There in the movie, a lot of the drama centers around him looking up. It's a metaphor for looking for high attainment, as well as the rocket going up. He's looking towards the sky, and his father is looking down; he's going down in the mine every day, he's going down every day into the darkness where he can't see, where it's danger and he's not learning much down there. Did you ever feel--was there any time when you were a young man and you felt that you would have to go into the factory, that was going to be your fate? Speaker 2: I did because there were certain individuals, certain teachers in high school that say, you're never amount to anything. They were once again stereotyping us. I give credit to those teachers like Miss Weiss, boy, that just came out of the blue; Miss Weiss, my English teacher, I used to work after school with her, she encouraged us. We had the tele-friend with Ohio Bell Telephone Company. They helped me with my math because I knew talking with her I wanted to be an engineer. I wanted to go to Max Hayes Vocational High School. Had to get my grades up just a little bit more to make that happen so, yes, there were people at that were saying, yeah, you'll never amount to anything and you could end up being in the hood, doing this and that and the other, be a factory worker, and that's when talking with my mom and dad and the deacon, said, no, don't let anybody put you down. And I tell all the students today no one can stop you but you. And I learned back in the '60s (1960s) that you know, I can do this. It's not going to be easy, but I could make it happen. So those teachers Mr. Carter, Miss Weiss, really helped me back at Wilson Junior High School get ready for high school. In high school Mr. Wilco, we had two things in common, we both loved magic, he would encourage me, Mr. Hart would encourage me to do certain things. So, you know, yes, people will always try to push you back over here, but you had to push back three times, four times over to overcome that pressure. Mr. Dominick--Mr. Purneel was the basketball coach, I learned a lot from him, how to coach and how to take things to the next level. So I was always one that's soaking up stuff and taking it in so when I got to the situation, I had enough ammunition to understand how to go forward. And some of my friends they fell by the wayside because they gave in and they're still in Cleveland in the factories. Story_ID: 25401 Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned the basketball coach. I know later on you would walk onto a Ohio State's football team. Were you an athlete in high school? Speaker 2: In high school we didn't have a football team, but I was on the wrestling team and then I was one of the managers for basketball. I was a good statistician. And that was one thing I could do was draw plays and stuff like that, I did that, and I thoroughly enjoyed that, so, high school, I was on the wrestling team. I did not play football. I played football, street football with my colleagues and coworkers, and it was fun. And then I went to the Navy, then I played football while I was in the Navy. Speaker 1: Now that area of the country is one of the football capitals of America, like Texas is here. That area of the country like Massillon, Canton, Cleveland, Youngstown-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we would go watch the Browns play we'd work then after the Browns would play, we'd go home and that evening we'd go out to the park--Wood Hill Park and we'd be playing football to the wee hours of the night. That was some great, great, great football. Speaker 1: And the basketball was the Cleveland East Tech had a powerhouse. Speaker 2: East Tech was the Scarab, East Tech Scarab and the Blue Bombers at East High School. And while I was in high school, Max Hayes had a pretty good basketball team, and we would always meet in the championships, St. Ignatius and Max Hayes were one of the two tops on the west side and East High School and East Tech was the top on the east side. Those were the days. Story_ID: 25402 Speaker 1: Now, that's something that we raised during the break was your teachers inspiring you, but also sharpening up your communication skills, public speaking, writing are tools that even scientists need, not just math, right, they need to be able to communicate. Speaker 2: That is correct. Communication is the key and the one thing that you got to be able to do is to communicate your ideas to another individual and they understand what you're doing so you know I go back to Miss Weiss, she sharpened my English skills and Mr. Hart helped me with my math skills so that you know it prepared me for life. Because seriously, you know, think about it now I tell my students when I do my career day talks. How many guys like math, how many don't like math. I said I was one that didn't care for all of the math but still I enjoyed arithmetic, put it that way. Shop math, I can build anything, fractions and stuff like that, but I learned today, I tell all the students you have to have math so you don't get cheated. I give them some of my examples of how they need math, but more importantly, science, technology and math are the keys to the future of engineers and I'm grateful to those individuals back in junior high school that really got my foundation going again, because that's been the success of things I've done with my career of engineer. Story_ID: 25403 Speaker 1: We were also talking before we even started the interview about the influence of "Star Trek". Was that your favorite TV show? Speaker 2: That's one of my favorite TV shows. I loved all of the "Star Trek" series going back to Captain Kirk because you think about the future, that's where ideas come from. I mean, you think about everything we have today is basically Gene Rodenberry was ahead of his time. And I share with a lot of kids that want a career, the fact is, think about it, back in 1966 "Star Trek" Lt. Uhura on the bridges of the Enterprise had a silver thing in her ear. Who would have thought four years later had the first generation Bluetooth? How many times you walk in the doors now, the doors open for you? You know the tricor, that's your first generation, that's your smart phone. It's amazing how Gene Rodenberry was ahead of his time. We try and go to warp engines, warp drive, I think that's the future of going to space travel, we're not there yet, but I think Star Trek, Deep Space Nine, you know, I look at Captain Picard, Captain Sisko and Gordy and Data and the things, the tools that they used. These are one thing that's imagination, that's Hollywood, but it's our job as engineers today to make this come to full circle, full fruition on what we're using right now. I just brought up 2013 KT and it's almost like "Star Trek". I'm at the helm with all the push button controls, I thought, you know, it took somebody forty years ago to communicate that and that was Gene Rodenberry that anything can happen in the future. So thanks for sharing that, yeah, I love "Star Trek". I watch all the series from "Star Trek" to "Next Generation", "Deep Space Nine", the "Next Voyager", yeah, I watch them all. Story_ID: 25404 Speaker 1: Okay. So now, in high school did you have time to be involved, now, you're working at the stadium too and you're doing--you got a summer job with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], we just talked about Julian Earls being a great mentor to you and others, did you have time to run for class office or do any of those kinds of activities in high school? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. I was in charg--I worked with the Vocational Institution Club of America called VICA, now it's called Skills USA. So, yes, I started sharpening my skills as a leader. I was in the boy scouts at the time also, as you can tell, I'm a very active person. So even in high school, I was working like I said, church activities in the choir, working at the stadium, on the basketball team as a manager, doing the wrestling and then working part time on the weekends. So I was always busy. Some days I leave in the morning, I don't get back home until nine o'clock at night but mom and dad would always know where I was. It was always this phone call away. Story_ID: 25405 Speaker 1: Now, the boy scouts are very important to you, right? Speaker 2: Most definitely. Speaker 1: When did you first get involved with boy scouts? Speaker 2: My dad was a scout master, and so that was back in the day, I remember my mom said I went camping with my dad like four or five years old with my dad. So I've been involved with scouting from early on. But I really think scouting took off with me in the early '70s (1970s), when I was at Calvary Hill Baptist Church. Mr. Wallace was our scout master and I was a junior assistant scout master. And the thing was -it taught us leadership. I think the scouting program built character, perseverance, loyalty in an individual. And I thoroughly enjoyed that because, seriously, when Mr. Wallace stopped coming to scout meetings, we didn't want it to fall by the wayside, so I took over, and I was seventeen years old, I didn't make it to Eagle Scout, I made it to life, Mr. Wallace disappeared with all my records and stuff, so I was devastated, I didn't make Eagle, but my dad would come there and so I got my cousin involved and he took over the troop. And true story today, I was running the troop, my cousin was twenty one years old, he was twenty four running the troop, and the district executive came in, Trudy Thompson came in and said whose running this troop and this scout is trustworthy, and I said, I am. I'm eighteen years old. And he said if you're eighteen years old, you're running the troop, why don't you become scout master? I said, well, you got to be twenty one. He says we can change that. So I took over as scout master at eighteen years old, went through the corner stone training, took Troop 426 Calvary Baptist Church from twenty two troops in the Center City district from 20th all the way to number one in a matter of twelve months. And the perseverance I had with my scouts is we were out there camping, we'd go out there, I was embarrassed, devastated because when we go camping and summer camp with the boys, we could never pass the swim test. And that's one thing about the African American community, we didn't swim. But my dad had us at the neighborhood pool. So we knew how to swim. So, you know, I went to Tri-C, Cuyahoga Community College, took the water safety instructor course, starting teaching my boys how to swim so when they go off the deep end, they knew how to swim. I took the opportunity to take them in the woods, once again, my dedication was there. My graduate friend from high school took over. I'm working for I'm working for Club Products, and I wanted to take my boys to summer camp, and the company said well you haven't earned vacation. So I said fine, I'll take a week of vacation without pay. You're going to do what? I said I'm going to summer camp with these boys without pay. They said why are you doing that? I says because I'd like to see these boys be successful, and that way they're not out on the streets trying to steal your hubcaps. And that was one of the things that has really, really made a major impact on those boys, because we were in the inner city of Cleveland, 105th and Cedar. How you maintain keeping these boys in the inner city actively involved in scouting? And we did very well. And the heartache of that was, here I was at Calvary Hill one summer, coming home from, I was in college at the time, and this kid walked up to me on the front porch at Calvary Hill Baptist Church, and he said hello Mr. Levert. I looked up at this guy who is 6'2". I says, hi, do I know you? He said, yes, Mr. Levert. You wanted to take me behind the woodshed out there many times and kick my--I says, Gregory Hicks, how are you? And he said I'm doing well, Mr. Levert. He said, thank you. He said I'm at Cleveland State now. If it hadn't been for you, Andre, Terry and myself would probably be in jail somewhere right now. And I said, so how's everybody else. He says, Jeff Wright is eagle scout, you know, of course, your brother, Henry, is an eagle scout, Marvin is an eagle scout, you (unclear) when you went to the Navy, only bad news was Ricky Dell. I said Ricky was good. No Ricky was killed in a drug deal gone bad. So, you think about all of those boys I had 36 boys. Out of the thirty six, twenty were from single parents. I remember when Darrence, I went to his house to recruit him, and she said you're a lifesaver. He had five sisters. So I got Darrence out of that situation. So, there I was in the two-year period, twenty years old, scout master number one in center city district, and scouting had a major impact on my life back then I could add even today. Story_ID: 25406 Speaker 1: When it came time to graduate, what kind of counseling did you have in high school, about what to do next? Speaker 2: Mr. Rouse and Mr. Wracker were my two high school welding instructors. And I recall very, very clear as today, you know, the companies would come to the high school looking for workers. And I remember working a couple of jobs my senior year prior to graduation for scouting for different companies and even a time after school doing welding jobs. And I remember Club Products came to us looking for a tool and die welder. And there was another young man in my class name Ernest R. Ellis. I had him--skill sets, we were pretty much even. Academically, I had him wrapped around my finger. I would get straight As in the classroom and Bs in the shop--A, Bs in the shop with him. So they gave him the opportunity, praise God. That was the only time I could recall my instructors showing favoritism because of race. They gave Ernest the chance to go interview for the job first. Then they weren't happy, they came back and I interviewed for the job. And the guy says, you got the job, he gave me the job right on the spot, because I was able to walk the walk, talk the talk. You had to be able to give a procedure, understand what the procedure was saying, what the materials were, and I would get straight As in the technology part of it so--so Mr. Rouse and Mr. Wracker counseled me and when Club Products came to us, I got my first job. I remember graduating, I was making $3.96 an hour in 1972. That was a lot of money, yes. But I worked for Club Products for two years, and while I was on that job, I went through a lot of racism, a lot of racism on that job. Speaker 1: Can you tell us a story? Speaker 2: I'll tell you. Yeah, I'll tell you a great story. Henry was the welder who was on medical leave, and they hired me to come into the weld shop. I cleaned the weld shop up. As a tool and die welder the company manufactured club aluminum cookware. And in the foundry they would make the cookware so I worked in the tool room doing all the welding on the molds and stuff and then the maintenance welding. So I enjoyed my job but you know it didn't come without a lot of pressure from the other folks that were there, who had been there for years. Here is a young black man that's now taking over Henry's shop and I knew what I was doing, I got brand new welding equipment to go with me--that came in with me. And so I was doing my job, and I looked in one day, I was in the weld shop, and the guy came in the shop with a part to weld and start just cussing, you think you can weld this part and blank, blank, blank and used the "N" word. I said I'll take care of it. Why don't you go cool off. I can tell he went across the street and had a liquid lunch. That's one thing about another story about going to the country and western bar across the street for lunch. I'm the type of person I deal with everybody and I work with all type of individuals, but he pushed himself into the shop and I took the die away from him and I said why don't you go back to the shop and he just pushed me. In the meantime my foreman is sitting over here in his office watching. And I'm thinking why is Morrie just sitting there? I will use the name "Jerry", I won't use his last name, but Jerry came over and just pushed me again and started calling me the "N" word and you think you all of this, you all of that. And I said listen, I'm a good welder, I know what I'm doing, I know my skills and that's something you can't take away from me. I got the knowledge up here, and he pushed me again and then I'm backing up again. And then I'm backing up again and that's three times now you touched me. It was Martin Luther King, none violence is the way, now back off, okay, don't push me. And he came over there and took my shirt, just ripped my shirt opened, buttons popping everywhere, I almost fell. And I think okay, Lord give me strength, give me strength. Why don't you just get out of here, my foreman still watching. And I said okay, something's wrong. In my mind I'm thinking if I react I'm going to be fired, if I react, I'm going to be the one to be chastised because of his ignorance. If I react I'm out of a job so I backed up and he pushed me again and I stumbled back and I saw a piece of pipe laying over there. And I said, okay listen, if you don't get out of here now, it's going to be you and me and somebody is going to the hospital because you pushed me four times, you rip off my shirt, I said only because this is a uniform that I'm paying to rent, I'm not paying for this, you'd be laying on that floor, Jerry, just get out of here. And finally I picked up the pipe and I said get out and finally that's when Morrie came in and said Ernest calm down, okay. He wanted to see how far Jerry would push me, and he pushed me 600, 700 percent passed the limit of a normal person, but at the end of the day, I would go home that night and say thank you, Jesus, thank you Martin Luther King, thank you mom, thank you dad, I still have my job. And the next day he came in and says, I did all those things, he never did apologize, he said, yeah, I had a couple extra ones at lunch, still never apologized until about maybe a month later, he said I'm really sorry. I said you should be because you and I both could be fighting could be fired, dead, whatever because you were really drunk, coming in here and doing what you did to me. And yet my brothers and sisters out there on the street, you probably be six feet under right now. But yet the lessons learned how to deal with black folks, because you can't do that, true story. I earned a little respect from my managers from that point forward, you know, because people heard about that. And so I got a lot of respect from people in Club Products thereafter. Story_ID: 25407 Speaker 1: Then you joined the navy, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What brought that on? Speaker 2: Basically, I was working in the shop, and I kept thinking okay, where do I want to go with my future. I listened to my church members. I remember Brother O'Neal was in the air force, Brother Louis was in the army and another was in the marine corp, so I used to do magic tricks. I love magic that was my hobby. I love magic. I used to do magic tricks in the smoking lounge down at Calvary Hill Baptist Church. So I would do magic tricks in there, and I take a cigarette butt, make it disappear and stuff and so I was always listening to what they were telling me, along with my brothers and a couple of other young men. It wasn't just me but we were always listening and I started thinking about the military. And then my brother's best friend, Charles Mitchell, he was in the navy; my brother was in the army, Vietnam, and they both Vietnam timeframe in the '60s (1960s). So I started thinking about starting my goals again, what I wanted to do with my life. I couldn't see working for Club Products after that situation I couldn't see being there another year, okay, I had to go and do something else. I used it as a stepping stone to say, okay, I wanted to go get the GI Bill, I want to go to college, I want to build a house, so I set a lot of lists, I want to travel the world. So I made a list of goals I wanted to accomplish. So I started talking to Charles Mitchell, my brother's best friend and one of the electricians I work with, Jim Workmen. Jim Workmen was x-navy, electrician. So we had started talking at break one day, so we just started talking, and I got Charles' blue jacket manual and started reading that, and then I thought okay I want to talk to recruiters. I went to every recruiter because I was going to join the coast guard. My uncle, my Uncle Douglas was in the coast guard. So I was all set to go into the coast guard and I said no, no, no, no, let me go back because in the coast guard you're only restricted to the United States coastal waters. So I wanted to travel the world, so I looked at going into marine corp, navy, air force and army. Army same with the marine corp you end up going into infantry. So I went to the navy and Chief Clapton, it's amazing how the names are coming out today. Chief Clapton was the chief recruit officer and I took some tests, the aptitude test and all this good stuff and he said you worked in this vocational high school, worked two years as a tool and die welder, you became a whole maintenance technician, you can become a welder, navy welder, I said, that'd be great. So I passed all the tests, and he says if you enlist we can make you E-3, not E-1, not E-2, but E-3. I would be a seaman, a seaman apprentice recruit E-3 going straight to bootcamp. I thought, wow. So I decided to join the navy. I gave them a six month window. Everyday on the job I would read the blue jacket manual, that the manual for enlisted personnel. So I finally told my mom, I was joining the navy. She says, why, son? Why would you join the most prejudice branch of service that there is. At that time they talking about the race riots on the Enterprise, they were having the fights over there. It was major, major, major. Speaker 1: That's right. There was intervention by the navy hiring Dr. Charles King to do interactive work, anti-racism work on the air craft carrier in those days. Speaker 2: That was in the early '70s (1970s), '71 (1971), '72 (1972), '73 (1973). I told my mom, I says, "mom, you taught me, you and dad taught me keep my Lord and my faith in front of me." I says, look what I went through on the west side, mom. You taught me a lot about diversity and race relations, how to work with people. I have my goals and objectives, I have four sisters and three brothers. I know you and dad cannot pay for college. I want to go to college. There's a lot of things I want to do, mom, that the only way I can do this is join the military. I'm joining the navy because the navy will give me the training, the skills set I need to succeed in life, whereas Billy was telling me don't go to the army because he was in Vietnam, went to communications, he in college and end up throwing right into the enlisted personnel in Vietnam, so I'm going to join the navy. And she says, "it's your call." So, I was twenty years old, decided to go to the navy, and let me tell you the best move I ever made. It was the best move. So I decided to go join the navy. And we'll get to that, we'll talk more about that. But that was my decision. I had eight goals for myself to join the navy and my mom and my dad, my dad said "son, the service is going to make you or break you." They made me, let's see what they're going to do with you. And he was for me going in, because I said I going to serve my country. My mom was concerned because I got in the tail end of Vietnam, the war was still going on. But she didn't want me to go. My brother went to Nam, he served, he went to pure hell over there, told me some stories. He was in the fox hole one time and they said there's some incoming and only three survived out of eight in there. What his friend saw, saw was boots left and his boots were smoking blowing in a million pieces. So I heard some stories from my brother. He said that's why I want you to go into the navy, do not go in the infantry, because it will take a piece of your mind. Story_ID: 25408 Speaker 1: So you joined the navy in 1974, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so 1974. So you came in as an E-3? Speaker 2: E-3. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's-- Speaker 2: That's already three promotions-- Speaker 1: --Okay-- Speaker 2: --Above the average person joining the military. Speaker 1: --So that would be equivalent to a corporal in the army or a sergeant? Speaker 2: It would be a corporal. Speaker 1: Alright. So, you were mustered in in Orlando, Florida? Speaker 2: Orlando, Florida, yes. I wanted to go to Orlando. I had a reason because they were going to San Diego or Great Lakes, but my supervisor, Dominick, used to get on me, he's Italian. Dominick Varilla. He used to get on me after Morrie took over, he became my manager and I told him I was going to go to Orlando, find his daughter and we're going to have a good time. He was racist and he was really on me every day, and I said, I'm going to get back at you, I told him I'm leaving today, I'm going in the navy and when I find your daughter, she was in boot camp at the time, I said we're going to have a good time. And I watched him turn read as an apple one day. I was just egging him on. But when I joined--when I went to Orlando, let me tell you that was truly another experience for me because, when we start basic training--you can't start basic training until you pass the swim test, you have to jump in an Olympic size pool, tread water for five minutes and then swim the length of the entire Olympic-size pool. And that day we came in, that we left on a Friday, we got there that Saturday and we processed through that Sunday. We have enough men to form a new company, but we need ten more volunteers that know they could pass a swim test to join this other company. It took twenty of us that came in on that flight and was in the holding tank, and we went to the pool. And I never forget as long as I live that day I had one other brother travelling with me from Cleveland. The brother and I went to middle school together, Greg Moreland. Amazing how your memory comes back when you want it to. Greg Moreland and I, we went through basic training and we went to the pool and I remember we jumped off into the deep end, he went straight to the bottom, they pulled him right out the water. Now, I'm treading water like it was a piece of cake. When I went through my red cross instructor license at Tri-C Cuyahoga Community College, I had to tread water for fifteen minutes, and plus we swam 15/20 laps, and so, you know, this is a piece of cake. I'm just doing this, have a good time treading water then they blew the whistle and I just take off nice and easy strokes going down the pool. When I get to the end, I get out, didn't realize there was like maybe 50 people in the bleachers just sitting there watching us. I guess they were in the class who knew how to swim. I got to the end, I stood up and all the brothers, they all stood up and gave me a standing ovation. And I thought, "wow" that was great, you know. My company commander came over and said you know why they're giving you the standing ovation? I says, no. He said you're the first black to pass the swim test this week. And you did it with flying colors. That's why they gave you the standing ovation, I said, wow. So we ended up starting that company, Company 193, we got our C-bags, all our gear, went to the barracks and that Sunday afternoon, they were handing out leadership positions. The recruit chief petty officer was in number one position he was in charge of all eighty men when the company commander went home. They had two platoon leaders, first platoon, second platoon and they were in charge of forty men. So then he had a sergeant of arms and stuff like that so the company commander said "Levert, front and center." I ran up there, yes, sir. He said, you were scout master? I said, yes, sir. How old are you? I said, twenty years old. You were scout master at twenty? I said, yes, sir. He says, tell me about it. I said I was Troop 426 Calvary Hill Baptist Church. How many boys did you have? I had thirty six boys. How many were eagle scouts? I had five eagle scouts. Really? I said, yes, sir. And he says did you have any issues with the boys. Most definitely, I had to discipline them, had to work with them, had to train them, teach them, everything, yes, sir. He said, you got no boys, you got men, you're first platoon leader, just like that. So I was in charge of forty men right off the bat. So that's where boy scouts has helped me with my leadership skills. Those young men from 426 Calvary Hill Baptist Church taught me a lot. And in that it taught me how to be a leader and how to communicate to the leadership there and that made a difference. Now in that company of men, you'll see a picture later but it was almost 50 percent African Americans in that company. Typically, in the navy, back in those days you have maybe five or six African Americans, but because this was a group of young men that really couldn't swim, they just barely passed the swim test, I was in charge. And we had men from north, south, east, west, we had young men there from the south, we had a young man, his father was a grand dragon for the KKK [Ku Klux Klan], I had Orientals [sic, Asians], I had Hispanics, so it was a nice melting pot of diversity and personalities coming together. I had forty men I was in charge of; we had three guys that were like Gomer Pyle who had two left feet, so it was a tough basic training. So I'm going to jump ahead about three weeks. We're marching and when we're in columns it's three across and all the way down and then we come to column of right and then we come together, and I couldn't hear the recruit chief petty officer, he was just not a good leader. So one day we just stopped in the middle of the grinder where we were marching, my company commander said, Levert, I said yes, sir, front and center. Went over there and he said you're now recruit chief petty officer, you're in charge. Wow. And I just took over, I didn't skip a beat, we took the guys back to marching again. I was barking those orders out left and right. We did very well we finished that up, got back to the barracks. He said you're now recruit chief petty officer, you're in charge of the whole company. Your job is to get these guys on track. So I would take my two guys, Wonosky and Winisky, both of them would go out there, we'd practice, I learned how when they messed up, I got punished, when bug eye, Guy Young and Kowasky, the KKK and the south guy would be fighting each other they had the sabers ready to cut each other, I had to jump in there, so we did a lot of--I did a lot of working together with those personalities. And when we graduated September 13, 1974, we had the best party ever. A reward from that was I received the American Student Honor Medal Leadership in basic training. Out of 100 men, I was selected to receive the American Student Honor Medal for Leadership. Story_ID: 25409 Speaker 1: Talking about your navy experiences, you were just made petty officer and that's quite well. Speaker 2: Well, the thing is when I received a merit for honor medal that gave me an opportunity to see my orders, and my orders said I was going to go from boot camp to extended training for two more weeks then I was going straight to see one C1 welding school, that's High Pressure Welding School, straight out of boot camp. Normally, you have to re-enlist for those schools and they're also given to individuals that are first class or higher. So I just told my mom, like I says, I got my first goal I am going to high pressure welding school to become a certified welder. Now, initially, I wanted to become a diver in the navy to become an underwater welder. But when my company commander said this is better than that school ever will be, look at your orders, son, look where you're going, you're going straight to the top of the welding schools. So I went home on leave and had a good time, and then ended up going to San Diego to High Pressure Welding School for eighteen weeks. Now the school is eighteen weeks, I completed school in ten weeks, because I was one of the few individuals in the class that had welding experience. Of course, I went to Max Hayes Vocational High School where I choose tool and die welding so, true story, I'm sitting in the class, I'm an E-3, first day out of fifty students in the class, the chief asked is there anyone here that did not request this class. I don't know why he asked this question, but I raised my hand. Everyone looked at me like they wanted to stab me with a knife because they all reenlisted, and I already served time to get this school. I said well, I just came out of boot camp, and they just thought, wow, how did you get into this class? I just said that's what my orders said. So, we started the class, and we started doing art welding, and we did that and I passed, what you do, you practice and then you have to submit a test coupon to be evaluated through x-ray and do tensiles. So once you pass that certain criteria of requirement, you become certified in that process. I passed the first two with no problem whatsoever. Then we started doing gas structure art welding, and I--we were welding aluminum. We did aluminum filler well. I welded the first part, I gave it to my chief, and he just threw it on the floor and started cussing like a sailor does, and said you didn't do this, and blank, blank, blank, blank, blank, blank. So he got everybody together, the whole class and said this E-3, none rank, blank, blank, blank, blank thinks he did this kind of work. So he's going to show us all how he did it. Yes sir, sit down there with my hood, started tig welding, got through, gave it to him, holy smokes, this blank, blank, blank can weld. So I passed that test, and so I started helping the other guys in the class to learn how to develop their techniques. So after that, you know, the chief of the school, the lieutenant came by and says you're doing very well with this. So one Friday, true story, because I'm an E-3, I had to do all the fielding work. So, I'm in the booth cleaning up, and then I climbed up to get in the rafters, and I see two guys talking so I eased across the beam and started listening in. They started using the "N" word again. We find out why he's so good. They went and checked my service records, which they weren't supposed to do, but they found out. Hey, he went to vocational high school, worked tool and die welders, so he knew how to weld before he even got here, that's why he's so good. I said, and thank you very much. They just laughed, turned red as an apple again, because they did something illegal by checking my service record, but once again, my attitude was, I'll help you conquer those skills if you just ask. So once again, the class was eighteen weeks long, I finished in ten weeks I would come in and muster. Chief said okay Levert take off. I go back to the barracks, get some more sleep, or I stick around to help the students with their skill sets. Story_ID: 25410 Speaker 1: So I came out with seven welding certifications then I went to my first ship. And that first ship was a USS Sterett CG 31. Speaker 2: USS--how do you spell that? Speaker 1: S-T-E-R-E-T-T guided missile cruiser 31. And the ship only rated--I graduated with what we call NECs, Navy Enlisted Classifications which is certification NEC 4955. And the cruiser only rated one. So I was a hall maintenance technician, third class, hall maintenance technician seaman, going to the ship with those NECs and that was ironic, because I was the only none petty officer who didn't have--had those skill sets. And so when I got to the ship, got reported in, they said are you a high pressure INC 455, I said, yes, sir. And that commanding officer looked at me, Commander Kluff. We'll talk more about Commander Kluff when we talk about the space program. But he was the chief engineer on the boat, and he said, the first time I have a NEC from high pressure welder who is a none-petty officer. I shared my background with him and this and that, so we hit it off very well, and I said, I will never let you down, because I passed all my certifications first time around. I graduated class honor man out of that group of men. So therein, my worthy career has taken off again in the United States Navy. Speaker 2: Okay. How many ships did you serve on? Speaker 1: I served on two. Speaker 2: Two, okay. The first was one the-- Speaker 1: USS Sterett. Speaker 2: --Sterett, okay. Speaker 1: I served on that for eighteen months. I had a chance to do a Westpac. I sailed to the western Pacific where we traveled from San Diego to west Pacific. We were still patrolling the waters on the tail end of Vietnam. So we got to the Philippines, I remember October of 1975, we still had a curfew. We had to be back on the base, on your ship, actually, out of Singapore, not Singapore, but the Philippines (unclear) City, you had to be off the streets by midnight, otherwise you were going to jail. So we still had curfews and stuff like that so, actually I went to the Philippines, Japan, Taiwan, Thailand, thoroughly enjoyed my travels. Join the navy, seeing the world it not a job it's adventure, that was the slogan back then, and I thoroughly enjoyed that. And I served on that ship with a lot of good people. I only have one grudge that I hold now with my division officer at the time. I won't say his name, because this is public information here, but he called me the "N" word, I don't care if you are my NEC 4955, you still will clean, like you will be the "N" cleaning up for these white folks. So what he meant was when you come on board as a none petty officer, you have to become a compartment cleaner, cleaning up, amongst your other duties, cleaning up the compartment, so when they get up in the morning, they go to muster, they go to work, you had to mop the floor, clean up, take the laundry out and all that good stuff. So you had to deal with their dirty crap and stuff. So I did duty for three months. So I did my high pressure welding duties, all maintenance technician duties, plus I was compartment cleaner. And he called me the "N" word every chance he could. That was to me unbecoming an officer in the United States Navy. But once again, I knew what I was getting myself into, my mom was saying, why you would join the most prejudice service that there is. And that's the only guy I hold a grudge against today, because everything I tried to do, he would block, everything. Story_ID: 25411 Speaker 1: Yeah, the navy does have a bad reputation in terms of services and in terms of racism. But do you think that you could get away with, I mean an officer could get away with doing that in the other branches? Speaker 2: I think they did it in the other branches. I think they've come a long way now. Because my first experience was once that happened, and I'll tell you another story. I was compartment cleaner. I had to clean up the compartment, I would mop that floor and I'd--in the words of Martin Luther King, if you're going to be a street cleaner, be the best street cleaner that you can. My mom used to clean other peoples' houses to buy me a new pair of shoes. I remember the Intruders, "I'll always love my mom, she's my favorite girl". I remember my mom and dad tell me, every job you have you do the best that you can. So whatever I had to do with those silly white folks, I did my J-O-B. I had to go clean the head, the restroom, they'd come in there, drunken sailors, they're drunk, throwing up all over the place, I had to go in and clean up that mess. I did my job. I didn't like it some days, but I did my job. I'll never forget we had a captain's inspection. Captain Collins came down, inspected our division, repair division head. He said this is the cleanest head I've ever had on my ship. He gave me a salute, shook my hand and said, job well done. Ensign tried to shake my hand, and I said, I said, "get your hand away from me". That's the only time ever in my life I disrespected an officer, because he--I teach my boy scouts, respect is earned and not given, yet any member of A-22, they'll tell, or 426, they'll tell you respect is earned and not given. He had not earned my respect. And that's the only time you'll ever hear me say in my entire life about somebody I disrespected because I cleaned that head, the captain acknowledged that, and he wanted to take credit for something that he tried to dog me out about. I thank Martin Luther King and my mom and dad for that. And they would tell you that was the cleanest head and everybody would say, "man you could eat off the floor in here". Oh, yes you could, it was that clean. Now, with that being said, ensign was rotated off the ship. We had a new division officer come on board, Lt. Tackett. Lt. Tackett was Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde from this other incident. Lt. Tackett was to me a godsend. I think I was being tried with the other division officer, took me through a lot of trials and tribulations, ups and downs, ins and outs. But Lt. Tackett saw my records, six months later I was getting 4-0 quoting marks, 4-0 like a 4 on my evaluations, which is normally not--it's highly unusual. But I was hard-working, dedicated, I did everything I was asked to do, and I got promoted to E-3, petty officer third class. The chief of the boat, chief of our division put me in charge of the repair facilities. So I was in charge of all of the repair facilities on board the ship. What that meant was all of the fire fighting gear I was in charge of. Every division had a person that was responsible for the fire gear, and I was in charge. I thought, yes, I have my own shop, I was in charge. On the back of my coveralls I had "Levert is my name, damage control is my game". My job would teach all the damage control petty officers how to maintain fire safety. We went battle stations. I became a fire chief. I knew everything there was. I remember chief Weiland, that name is coming back. Chief Weiland, he'd wake me up in the cold and say that's not good enough, I'd say, "all come on chief". He'd say listen, you can be in a life, death situation, and you'll know what to do in a class A fire, class E fire, class D fire, you can kill someone. So he sharpened my skills, and I was in charge of the whole ship repair division. And all the brothers had nothing but respect for yours truly. And once again, I could say was Mr. Byron challenged me, chief challenged me, Lt. Tackett saw what was going on and made things happen for me. Now, with that being said all that was great and then Mr. Gibson, who was the only brother officer on board the ship, said "Ernest, you ever thought about becoming an officer", I said, it's possible. So the navy had a program called the BOOST, B-O-O-S-T, Broaden Opportunity for Officers Selection and Training Program. So I had an opportunity to apply for that. They take the top five percent of all enlisted personnel in the navy, send them to this school for almost a year; get you ready for going to naval academy, ROTC or a special engineering program. And Mr. Tackett, Mr. Gibson were my sponsors, they said we want to send you. I thought, "wow". So I spent eleven months on board that ship, all of the officers sharpened my skills, interviewed me and challenged me on everything else, when my package came it, it says Levert--they called me up, the captain called me up to his quarters, (unclear) said you've been accepted to the BOOST Program. And everybody was happy on my ship except for the white guys in my division. They still wanted to dog me. They said, so you're going to become an officer now, I'm on my way. And so I went to the BOOST Program. So, I served eleven months on my first ship, two different division officers and one challenged me, raking of the coals, the other saw my skill set, my leadership skills, my perseverance and made things happen. Story_ID: 25412 Speaker 1: So did you complete the BOOST [Broaden Opportunities for Officer Selection and Training] Program? Speaker 2: Yes I did. I graduated from the BOOST Program. Now with that being said, I was supposed to graduate and then go give the navy four years, go to navy, planned to go to Purdue, major in mechanical engineering and then give the navy four years, so the Navy Educational Scientific Engineering Program. However, I came home on leave and I saw my younger brother, Henry, was going to Ohio State University in civil engineering, I saw his course book, and there it was, I looked through the course book, I saw welding engineering. Then I started looking at the curriculum, I says, I know that I can learn that. So I went back to the BOOST Program and spoke with my division officer, Lt. Mustang, wow, she was a good lieutenant, Lt. Mustang, and I told her, I'd like to, rather than go to Purdue, can I go to Ohio State and major in welding engineering, still become a duty officer. She said, well, that's not in the program. So I share with my Lt. Dr. Turry and Miss Baxter. They sharpen all my English skills and stuff for me and they were just great mentors too, so they were saying, okay, why don't you just finish the program, graduate top 4.0, then go to Ohio State? So that's what I did. I graduated the BOOST Program and called my detailer, who was a person that sits in Washington, D.C. and make up your orders, called him up, tell him I'm about to graduate from the BOOST Program, but I'm not going to the NESEP Program. Can you put me on another ship, preferably a guide missile cruiser, preferably one that's doing Westpac, so I want to have some fun in my last eighteen months and then nine months, and then I had nine months left in the Navy. So, I got my orders to go the USS Juin. So, I went home on leave before I told my parents I was going, because they were going to fly me to Japan for my next ship. I went to Ohio State University with my best friend, Paul Denlies(sp), my best friend. We worked together, partied together, double dated together, I was his best man and he was my best man. We worked at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] together, so this is my best friend. We drove to Ohio State together. I applied, I met Dean Minnie McGhee, God bless her heart. And I met with her and she was the dean in charge of minority engineering programs at Ohio State. And I share with her I'm active duty now, I got nine months left and I start the fall of next year at Ohio State, if accepted. And she looked at my resume and said you know something, and she looked at me and said you get to fight your way out of Ohio State, I says really. Not many times do we get welding engineers that have your background and look at your background, your skill set, you have to fight your way out of here. I want you to go talk to Dr. Warren McCauley, who's the department chair. So I went to Dr. McCauley's office he looked at my resume and said we welcome you to come into this department. He said, it's not often we get welding engineer who knows how to weld, you got seven welding certifications, he says you'll have a great time here. So I did exactly that and went back to the navy and Dean McGhee said we're going to really welcome you here when you come in and I remember she said but you'll have to fight your way out of here because you have great skill sets. So I went back to the navy, flew to Japan, did my time in the Pacific again, and when it came time to reenlist, the recruiter called me in his office, Chief First Class Hatfield, so Levert, you ready to reenlist, I said, what can you offer me, he says I can offer you C1 welding school, which is the number you reenlist for. I said, check my record, I got that right in boot camp, I was class honor man. So, come on, come on, Hatfield. He said, okay, I'll give you C1 welding, it's heat treatment metal school. I said look at my record, I went from the BOOST Program, another school I went through, that was only eight weeks, I graduated number one in my class. He says, man, I'll give you $500--I'll give you $1000 re-enlistment bonus. I reached in my pocket, pulled out a letter said I was accepted to Ohio State University Engineering Program. And he looked around and said, don't tell anybody, he said, get the hell out the navy because you'll make that $1000 your first year out of college. So I go downstairs to my division officer, Lt. Cucula. He's Hawaiian. He said Levert, you're not reenlisting, you're one of our sharpest whole techs. And I says, I gave him my letter, I said what would you do? So what are your plans, I said, I'm going to go to Ohio State University, get my degree in welding engineering, come in as a duty officer or just go work on the space program. He says good luck to you, son, you go do exactly that. So I got out of the--I went back--so I served--overall, my military, I served eleven months on my first ship, nine months on my second ship; that's twenty months on board, I spent twenty four months in school. How many people can go to the military and have a career like that. So twenty months aboard two ships, I learned a lot, traveled the world, and then twenty four months in school, learning high pressure welding, heat treatment metal school and going to the BOOST Program, it made a difference. So I graduated-I got out of the military July 11th, went home stayed with my mom and family and transitioned to Ohio State the fall of '78 (1978). Story_ID: 25413 Speaker 1: Now, '78 (1978), this is where you met Ron McNair, right? Speaker 2: I met Ron McNair while I was at Ohio State [University]. The four years I was there in my new engineering program, in 1981, he was the keynote speaker at the banquet. I'll never forget, that was my junior year, because I received the most improved academic award for GPA at that time, and he presented that to me, and he was one dynamic brother, dynamic speaker, PhD, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], money, I'll never forget as long as I live. And the words that I took from Ron McNair that afternoon, we spoke one-on-one. He said, Ernest, we're going to need some sharp engineers on the space shuttle in the space station program. And if you recall the space program started in '78 (1978) at Ohio State with the Enterprise. So with watching the Enterprise starting, the shuttle program started. So he said, remember, key word, pick an area of your discipline and become an expert, he said don't be a typical welding engineering, pick an area of your discipline and become an expert. I said, what do you mean by that. He said, well, I'm at MIT, have a PhD in the physics in laser technology, so as a junior, I went back and looked at the curriculum, I knew all the different welding processes, I learned robotics that year, my senior year, specializing in also power beam technologies, electro nome, welding and lasers, those are the three things that would make me unique from other colleagues, so that's what I did. When I graduated in 1982 at the MEP banquet, the keynote speaker was Dr. Julian Earls. So I got a chance to meet Dr. Earls, I said, you may not remember this but I worked back for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] back in 1970, went to the Navy, now graduating from Ohio State, that's twelve years ago, and look where we are. And his words were because he's a marathon runner, he used to always say run your own race, so those are two words of wisdom I used from those two individuals; "run your own race" "pick your own path and make it happen". I did that, and I graduated with 18 job offers in the class of 1982. It was eighteen in my graduating class of welding engineering, they all kept saying make a decision so I can get a job. Eighteen job offers so Dean McGhee's words of wisdom came true. True fact today, I had to fight my way out of Ohio State. Eighteen job offers the nineteenth said I was over qualified, Chicago Bridge and Iron, they said, normally they take an engineer, put him in the field, teach him how to weld. I already had fifteen years' experience. I took my first welding course, Dr. Charlie Albright was my professor and it was basically your first course in welding engineering. I went to Dr. Albright and said you know I can do that lab with my eyes closed and one arm tied behind my back because I'm a certified welder with seventeen certifications. He said, well why don't you teach the lab. Really, I said, absolutely. So there I was going to my welding engineering 301 class, my sophomore year, and I walk in the classroom with all the students and everybody said where's the TA, the teacher assistant, where's the TA? So no one walked in. Professor Albright walks in the class and everybody says where's the TA, so he says, well, we got a unique situation here. We got a very special TA who's going to teach this lab. Ernest come on down. I came down from the class. And they said, you're going to be our TA, I says, yes, I am. So I was doing undergraduate work, I mean graduate work as an undergrad, so I taught that lab, got an "A" in the lab, taught my colleagues how to weld, and once again, respect is earned. Only minority in the class too, way back in high school, here was entirely different. They respected me as a veteran. This Rick Chesser was another veteran, he was a nuclear guy in the class, and we were the old timers. I was twenty three years old in the class and Rick, I think, twenty-six. So, we would sit there and teach these guys words of wisdom about the world and about welding engineering and we would always have these study groups together and we would be the godfathers of the class, it was just different. So until this day, all my classmates of 1980 still have the respect for me and what I did for them at Ohio State. So, I finally accepted a job with Ametek Straza. Story_ID: 25414 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you something before move on and that's what did you have to learn in order to become an welding engineer? I think we had alluded to this discussion before. It's not just about, you know, linking two pieces of metal together you have to know some things about the composition. Did you have some sort of capstone project, you know, your senior year to get your degree where you did something unique with welding. Speaker 2: Let me go back to the curriculum. The basic foundation is physics, chemistry and math, calculus. People would say why didn't you take calculus, because now you use formulas for everything in computers. It teaches you how to think, how to solve problems. That's what the math is for, you know, X plus Y equal Z and all this stuff, so you take two pages of calculations to give you an answer. But teach you how to think, the physics and the chemistry as a welding material scientist, we learned a lot. I had to take electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, process engineering, industrial engineering to be able to communicate with other disciplines on how to join materials together. We also had special safety classes that we had to do at Ohio State, because part of welding engineering is safety concerns about what all the different chemical compositions, manganese, magnesium, all of these compositions can be hazardous to your health if it's hand-held or somehow got into your skin system, so there's a lot of stuff we had to learn on material scientist. As far as capstone project, we always had lab projects we had to do as teams. So we did those as part of our undergraduate courses, then when we got into your junior year and senior year, had to go work in industry for a summer. By working industries for a summer, you came back and did a report. My first--actually, I got a job at my sophomore year at Ohio State working at Alcoa at the tech center, and I helped come up with a nice patent for spot welding. They gave me a nice check of $500, but I worked my sophomore year and came back and did a report like a capstone project for my sophomore. My second year, I worked for Alcoa in Vernon, California as a plant engineer. And the one thing I learned about these different internships, it taught me, maybe not what I wanted do when I graduate, but what I didn't want to do. In Georgia research that I did at a core tech center, working with the various strength learning how materials crack and how to--how susceptible to cracking and control the cracking concerns that cracking begins, because you don't want in your welding is a crack. The crack fails then you're going to have a cutthroat failure of that part or that unit. You don't want to see an airplane coming down, your car falling apart. You don't want cracks in the weld, so I learned a lot there. But you're always riding on a research bubble. You got to have funding for that, so I said I don't want to do that. Second summer I worked as a plant engineer, making aluminum bullets, baseball bats and all this stuff, all these presses. That was cool, but I was dirty and I didn't like that. It really wasn't what I wanted to do as a welding engineer. But my third job I was one of the few, once again, because I was a veteran with eight year's experience, perseverance, one of the Deans at Ohio State helped me get a job at Alcoa my sophomore year. So for senior year I got a job working for Caterpillar Tractor in the manufacturing division. And we built the DA tractors, and my job was to help build some of these projects, go through all the testing, fatigue testing, writing the welding procedures, evaluations. I thought, yeah, this is cool stuff. I get to build things, take the things from the drawing, put them together. So I thought, that was my cup of tea, manufacturing. I liked building things so that's why I took the job at Ametek Straza. Actually, I accepted a job at Caterpillar Tractor in February, 1982 and I was making big bucks at that time, but then I realized seventeen more job offers later, after I took Caterpillar Tractor, I had to renege on their offer. I didn't want to go work for them in Peoria, Illinois. I had an offer to go work in San Diego, California, worked for Amatek Straza building jet engines, jet components, work on the space shuttle program. So, I was just--sorry Charlie, I'm going over here. Story_ID: 25415 Speaker 1: The Ohio State University. I don't know if they started talking about it in that sense in those days, did they use that terminology? "The Ohio State University?" Speaker 2: Yes, because it's actually in the logo. It's "The Ohio State University" it's in a square, so, truly, truly, truly. It wasn't until Chris Carter did that when he got into the NFL that he started saying The Ohio State, it's always been there. Speaker 1: They all say it now. Speaker 2: They all say it now. And if I don't say it, my colleagues would say "The Ohio State" for me, so I'd say okay, "The Ohio State University." I'm very proud to have been a buckeye. I grew up in Cleveland watching all of Woody Hayes and watching them play, and you know, when they finally had welding engineering at Ohio State, I thought, you know, this is my destiny. I was so glad I went there. Speaker 1: But your journey through Ohio State was not without some obstacles, right? Speaker 2: Most definitely. I'll share a few of those with you for the sake of some of the students can see this is the most that I'll share with them. When I got into my sophomore year, I got into some classes with the different professors, most of them were always fair. I had a couple that were challenging me, and I had one professor in Calculus III. Thirty-five of us started the class and I think six finished, and his job was to flunk you out. And I told myself I had straight "As" in Calculus 151, 232, so I declared for 1 and 2 because once again the BOOST [Broaden Opportunities for Officer Selection and Training] program had prepared me for the academics at Ohio State. The BOOST Program was the most rigorous academic program that I ever worked on in the United States Navy. With your ninth grade to your first year of college in a matter of one year, so you were constantly working hard, your work habits were already in place. I got to Ohio State, I knew I wanted to conquer math and conquer the physics. So back in that time where they did taping of the classes, so I would come back early from a trip from Cleveland and spend my nights on west campus going through beta tape clases, so I knew I got "As" in calculus. One professor was saying, you know, the buck stops here. And a lot of students would flunk out of engineering because they couldn't get past calculus III. I remember the first midterm, I got a "C". I went from "As" to "Cs" and his job was to flunk you out. Some people failed the midterm. I challenged myself, I'm not going to let this happen to me, so I would go back, I made my professor--I made a point that at that point in my life, each professor would earn their money from me, meaning that I was there open hours, open office hours, I was there when they had resuscitation with the "TAs", I was there. Even if I didn't know the material, I knew the material, even if I knew the material, I would learn it better. So I challenged myself, and I got passed that one professor. I decided thirty five was in his class, six of us passed his class, we all got "B's", he'd give no "A's", all got "B's". Going to my material science courses, I took thermodynamics, and I had a professor, and we had a midterm, and I remember we had calculators and I'd skip two steps in my outline on the answers, he said times up and I'd just kept calculating and I wrote the answer down. When I got my test back, he says, you cheated, gave me an "F". And I said, how, and I went to his office hours and he says you know Ernest, you couldn't have got that answer, I said Professor, I had it in my head, I knew what I was doing, you see I just fit in the steps but I had the answer, no you cheated. He gave me a big fat "0" and that was thermodynamics. And that was working with heat, heat transfer, a lot of good stuff, so I says, "fine." So I went to every class he had, every training class he had, resuscitation, I did all the stuff required, plus I was in his face. Every ten minutes, all office hours, I'd asked questions, I knew the answers, but you accused me of cheating, and I didn't cheat, so I made sure he earned his money. Got ready to take the next midterm, I went to the back of the room in the corner by myself, I did the same thing in the navy too. I went to the back of the room, so he could never ever accuse me of cheating ever again. And when I turned my paper work in, my mid-term in, I got "A" minus, because he couldn't take it away from me, one, I knew the material, I was in his face every class and made it happen. But I want to take a few moments to say I give credit to Dr. Carl Graft, he was the department chair of the welding engineering program when I was there. He gave a lot of recognition, because I was the president of the American Welding Society Student Chapter as a junior and as a senior. And he gave us a lot of assignments that he thought that we could handle because of my leadership. And Carl, Dr. Roy McCauley, Bill Green, Dr. Charlie Albright, and more importantly, Dr. Clarence Jackson, he was the godfather of making (unclear) in the slags for the welding industry. I did some research for him as an undergrad. He was a great mentor, godfather to me, and may he rest in peace, but he's in history books for what he's accomplished. But these individuals had a major impact, and I want to specifically say Carl Graft because he nominated me for a student leadership award on campus because of my leadership as president of the American Award of Society of Student Chapter. And my colleagues still--that was 1982, and I was runner up for the award for the entire campus. Of all the leaders on campus, I was runner-up to still--to be the second leader on campus at Ohio State University with all the Greeks and everyone else, I give Dr. Carl Graft the credit, I give Professor John Sieg, another professor, we had a--we started roasting our professors, he was our first teacher of the year. And to this day, I'm still good friends with my professors, because they were great mentors and more importantly as we travel the world together, we see each other and the community is a small world and they read about my achievements, so I have to say, you know, it takes a village, and I give them credit where credit is due. And once again, I mentioned Dean Minnie McGhee, without her support at Ohio State at what every minority engineer student that has come out of Ohio State knows Dean Minnie McGhee, and her staff, Philesha and other folks that were there, Curt Luper, those individuals were there when we were down and out, when I had those issues with my professor, I would go to her, she gave you words of wisdom, gave you words of encouragement. I had one professor in chemistry, he had a special sheet, and you had to fill in the blanks and I was off one, he gave me an "F". So I went back and pleaded my case, I said I know the chemistry. I lived next door to three guys in medical school, so I knew chemistry. They were my mentors, Marty, Bill and Frank. They all had degrees from John Carroll University in Chemistry, so I knew this material. I said just move you key up one and he finally looked at it and gave me my "A-" in chemistry. So you know you have to work hard and sometimes when a professor accuse me of cheating, I had to go make sure I didn't cheat, because I was the only minority in my class. And almost 80 percent of my classes--90 percent of my classes at Ohio State, I was the only black in my class, and I know I was setting the stage for other engineers coming down the pipe behind me. When I graduated from Ohio State in '82 (1982), I was only the tenth black welding engineer in the country, only ten of us. So you know we set the stage as we go forward. I've been the only black president of the student chapter of the American Welders Society. I try to encourage other folks to do that, but you have to have the right stuff to be the leaders. Story_ID: 25416 Speaker 1: Okay. How many black welding engineers are there? Speaker 2: I'd say there are about twenty right now. Speaker 1: About twenty? Speaker 2: Twenty to twenty five at the most. I was number ten, and I had recruited other engineers going there. I was at a career fair at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] one summer, and I had a weld sample. I told this kid in eighth grade, if you break this weld sample; I took this to all my career day talks, if you take this weld sample and you break it, I'll buy you anything you want. And his eyes got this big (indicating) and they tried to break it, and I said you can't muster 80,000 pounds and pull it apart. Just a few years ago, I was at Ohio State at the NAP(sp) Banquet and a guy said hello Mr. Levert, and I said how are you, he says you may not remember me, but I'm about to graduate and I'm coming to welding engineering program at Ohio State. He says, you offered to buy my mom a house in Pepper Pike if I broke your weld sample. I says, really, you were at NASA in Cleveland. He says, I'm that engineer. You got me so excited about weld material joining back in eighth grade, I'm now going to Ohio State to take up welding engineering. I says, thank you. So, the words of Junior Earls, "If you can help someone that means you've done your job." And that's it. Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, Now, we were talking about Ametek Straza, right? Speaker 2: Ametek Straza. Speaker 1: El Cajon, California? Speaker 2: El Cajon, California. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was my first job out of college and that was also a challenging opportunity for me in my career. I loved that job because first of all, I was the first welding engineer they hired that had a degree. And that was a challenge, because once again I walked in there and the work they were doing, they were building the jet engines for General Electric, Pratt Whitney, GE, they were also building the main engine for the Shuttle Challenger, so I was--for Rocket Die--so I was--I found the job that I really wanted, and more importantly, the chief engineer, Skip Hague, may he rest in peace, took me under his wings, he knew--he was the chief metallurgist there. It's like going to grad school, every afternoon I would go into his lab and he told me about titanium, hastelloy, waspaloy the first thing I had on my job, two weeks out of college, the engineer commenced we need a welding procedure oil in the hastelloy Rene 41, another in 718 and then the waspaloy. I said no problem, I'll take care of it; give me the end of the week. I get on the phone, I called Dr. Carl Graft, I said Dr. Graft, how do you do sir, he said, Ernie, how are you doing, I said, I'm doing great, Dr. Graft. Let me tell you what was my first thing on the job. What's a waspaloy? And he say's really, I said I had to come up with, I found the answers but after that Dr. Graft hired Dr. Bayslack to come on board to teach those who design the materials in the world of engineering curriculum. So those are special materials for aerospace applications, jet engines, high strength, high temperature materials, because those jet engines are flying. I just came back from Paris, that jet engine is flying ten straight hours, rest four hours and back ten straight hours. Those temperatures are very hot, we're talking like 2000 degrees so you can't melt those materials. So I enjoyed Ametek Straza, building those jet engines and the Shuttle Challenger. Story_ID: 25417 Speaker 1: More importantly I dealt with individuals, some more racism again. Here come the "N" word was used on me again, left and right. I always take the high road not the low road. I never lowered myself to their standards, it was just amazing, but Dick Glaff(sp) set next to me, may he rest in peace, he was a good mentor. He was from Ohio, so we hit it off very well. The thing was I was doing work as a welding engineer that they didn't know how to interpret that. I was doing engineering economic analysis. I was reviewing equipment, doing the return on investment, how to invest in new technologies, robotic applications which is my expertise. Then they made me in charge of the electronic welding facility. Electronic welding is a very unique process that dealt with electrons, and I love this process because of Ron McNair, I'm a unique individual with my skill sets. So all the electron welding came through me, and my boss got upset because I was doing reports on analysis, passing them around and one of his bosses made a comment; this is the kind of work you should be doing. So I slapped him in the face. Didn't mean to do that but you hired a welding engineer, this is my job, they didn't know what to expect, they expected this much of me, I was doing this much (indicating upward). And I went to lunch with the vice president one day for United Way, and he said, Ernest walk with me, so we started talking and by the system, we were using electrone welding, I said it was on it's last leg, I recommend we invest in another system, because if those spare parts go out, we can't purchase this, so I was just being honest. I come back from lunch and my boss walked right by me. I walked in the office, he said I heard you were rubbing elbows with Jerry Lore at lunch. Yeah, I sat next to the VP and apparently, a good friend of his, his golfing buddy, is an alumni from Ohio State, worked in the engineering program, he shared with me, you should hire a welding engineer from Ohio State, so I was that person, so he was wondering how I was doing. In the meantime, he asked about the equipment, so I shared with him about the equipment. He said, we don't tell Jerry everything, I said, so no one told me to lie to him. We don't lie to him, we just don't tell him everything. I says, well, no one preempted me to tell me what not to share with him. So I told him I would write a report. When you get the report, you give it to me, so I did; I did an engineering economic analysis. I laid out all the equipment, look at the life expectancy remaining on the equipment, we bought new equipment with a return on investment and all this good stuff, so I won't go into details, but I did that. He wouldn't let the secretary type it up for me, I had to type it myself. And the recruiter that recruited me, Charles Tieberry, he used to play for the Detroit Pistons, he was the HR guy, he came and got me, another African American. He was in my corner out there. He handed in my report for me, cleaned it up for me and got it back, Chuck read it and then it just went into his pocket, into his drawer. Actually, no, I read it, got it typed up and I passed it out. Everybody was rampering it was a great report and then he pulled it back from everybody, stuck it in a drawer. Then I was laid off thirteen months later. This reduction in staff, three of us went out the door, and so, he said--that was 11:00, you can work to 2:00 and then you're out of here. I worked the whole day. You know why, because I had no place to go, I used all my resources on that job to go find me another job. And then I had all my books, I stacked up all my books and everything else. And I called Geodynamics. My eighteenth job offer was Ametek, seventeenth was Geodynamics, commerce division in San Diego. So I called Bob Schneider to tell him I was available and this and that and the other, I knew electron welding. He said we have a great position, so I had a job within two weeks. Story_ID: 25418 Speaker 1: I had a job in two weeks, so here's the kicker. Geodynamics would use Ameteks Straza's equipment on second shift for electron welding on Atomic cruise missile. Atomic cruise missiles there are twenty three weldments on that missile, twenty one were done with electron beam weldings, so they were using our equipment second shift while they moved their facility. So I knew Ametek was making GD [Geodynamics] pay for this, pay for that, so I knew all the dirt that was going on. So I came back in two weeks later, worked for Geodynamics. And Bob said Ernest, great to have you on board. Your further assignment is you're going to take over the facility at Ametek Straza. I said, "wow", couldn't ask for anything better. So I go back out there two weeks later, I'm walking back into Ametek and I have my Geodynamic's badge on. Everybody's saying "what the hell you doing?" I mean some people welcoming me back with open arms. My best friend, James Leak was there, now that's my brother from another mother, but James, and his wife, Diane, hooked me up out there in San Diego [California], but it was just great, but more importantly, I went back in, I was welcomed, those departments who called me the "N" word still called me the "N" word. Now I'm working for Geodynamics. I know exactly what you guys are doing, and we're not taking any of that mess any more. So I cleaned that up. I worked the second shift out there, and I really had a good time with those folks out there. Chuck, you tried to charge us $10,000; I know the cable only cost $5,000, so we'll give you $6,000 for that cable. I knew because of the profit margin and stuff like that. And come to find out, he took my report, took it out of the drawer, took my name off, put another cover page on it and passed the same report out. And I proved that that was my report that he had put his name on. So it's just amazing what happens in this world out here, and once again, it was great. Now while I was at San Diego, there were three ladies that I want to share with the team here, Frances, Mary and Joyce. They adopted me as their son when I was in the navy and they encouraged me to do a lot of things, and they were my mother's when I was in the navy. I was away from my mom, away from home, and all time while I was on board ship, when I got off ship, I had a place to go stay, had meals prepared for me. We would go to a club called the Turbo Inn, and that's where I met these ladies at, and they adopted me as their son, which was really nice, went to church with them, so that was my family away from home. So now I'm back in San Diego with my engineering degree now, and I'm taking them out to dinner, they says, you know, we knew you had it in you, so once again, goes back to Mother Smith, these mothers had all that in there with me, Frances, Joyce and Mary. I hope they get to see this because I haven't been in touch with them for a few years, but going back into Ametek that day was like I said, "thank you, Jesus" because once again, the people that respected me still respected me, it was a great experience. And Ametek was good, it was good, I learned a lot, even though still dealt with racism out there, I still dealt with it. Then from there I went work with GD. Bob Schneider was one of the best bosses I could work for. It was thirteen of us, thirteen engineers in his group. We had solved all the world problems with welding material joining throughout the world. And that's one thing I learned at Ametek I took to GD. Speaker 2: Okay. So you were at Geodynamics until '85 (1985)? Speaker 1: Until 1986. Story_ID: 25419 Speaker 1: 86 (1986), okay, and that's when you went to Lockheed [Martin]. Speaker 2: Lockheed. Speaker 1: Now, how did that move take place? Speaker 2: I was enjoying myself. If I had not gotten married, I got married in 1985, my wife and I had been commuting back and forth and we wanted to do a couple of things there and I was living in San Diego. So we started dating back and forth again when I graduated and things got serious and I proposed to her while I was in San Diego. So the first year of marriage I commuted from San Diego to San Antonio, because she was an army medical doctor. Speaker 1: And you met in Columbus, right? Speaker 2: Columbus, Ohio. Yeah, what really got us together, I was a veteran going back to school, and I was using the GI Bill to pay for my college education. I met Rhonda through the engineering program. She used to tutor engineering students for college of engineering through Dean McGhee. So once again, Dean McGhee is the one who introduced me to Rhonda and she had a 4-0, 4.0 in chemistry, and before I wind up talking to her I had a 3-2, you know, you're too smart for the kid, but we started talking in her senior year and my junior year, and come to find out her sister was in welding engineer. I convinced Kay to come into welding engineering, not knowing that was her sister. So I have a sister that has a masters in welding engineering so, but Rhonda and I, she graduated the year before I did. I took her out to dinner that year because I was proud of her, one, of her achievements to tutoring us three graduating with a 4.0 from Ohio State in chemistry and she wanted to learn more about the military. So that brought us together. So she used the military to pay for medical school, and I used the military to pay for my school and that brought us together and we became boyfriend and girlfriend, and three years later we were married. And so I was commuting from San Diego to San Antonio at that time, then we took a honeymoon a year later and came back, I started looking at jobs in San Antonio and come to find out there was a job here in Dallas for LTV at the time looking for welding engineer. And I applied for that position and I came back from our honeymoon in the Virgin Islands, they were waiting to hear from me. I interviewed, came to Dallas and interviewed and the guy says, you know, your challenge would be here is to make welding corp competency here in our division. We have engineers here, but we have in production operation, we don't have a welding engineer. So, I talked to my wife about it, commuting every other weekend on Southwest Airlines, going back and forth between San Antonio and San Diego, I ended up going to here, I got the job and I knew the rest of the story, as Paul Harvey would say. And I've enjoyed my challenges here, had some issues here at LTV. Just to give you a history LTV, Laurel and Lockheed Martin are the same companies. In '86 (1986) it was LTV, 1993 it became Laurel, '96 (1996) became Lockheed, just acquisitions and mergers. So I've had the same phone number for the last twenty six years at Lockheed Martin. Story_ID: 25420 Speaker 1: Okay. Now what were some of the projects? You worked on some intense projects for Lockheed Martin? Speaker 2: Just to summarize before I leave GD. At GD my job was robotic applications and atomic cruise missiles-- Speaker 1: Geodynamics? Speaker 2: --Geodynamics. So I had a lot of experience there. So when I came to Lockheed Martin LTV at the time, I had already experienced with the different material applications. So my first job was building some unique missiles called (unclear) armor missile, the binary chemical warhead, the acet was the anti-satellite weapon system. So those were the great projects back in the day. The multi rocket launcher system is our bread butter at Lockheed Martin. They had 8.5 miles of welding in that launcher with over 350 details welded together. You can imagine that eight and a half miles of welding all the technique procedures to put vehicle together and to launch the missiles and the rockets were just a great project. So those were great programs; those were the last two to three year programs, then I start working on the space shuttle program and then my ultimate goal was the space station. That was just a great experience on the space station. And you work with different individuals, different team members so I worked with some engineers on the army tackle missile system, the first surface missile, I challenged this engineer how to develop welding procedures. I will never forget as long as I live, I predicted what he was working was going to fail, I predicted failure. And I work in Texas, Missouri, you got to show these people sometimes, they won't listen to you. They will not listen to you. Respect is earned and not given. So watch my good friend, tell him what's going to happen, he didn't want to listen, and what happened is you weld these two halves together at the missile, you weld them together, then you put them on the expanding (unclear), they expand. When you expand that metal, those two weld joints are really pulling apart. If they are not joined right, they will pull apart and they will break, and they cracked, and when that warhead cracked, and I told everybody around me, I predicted what's going to happen. He didn't want to listen, so I said what's going to happen, so he expanded it and when he heard that thing expand, it went like a stick of dynamite, bam. I mean everybody in the whole building knew it failed, and everybody came running and looked at it, it cracked right in the base of the center of the weld down the heat affected zone right where I predicted it was going to fail. He was going too fast, and did not--you got them--when that material solidifies, you got to solidify at the right congruent growth. It's got to grow together perfectly, if not, you're going to have failures. So with that being said, the manager, directors, called me in the office and said why didn't you explain it. I explained his procedures, he didn't want to use it. And they almost blackballed him. They said, whatever Ernest recommends from this part forward, you will work with him. So I took him under my wings and started working with him and came back one day, and I walked up behind him and he was just cussing me out left and right, using the "N" word left and right, and he turned around, looked at me, turned red as an apple. I said, "why Lord" but that's okay. I got to deal with these individuals. We went, we worked together and all the welders were saying, you know your stuff. So I was trying a new procedure the next day, so I worked late that night and I was in the shop practicing my skill sets, and the foreman came in and said, Ernest what are you doing. I says, "Walt, I'm practicing my skills." I'm going to produce a new procedure tomorrow and everybody's going to challenge me to make sure I know how to do it. But you know as a union shop, I said that's okay, but I was a welder before I was an engineer. And he looked and said, wow, he said, gee, Margo, you can weld. I says, yeah, that's my background. So the next day we came out, we worked on the Ametek missile system. (unclear) warhead we did procedures. Everybody came around, they watched me weld, I got respect with a capital "R" out of all my welders, put that to bed. You could weld, you're an engineer, whatever you say, Ernest, we'll work with you. So I've earned the respect from the last twenty six years as a (unclear) expert. The greatest challenge I had at Lockheed Martin was working with the Ametek missile system. The government wanted--Lockheed Martin wanted to sell this missile internationally. What I can share with you is the state department mandated that missiles had to be tampered proof. They didn't want to sell these missiles to foreign military countries and they cut it opened and look inside so they wanted to make sure that you cannot take it apart. Or if you took it apart, try to put it back together, we had what you would call a weight and C-G. The weight and C-G missiles flying through the air had to be on a straight path. If you don't have the weight and C-G perfect, it will cork screw, so that's what happens. So, I got called into a meeting in 1995, walked into a room with a general, two colonels, my VP, director the whole entourage. And I thought whoa, what did I walk into? And the vice president turned to me and said, I guess you're wondering why you're here, Ernest? I says, well, I guess I'll find out. He said, well we want to send army tactical missiles to foreign military countries. Right now, we have Turkey and Greece who want missiles, but safety mandate, they must be welded together. And you're our welding engineer, our chief engineer, if anybody can do it, you can do it. So they gave me some more background on it. This is a live missile, meaning that you have a solid rock and mortar, three feet in diameter. This missile goes one hundred miles minimum range. If I tell you maximum then I will have to kill you, but I won't to do that. But this missile goes a hundred miles minimum range. Can you imagine three foot diameter missile flying through the air. And it was a different material, D66C material, very hard material, and then these 17 seven stainless steel material. So the two were welded together, and for (unclear), don't have to worry about the tamper-proof but I said, General, you want to do what? And with a straight face, they said they must be weld it together, the state said mandated, it must be welded together. And he said, how are you going to do it, I said, with a straight face, we're going to do it very carefully. Because what happens is anything above 600 degrees four inches away from that weld joint that missile is going to blow up on you. Anything forces away on this rocket molar or its skin side, anything above 195 degrees, it's going to blow up on you, and that will kill you. So I designed the system called electrone welding, this process out there a company called Siaki out of Chicago, they had the equipment. Put together a test plan procedures and worked with my friends with Siaki, Robert Cherry, my good friend, Ken Lockenburg, Bob Saylo and of course Ted Hanna, Ed Hansen, not Ed Hansen, but Ron Hansen. The team came together with me and we worked together hand-in-hand. We built mock-ups. We welded the parts, make sure we could pull them apart, get the tensiles, make sure it was strong enough then we did a temperature profile. And the first time we welded it, the warhead never got above 303 degrees, 100 percent margin of safety. Anytime we designed a product we have to have a margin of safety. So we had 100 percent margin of safety on that missile. And we jumped for joy to give out T-bone steaks. We went to the lab and did the test, it cracked right down the center in the effective zone and the missile would have snapped two; holy smokes, going back to the drawing board. Story_ID: 25421 Speaker 1: Alright. So here we are cliffhanger. So the mockup cracked? Speaker 2: It cracked and so back to the drawing board, we found out that when a weld is made, there's a hardness that we test the hardness of the material. And so it was too hard, so come to find out what we called heat treat, that's where you heat treat the materials to make it softer to temper it so that is has more ductility in the material, so if it's too rigid, it's going to break, so you want it to give. So, I went back to the drawing board with my team. We looked at it, so because it's a live missile, we got to work on the temperature profile. We can't put it into an oven. So we developed a technique, we used an electron beam weld, what do you call it a cosmegapan. We widened the beam out and we would treat the path a second time, not welding, welding was the first path, you got penetration, second path we just heat the material up locally and weld it around the warhead, then we checked the hardness. So initially we're at 65 in a rock well sea is very hard, 65 is hard. We'll be down about 40-45. So the first paths, we got down to about 50, 55. So we did a second path, got it down to 40, 45, so yes, we solved the problem, not yet. Because it's a missile, you know the max is about 300 degrees, so we have to wait a certain timeframe so the missiles of the time grade to come down if we put more heat into it. So we had to develop a window, that window was 15 minutes, 20 minutes. So the minute that we stopped welding the penetration paths, there was a person who would clock with a stop watch quick. A certified welding inspector. Fifteen minutes we got ready to make the second path. If you go pass twenty minutes, you just messed up the heat treat properties. So it was surgery, it's unique. So we did that, everything worked through process and it happened. We were able to pull the tensile, we met all major requirements, we jumped for joy. The project was successful. Now, the trial and tribulations of working on that project; Siaki was one of my good members, John Cook was one of the engineers up there working with me, a couple other guys, Leo working with me on the project. But the key was I got twice amount of sleep on that project. The first time because you're taking 60 thousand volts of electricity hitting this small piece of filament called titanium to about three thousands degrees and emit these electrons. You concentrate the electrons down starting the welding process. Anytime you kill the power, we have what you call an arc out, because all of that power with six thousand volts coming through there and when you kill the power, it normally boils a hole in the part. Normally it typically boils back over, but you've got a live missile. So I didn't sleep one night and all of sudden the missile started rotating, the missile blew up, I woke up in a cold sweat, my wife said are you okay, I said no, no I'm not okay; the missile just blew up. She just said this is one of those projects that going to kill you in your sleep too. But she started putting a note pad by my bed, so I put anti-rotation device, went back to sleep. Next day went back to work, called my friends at Siaki and my mechanical engineer, electrical engineers, laid out the process and said okay, missiles start rotating, we need an anti-rotation device. So we put a feedback system tachometer. If the missile is rotating it works. The minute that it starts rotating it kills the power, good, that worked. Every time that missile come in and gauged that tachometer, problem solved. Another week later doing great, wake up in cold sweats with a power surge, another arc out. Because we're in the desert, you can't work on any live missiles in a populated area. So we're in the desert, in El Paso, way out in the desert. So if the building designed to blow up and out to the desert, so that any mishaps that's how it works. Because you're out there, there's power fluctuations with electrical current. So if you're out there and there's a power failure, the building goes down for a while. So you're out there on that grid, so once again go back to arc out. So if you have an arc out with 60,000 volts, you're going to blow the missile up again. So what we did, I went back to my electrical engineer, we designed a transformer, upgraded that, all these surge protectors, and I didn't do statistical analysis, I went back in there and I threw the power a hundred times, it reached a hundred times we don't have a little blemish in the weld joint, not an arc, not a spike, mission accomplished. So September 27, 1997, we're ready to run our first live missiles. I'm at the helm, I wrote the book. I weld the first 25 myself, train my operator, Tony Sanchez, great guy, great personality. I trained him to weld these missiles. And we successfully have made the company over $700,000 and product for them, welding these missiles. That night I slept the first time soundly in two years. I woke up, we went out that night. Robby Cherry was the technician from Siaki. They told us we had to escort him up to the main building. He could not be in the building with welding (unclear). He was one of their top engineers, and when I pushed that button, I held my breath for the longest of my life because I knew the max going around was 270 degrees with max temperature. We got past that max temperature and the temperature grain was coming down and everybody was high fiving and jumping for joy. I sat back in my chair, all I said was thank you, Jesus. That was the most challenging project in my 40-year career in the welding industry, welding of the live missiles. And that had been the number one success record for Lockheed Martin for the 88 (unclear) for military sales missiles; great, great, great project. Speaker 1: Okay. How long did it take you from start to finish, to perfect the process? Speaker 2: We started in 1995, well June 1995 to September 1997. Speaker 1: Just two years. Okay. Just for sake of discussion, the government didn't want those war head to be able to be removed because, I mean, or looked inside of because of the sensitive nature of the information-- Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: --And even though I might purchase them as a country, I can't look in to see how it's made? Speaker 2: No. Because the technology, as we are aware now of "ITAR" International Trade Association and Regulations. And all I think about ITAR, anytime I work on any project, internationally, I'm not going to jail because of some technology I'm transferring technology to you. The government can do it but not me. But as long as they--we even sell missiles and stuff to other countries, but we meet all of the most stringent requirements there are for the International Trade Association Requirements. But, yeah, they want to make demanding and be tamper-proof, and we did it. Story_ID: 25422 Speaker 1: Okay. I have here in the notes that you have a code of conduct that you enforce when you meet because of a couple of incidents that took place that you say that "when I tell my manager I'm going to court today, I'm going to court means drastic, I'd say given the proper tools, I can guarantee you I can do the best job making these welds perfect each and every time, however, if you can't give me the tools then I can't be responsible. I'd like to be relieved of my responsibility of being your welding engineer." Speaker 2: That assimilated from a situation or sensor destroyer missile. February 10, 1991 at Weiss and Missile Range is where we do all our testing of our missiles. We had an unscheduled disassembly of our missile in flight. Yeah, those are very colorful words, unscheduled, disassembly and in flight. This missile flies through the air it has six simunitions about the size of a paint can, and as it goes through the air it dispenses these simunitions with a micro by the time you blink your eyes, and it flies (unclear). It got 30 degrees to the point of the earth, circles with a parachute system and then destroyers are target from the air (unclear) armor missile. Well that day we had a situation where I shared with the managers and engineers, they had selected the wrong aluminum alloy for this missile manufacturing. This is a material we called 6000 series aluminum which is very high in silicone and manganese. It's not good for missiles. And I share with the team, I just came from Geodynamics, and we used an atomic cruisers made out of 2219, very high in copper. Copper aluminum gives you very strong material and is very good for electron welding. 6000 series is good for chairs, tables, not good for missiles. So I share with them, but I was overruled. So when we had that failure, anytime there's a failure on a product for the United States Government, you go to what we call a red team mode, cause of corrective action, and I'll never forget going to the artillery room that day, Carl Wolf was there, Wilbur Cummings was there, Floyd was there, everybody was in this room. And still it was only two minorities in the whole room, and I'm in the hot seat. And everything was coming up to the point, everybody did analysis, they did back in the day a CIS, they did the reevaluation, it was a weld failure; hot shore crack about the size of a human hair causing the missile to snapped in two because 6000 series is very susceptible to hot shore cracking, shared that with them. Seriously, I took a break so I knew my report was coming. I went upstairs to my office, grabbed a stack of material, my produce-ability analysis, that all my dig in there, that once again, I did my homework, said a prayer to the Lord, went back downstairs and I sat down. I got up and gave my report, gave my presentation, it was a weld failure, but it seemed I had a big harpoon on my chest. Everybody was throwing darts, hitting dead center. Harry Baumgartner said, Ernest, I don't know how you did it, but after you got done, you were like superman, you were fending off those harpoons, because I did my homework. The colonel and Wilbur both looked at me and says, job well done. However, Floyd, they told him take your blank, blank, blank, blank, program manager (unclear) why put your engineering hat one-on-one on who see weld engineer. He shared with you what you should have done and you didn't listen. Ernest, you need to be more forceful in what you're doing in making sure the manager listens to you. I says, Wilbur and Colonel Wolf, it will never happen again on my watch as long as I am welding engineer. I learned that day that I will take full responsibility of my work. You've given me the power and the respect so that I guarantee it will never happen again on my watch as your welding engineer. So anytime I talk to my managers, I'm going to meetings, I know it's going to be a conflict but we have conflict resolution, it's going to be a risk, we got to do a risk mitigation, I've got to make sure that I'm prepared, and I told my manager I'm about to go to court, so if you get a call, meaning that I'm going to tell that individual that I'm going to be leader as to my responsibility as to welding engineer on the project and step back because I am not going to let another failure happen on my watch unless they take the risk all 100 percent. And when we start welding--I'll share with you an example. I got ready to weld the live missile. I wired the tool room with my good friend, Al Deshane, he was a director, I had three engineers in the room, and they wanted to weld the A tactile missile where the warheads come together, and that gap varied from zero to 100,000. Anything greater than five human hairs it would just cut the missile in two and blow it up. I said Al, here's the situation, you have three engineers, they had to know first thing about welding engineering, don't have a degree from (unclear) University in welding engineering, they don't know anything about electron beam welding, and understand the process. If you listed any one of those three, you get into the recommendation, then I want you to call Wilbur Cummings, my manager and says that I have quit the program, I want to be relieved of my responsibility as your welding engineer. I want off of your program, because if they blow up that missile, they are going to blow up a whole facility. They invested 1.6 million dollars to my recommendation to build that facility. So that's going to go up in smoke. However, I have a degree in welding engineering from Ohio State University, I know everything about electron beam welding, I guarantee you either listen to me, put together my team that I have in place, I'll give you full responsibility for your program. I take full responsibility. I want to say in my mind, you could listen to Larry, Curly and Moe, I want off your program, but I didn't disrespect them. But I said, you listen to any one of these three engineers, I want off your program. But you got to call Wilbur and Bud the two (unclear) and VP to tell them why and what I just said. He said you really feel that confident. I said, it's not confidence, I understand, I know what I'm doing. Yes, I'm confident, I take full responsibility as your welding engineer. And he says, okay, Ernest, I'm with you. Now you know the rest of the story. I've only had to do that about three times, had to do that recently at another program, the program manager backed off once again. I says okay, and here's--I always do my justification. I won't say to them back off, I always justify why I'm doing it, which is why I am the SME for the enterprise now at Lockheed Martin. Story_ID: 25423 Speaker 1: Tell us about some of the your NASA projects? Speaker 2: Well, the space station was one where we built these thermo control units that control the environment for the cruise (unclear), the black box environmental test chambers. My team, we designed 15,000 welding systems. And I tell all my colleagues when you're travelling at 17,500 miles per hour, you have orbited 250 nautical miles, you don't have a bad weld day. If you do you're going to freeze like frosty the snow man or roast like a turkey on Thanks Giving Day, because every ninety minutes plus or minus 250 degrees. The space ships are travelling 17,500 miles per hour so every ninety minutes you see a sun rise or sun set; that's 16 sun rise and sun sets in one day. I have fun on my career days, I says, how many did we see? We see one. So, all my mathematicians, get your calculators out, how many do they see. Go home and have fun with your parents. See, that's a kicker it's my welders are the best welders in the USA. I used to say the best welders in the world until I got involved with the international welding. These technicians are the best in the world, so I work with the best companies like Astronaut, we design--my good friend Wayne Tuttle, we design specialty welding heads to makes these welds. David Brewer, Kerry Polk and Jeff Handstrom were my sharp surgical welding team. These guys have to certify everyday and once again, you can't go up there and fix it when it fails. You get--so you figure at 15,000 welds every weld is inspected five times; visual inspection, x-ray, proof pressure, heat and leak detection and then penetrate inspection. Why helium detection? Helium is the smallest gas molecule that's a red and we flood the system with helium. If the helium gets through there, we know we got a leak. We only had one leak on one part that was produced by a subcontractor. I told my entire space station team, if we ever have a leak or anything that we worked on, I'll buy everybody a dinner at Roof Christ Steak House. That's a good confidence in my team, if we ever have a leak. So I told my welding team, every time you build a panel, which is 22 welds, I'll take you out to lunch. Any time you build a full array of eight panels, we go out to dinner. So Jane Parris and my good friend, he'll come to me in a minute, Chris Raul, we were always--and Tim Han, we'd put up money in the pool, anytime they know no defects, we took them out to dinner, so I invested in my team, so we never had a failure on the International Space Station thermo control units. Now, once again, you can't go to outer space and plug in the power, so we built the photo protect radiators. Every battery has a radiator system like in your car, you have anti-freeze, when it gets too hot, you turn on the air condition, when it gets too cold, you turn on the heat. So we have automatic systems up there. In the radiator system we use hydroxide ammonia, and that would go through a freeze thaw situation, so we had to make sure that there were no leaks whatsoever. So that was the, once again, the space station program, we built the thermo control units that control that environment for the astronauts up there. And they would come back and tell us thank you for a job well done, because I got a chance to meet Kathy Thorton and several other astronauts, because they know our work is in their hands. And when the Shuttle Challenger blew up, I lost my good friend Ron McNair, and I thought did I make a mistake to cost a friend his life on those gimble joints. So we only do soul searching as engineers. That's why it's very critical we work hard. That's why we have back ups to the back up to the back up systems out there. That's why I tell the kids, you know, when I talk about career days, "C's" are not acceptable, learn from your mistakes, if you make a mistake, go back and learn how to get "Bs" and then get "As". That's why I'm very proud of both of my kids, they're engineers, and they learned from their mistakes, so we don't do less, we do lessons learned, it's in the space program. Also with the NASA projects, when the shuttle goes up, he open his cargo bay doors and in the cargo bay doors are radiators, by the second time it goes around the earth, it just opens up those doors and dissipate that heat, you got a problem. Everything generates heat. So you got to get rid of that heat so you're working on the vacuum system up there, so that's what we do, get rid of the excess heat, so we at Lockheed Martin, we're in the one of the world leading experts when it comes to thermo control units for the space programs. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: And that's another fun project because you get to work with individuals all the astronauts, and as I think shared with you earlier, I got permission specialist in 1982 when I graduated from Ohio State. Loved to go to outer space, I mean I'm a (unclear) fan, I would love to go to outer space one day. Speaker 1: --So you think it's out of touch now? Speaker 2: No, it's not out of touch. I think that's it's going to be an opportunity to do some space travel. The one thing that I do share with everyone here is the fact that, you know, people say that the Shuttle program is gone. Remember the Shuttle program was only designed to build a space station, it's a work horse, it's only designed, all the product had to fit the cargo bay, and we have 45 shuttle missiles to build the shuttle, to build the space station, shuttle back and forth. They had no engines, it would go up and only had one chance to land, so now we're trying to go to Mars and beyond. So once again, I think that's a chance that maybe my grandkids will see space travel. Story_ID: 25424 Speaker 1: Just for the record, can you go back and give us the engineer's assessment of what did happen to Ron McNair and crew. This is 198-- Speaker 2: 1986, yeah. I'll never forget that day, as long as I live. Basically, the old rings on solid rocket boosters were in a freeze condition down at the Cape, and the material shrunk, just like it does with a gasket, the material shrunk, and there was a leakage of fuel coming out. The maverick team chose not to wait until the temperature rose to a certain temperature and all that gasket to expand back again to seal that leak, and it was all about money. They put money versus the landing of the day versus the launch. And the engineer, once again, same thing I did, I ran upstairs, got all my data, and he told them, if you launch, we won't have the data for a freeze condition; do not launch. They said, do not launch and they launched that day. And you could see from the tapes on the launch pad, you saw the fuel leaking out and the shuttle went up, it ignited just like a fire cracker and blew up and killed astronauts. And once again, I was in San Diego, I was in the computer room, Margaret walked into the room and she was just crying like a baby, and then we said what happened, she said the Shuttle just blew up. And I was just spellbound for about maybe ten minutes, I'm thinking, one, my friend Ron McNair, two, Chris McCauliff, three, did I make a mistake on my designs and my procedures for the gimble joints when I worked for Ametek Straza that cost my friend his life. But it was an old ring failure, which is why we test, we test, and we retest. Same thing happened with the Shuttle Challenger is why now they have cameras on the Shuttle taking off. It takes pictures because as things fall off, ice fall, the insulation falls off, it does damage to those tiles. And with the Columbia, it was a Saturday morning, I was in the bed, my daughter came to--said, mom--dad, mom said wake up, the Shuttle just blew up over Texas. I'm lying there, I says, no way, and I realize, we heard a noise, and it was, because when the max ship is coming in, as it's coming in that's why those tiles got all that temperature, and a little leak, and that's what happens, a leaks inside there that got the temperature side and once again, it's a very viable vehicle and it blew up again. So we lost two shuttles. So to take away from that, I chose two lessons learned. The least there were two different type failure modes, they weren't the same failure mode, but still when human life is off, it's very dangerous. And that's why, we as engineers, we try to make sure our calculations are right the first time. Speaker 1: --Your team had a 99 percent success rate on the initial welds and 100 percent on rewelds, right? Speaker 2: Yes. The reason being, like I said, 15,000 welds, that's 60,000 inspection operations, and most of those were the manual welds, and those basically undersized welds, we had to have a minimum requirement size, so we had to make sure we had to have a 100 percent for NASA, anything less was unacceptable. And we made sure we met that. Oh, yes, and I'm very proud of those records. And once again, when the team wanted to go out to--I had one issue with one of my welders. Now, let's go do it anyway, and I said, okay, time out, go home. I'll go fix the problem. I said here's five dollars, go watch Appollo 13. That is not an option on my watch, go home, and that was Kerry. He came the next morning and says, whatever you say, Ernest, whatever you say; would not have a failure on my watch. Because once again I would love to be the first welding engineer out of space to go do a repair procedure; I'd love to go up there and do that, but I know that's not feasible, it's not the right thing to do. Story_ID: 25425 Speaker 1: Now, your path to your position was kind of unusual, right, in terms of, I mean, actually welding in the shop and high school and in the navy and then being able to go to Ohio State and come out and work for NASA and Lockheed and, you know, what would you recommend to young people today in terms of if they wanted to become a welding engineer? Speaker 2: Well, basically, the whole idea is when I served as president of the American Welding Society, being the first African American president in 2002 my mission was to teach individuals they can have a great welding career. And when we talk about image of welding, I told students you can do anything you want in your life. And right now I talk about the welding career, you can be a welder, a technician, inspector, business owner, supervisor, there are so many different welding professional jobs you can do, but figure out the one that you want that you will enjoy. You want the hands on, you become a welder, you want to do an inspection, become a welding inspector. You can have your own welding company. And so many guys have their own gas diesel rigs out here. They're out in the fields so there are so many welding careers out here that available to the students. I still say science engineer, technology and math is what you have to have as the baseline. In the American Welding Society we have really encouraged that. We just developed a welding merit badge for the boy scouts of America that I was the godfather of, and my boy scouts here 822, they're actually in the book, so they're part of the history book. We were the first troupe in the United States who had a welding--the merit badge, and the most important is you teach eleven-year old boys that they're great careers. You look at the pay scale, you can start in college--start off as a welder making $30,000 a year, or going to graduate from college right now with a BS from Ohio State University making $55,000 a year, graduate with a masters degree making $80,000 a year. So the careers are available for welding. People think it's dingy, dirty, dangerous. Yes, it's dangerous. Walking down the street is dangerous, driving a car is dangerous, but you reap the benefits. You heard my story, working on the space shuttle, space station, building rockets, building the missile, traveling the world; I've been to 20 different countries, I'm involved with the International Institute of Welding. I'm chair of a commission, because Ron McNair challenged me back in the day, pick an area of a typical welding engineer. So I chose power beam processes, now I chair commission four of the International Institute of Welding. The first African American Chairman, that's number one position in the world. I'm respected throughout the world for my knowledge for power beam technology because Ron McNair planted a seed back in 1981, back in 1960, Mr. Martin Luther King, Dr. Martin Luther King told us what we need to do to get there. Julian Earls and all the people who were my mentors along the path have really helped me. And so I told everybody it's a great career in welding material jointing throughout the world. With that being said, my career path at Lockheed Martin is very unique. It didn't happen overnight, I've been with the company 26 years. But along that path I had great mentors. You heard some of the horror stories, but the good side of it Mr. Ed Morris was my manager back in the day, 15 years ago, he said, Ernest, take what's your knowledge and go share with the world. I gave my first national paper on welding space station thermo control unit in Florence, Italy in 2000. I never forget I got through giving that paper it was silence in the room. All of a sudden everybody started banging on the table. That's the international community job well done. My friend Cosingy Chanko from Ukraine, Thomas Gillespie was there; it was just great being accepted in the in the international community. I look at Jack Jackson, my director, he always encouraged me to take that risk, go the extra mile, make it happen, but always cover your basis. I look at the African American Leadership formed in Lockheed Martin, this is a group of senior managers that formed this organization to help us grow. Internally, that's how I was able to grow because, you know, the one thing you would take away from this today is I bragged to myself as a welding engineer for the enterprise for Lockheed Martin as a fire control. I helped them solve problems enterprise wise now for the entire corporation. I look at my good friends that helped me, Art Johnson, was part, Joe Cleveland, Linda Gooding, Sharon Cooper, these were African American individuals who were high in Lockheed Martin that helped us young folks come up the route. I mean seriously, Sharon was my mentor. I had one mentoring session with her, but that one mentoring session with her really, tremendously took me to the next level. Ed challenged me, Linda challenged me, they taught us what they were doing, so these were people that, you know, I want to give credit to because, once again, within Lockheed Martin and it's walls, I mentored a lot of students also. You always got to give back because someone--when you get to that fork in the road, let me teach you how to make the right decision. If you don't make the right decision, back up, back track and go down that path again. So everyone has different ways of doing certain things, but the African American Leadership Form is one of the best that happened at Lockheed Martin, and these individuals formed this organization and allowed us to come together as African Americans, Bob Stevens is one, he's the CEO of the company. When he knows your name, you've done your job, well done. Story_ID: 25426 Speaker 1: Now, what's Lockheed's relationship to nurturing and bringing in African American scientists? Speaker 2: The one thing I love about Lockheed Martin is the diversity, it's core of principals, our full respect for leadership that the managers in the upper levels are really pushing downward. I'm involved as a recruiter for Lockheed Martin, I do a lot of career fairs. I go to the SHIP which is the Hispanic organization, "NSBE" National Society of Black Engineers; they also have the black engineers of the bay organization. And this organization is where they have career fairs every year, and Lockheed Martin is right there at the forefront trying to encourage the young in the best and the brightest to come to Lockheed Martin. We're an engineering company; we have over 100,000 engineers, so we have to have a very diverse workforce, and Lockheed Martin is there, I see it with my own eyes. February is engineering week, we go out to communities and we bring students into our facility. For example, my daughter brought together Arthur Mathis science major from Marcus High School a few years ago to Lockheed Martin "E Week", engineering week, and I gave them an overview of what we do, we have one of the young men from Marcus High School working with us teach these students what we do there. Out of the forty five students, half of those students became engineers in college. Now, we go out and we hire the best and the brightest at Lockheed Martin and seriously I feel confident in what they're doing. I think it's quotas out there that they go after, but I know they go after the best and the brightest, and they bring in all very diverse background of engineers. Story_ID: 25427 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you said there was something else about the welding profession that you wanted to say, we talked about before we-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to share with the group Mother Smith, like I shared with you earlier, told me back in the day that I was going to be an international world leader, and Pastor Ribbus at Calvary Baptist Church, Mother Smith, Emma Joe and her sister Christine, I mean I can name them all, Brother Seabury, they all encouraged me back in the day, and said, you know, you follow her wisdom, her advice, and you could be an international world leader. And I just left Paris two weeks ago, and I introduced the Welding Merit Badge to International counter parts, and more importantly is you know, this past summer, at the IW Annual Assembly, every year we have two meetings, I go to the chairman's meeting in Paris then the Annual Assembly the IWA of fifty six different countries; these are the best and the brightest in the world from fifty six different countries, professors, business owners, engineers, entrepreneurs, and we come together, manufacturers, I get to manage the best and the brightest in the world, and in the words of my friend, Ike Mesinawa is my mentor from Japan. He said we want to be an international organization. And he mentored me to take over this position. And so, when I go to Germany this year, when I go to Nigeria, Singapore, Peru, I'm representing, not just Ernest Levert, Lockheed Martin, I'm representing the African American community. So when people interact with me, I'm in China, a guy walks up to me and looks at me and touch me, and you know, I'm the first African American that they ever interact with. He said, well, how do you react, I smile and say, hey, how you doing, they want to take a picture with me. I'm at the Great Wall of China three years ago, and they walked up to me and got all up in my face, looking at me, my hands in my pocket, make sure they don't want to pick pocket, but looked at me and she says in Chinese to my interpreter, can she take a picture with me, and I said, ask her why. She said you're a very lively looking man, I said, ask her why, she said you're--she'd never seen a man of color before. And so we got to be careful when we talk about what we do as African Americans in this community and even though you can be tall, blue eyed, they don't see people like us around the world, so, I wanted to share with you, and in the words of Mother Smith, she told me I could be an international world leader, and I've done exactly that, I've travelled to twenty different countries, I'm respected by my peers as a leader throughout the world, I've thoroughly enjoyed that. When I present to the board of directors, they see my passion with the youth, bringing the next generation on to replace me. I'm fifty eight years old now, retire in a few years, I'm trying to bring the best and brightest on to replace me, but more importantly, when they ask me to run for board of directors, I'm going to say yes, I'd like to apply for that position which I have so, hopefully, I am the first African American president of the International Tool of Welding. One thing we didn't cover was one organization that I was chairman of was the Federation Material Society. This organization is out of Washington, D.C., made up of twenty two different other organizations, [American Association for] Crystal Growth, Vacuum Society, Electrical Society, McWorts Society. I was in front of 700,000 members. They sought me out to be the president. Betsy Houston, a good mentor, good friend of mine, she was executive director, got me involved, and my mission was to turn that organization around, revitalize the organization. Our mission was, not to advocacy, but just to work with the congressional representatives upon the hill, try to get more material, more funding for the National Science Foundation for different projects for material research community. So we were able to successfully get that side of the budget doubled. So I'm in the office with people--I had an opportunity to sit in Senator Barack Obama's office. He was on the campaign trail for president's first term. Three things I remember about that office was the Buffalo soldiers, Martin Luther King and pictures of his family and a picture of Abraham Lincoln. I'm sitting in his office, I'm talking to the chief science staffer about the space program. He supports the space program, but when he chose to not renew the Orion project, I was upset, initially. But in the international community this international project we need to work on that's what he's pushing out to be commercial even if you're under the $500 dollar hammer again, all the bureaucracy, all of this stuff is gone by the wayside, so I respect what Barack was doing. So same thing is when I go get board of directors for IAW, they want someone to bring knowledge, substance to the table so I came back from Paris a week ago and I was very happy what the president was saying we hope to have you on board as a board of director to meet the president one day, so you never know what the Lord has in store for you, but I thank Mother Smith for encouraging me back in 1970 when I was seventeen years old, I'm now fifty eight years old and when I got the pin, I don't have it here with me, but when I got the pin this year from the IAW as one of the leaders of the world and from all fifty states, I could say, well thank you, Jesus, thank you, Mother Smith for the opportunity to be a world leader. So I tell the kids, keep mentoring and keep listening to your mentors and your elders. Story_ID: 25428 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My main one is staying focused, trying to break the status quo of what's happening in the community out there. I always use my family as an example, I always try to talk to the youth about staying in school, working hard, college is not for everyone, but find a job that you enjoy that you can get up in the morning and enjoy going to work, stopped reaching for a handout. I would say, with God in your life and faith in yourself, you can achieve your goals no matter what you're told. Figure what you want to do, because the best kept secret to total success, my success have been goal setting where "G" stands for God, "O" is for opportunity "A" is for attitude, "L" is for leadership, "S" stick to it, don't give up the ship. In my navy days, I've never given up the ship. So, I'm writing a book right now called the "Power of One" as it relates to the power within you. And I will talk about what they need to do. But the main concern is these kids today, they're being raised by kids, they really don't have a full understanding of what it takes to be successful, and that's why we, as this generation, has to go back and teach them what it takes to be successful, hard work, not handouts, hard work, dedication, perseverance. That's why I talk to these boy scouts. In Troup 822, West Side Baptist Church, 80 percent of our boys make Eagle Scout, 80 percent. Only two percent in the African American community make Eagle Scout. Last night at a scout's meeting I had one of the moms send me a nice email. Roxanne was saying thank you for taking time to be with my son to help him. He's twelve years old, but he's going to be an Eagle Scout, teaching him why they're doing the hard work now is because it's going to pay off down the road. And when I look at these fourteen young men that are Eagle Scouts, they're all leaders on campus, they all have persevered, and I'm just so proud. So once again, if I can show the world through some type of organization, mentoring, the parents giving back to the kids, that's what we need to do, show these kids, these African American kids and Hispanics and other kids you can be successful in this world, but do it on your own, not asking for a handout. Story_ID: 25429 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at your own history, is there any major activity or thing you wish you can go back and change or undo? Speaker 2: I think about that quite a bit. But it's a paradigm, if you go back and change what might have happened after that. No I think a lot of things that I've done, I will continue doing, because I think there were always lessons learned. And I have proved from those mistakes that I made and moved in the next direction. Moving to Texas was a good move for me; marrying my wife Rhonda was a great move. We have two kids, you know, and I stayed involved in their life throughout my career. I did science fair projects, I did career days, I volunteered. When I walked in the school, here comes Mr. Rocket Scientist, you know, because I teach the kids. You know, when they look at an engineer, you know, I still give back to maybe--they went from 100 to 70,000 kids a year, because I refuse to say no to a career day, I refuse to say no to an opportunity to talk to parents about what my hardships were. So, the only difference would be my navy days, my first, no, I wouldn't change that. I took the crap, I took the stuff, but look where I'm at today. I raised myself above that garbage and so I look back at that sometimes and wished I had a different path but, you know, it made me a bigger person. Story_ID: 25430 Speaker 1: If you look back over your history, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I'm giving back. I think if the Lord called me home tomorrow, people would say Ernest gave 100 percent in everything he did, and in fact, in my job, I give 100 percent, in my family I give 100 percent. There's always a balance that I have to work on, family, business, my extracurricular activity, my wife will tell you, that you know, Ernest, you got to have that balance. But with my boy scouts, I will always give back, and I think that's my legacy is given back; a giving person, helping a person grow. In Lockheed Martin, my legacy is I am the soldier, (unclear) welding engineering and material jointing throughout the corporation, because no one can--everyone has called me up whether it's a fire control, eyes on GS, MS2, I've always been there to answer the question. And when I go to different events, they know, here comes Ernest the rocket scientist. So my reputation has preceded me and I thank the Lord for giving me these opportunities, the same thing with HistoryMakers, this is a great opportunity which I will cherish the rest of my life, because once again, when people hear your story, they can learn from your story. So my legacy is giving back. Story_ID: 25431 Speaker 1: Now, I know you mentioned your children and your wife, but in the course of explaining other things, now is the time, can you really tell us about your family. Speaker 2: Yes, my wife and I Rhonda Hagey-Levert has been there, we've been married 27 years, been very proud, she's an internal medicine physician, we have been here in Texas now, that's what got me to Texas 26 years ago, and very, very proud of her achievements. You know she has come from a great family the Hagey's are--her brother and sisters are professionals. We have two children, my daughter is 24 years old, very proud, she just graduated December 10th with her master's degree from Northwestern, we will move her to Atlanta, Georgia next week, where she'll be working for Kimberly-Clark, very proud of her. I was at a welding convention in Vegas this past year and she did internship with Kimberly-Clark this summer. I go by and says, just want to say hello to Kimberly-Clark folks here, because they build welding equipment, and her project was similar in building welding helmets. And went by and says hi, I'm Ernest Levert, I'm Chantale's dad and the lady jumped and said you're Chantale's dad, you're Chantale's dad, I said, yes; we loved your daughter and she did a great job for us this summer. Just make you feel like you did something right raising your kids. So I'm just very proud of her, so she'll start working for Kimberly-Clarke on February 18th with her master's degree. She's 24 years old. I said you're a catch, but you're a good catch now, got your mind body and spirit there. Our son is Ernest Levert, Jr., Eagle Scout, very proud of him. He has been just like mom, straight "As". I remember he came home from school one day and said dad, they called me the "N" word Dad, they called him a nerd. He got one "D" in eighth grade. I talked to him, Michael Jordan or Bill Gates, what Michael Jordan makes in one year, Bill Gates makes in one day, basically. So I tell him you can be a nerd or work for a nerd. But he is now Eagle Scout, he's a leader on campus, very proud of him, he's studying biomedical engineering, mom's a doc, dad's an engineer, so you tell both my kids I'll be your patent attorney, because you're going to make us rich one day, and very proud of him. He'll graduate May 5th from Ohio State University. Both kids born in Texas, where they both got full scholarship to Ohio State, Chantale got four in-state scholarships, the buckeye scholarship, even got a full ride plus a stipend--academic scholarship, so very proud of both the kids and as a graduation present, we're taking an Alaskan cruise on May 5, excuse me on May 30th to--it's on my bucket list, so it will be twenty years wedding anniversary, both their graduations and I tell my kids, I'm very proud of what you've done. Now with that being said, all my nieces and nephews I have, both my kids, I say, okay, now, you be the role model for your cousins. My nephew, Walter Levert, came to live with me one summer, along with Jason, my brother passed away, and I took on the responsibility to help, now he's an electrical engineer, doing a lot of different things, so I'm trying to make them the mentors for their cousins so they can see what they do. They don't have to end up going down that path, falling in love, getting pregnant, falling out of college, I'm trying to teach them that education is the key to success, and that's what we're doing so, I have a great family, very proud of them and what they've accomplished and what they're going to accomplish. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25432 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked about we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I think we covered pretty much. It's always something that you wished you had said or brought out, but I think over a period of time, I think we covered a lot of the most major areas. Speaker 1: Okay. Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That's always a good question. Just be remembered as Ernest Levert that was a caring, giving individual who put others ahead of himself. I think what I've done with my lifetime is work with individuals to my success is your success and that's simple and easy. Story_ID: 25433 Speaker 1: This was taken in Beijeng, China, I am part of the International Institute of Welding. I am representing the IAW on this picture with my colleagues. As you see the only African American but once again is truly being respected by the Chinese at the delegation. Love this one this is my portfolio that was put together as black engineer of the year for 2004 for special achievement in an industry. With that cover you see my picture with the rockets space shuttle, space station, these were projects that I worked on. This is a picture taken right after basic training where I received the administer honor metal, that was in the (unclear) post, and the second one is where I completed the heat treat metal school, where I was class honor man; those are two major achievements in my life. First student to ever ace the final exam in the history of the United States Navy, first recruit to graduate United States Navy basic training with a beard. This as I recall that was put together by a college program, and they called it "Putting it Together". I loved the title said, once an inner city kid now he reaches the star with his welding career, and it talks about my goals saying what "G" stands for go for the goal and go for God, so there's my G-O-A-L-S as I talk about and be having in my book. This was a highlight for me, one of the highlights of 2012, this is the welding journal for the institute (unclear) which is an Italian welding journal. They wanted a story of an American that has impacted the Italian Welding Society, and ten years ago, I went to Italy, I was a guest at their institution, and believe me, everyone still remembers me, so it's called Ernest Levert, an American Story, so it's a great opportunity. Front cover, and be careful what you ask for, was Mother Smith from all over the world. This is the welding journal a journal that is sent throughout the world with this picture, talks about the first boy to earn the welcome merit badge held from Texas. This is 8/22 along with some of my co-workers and another colleague from Arlington, Texas with his Troupe 118 who I also worked with who earned a welding merit badge. History was being made with this picture. This is a picture taken with A. Bernice Johnson, along with Ray Shuc, Chris and Jim Key, they were all part of the American Welding Society. Our mission was to get more funding and once again, since I was from Texas, they could produce jobs, we had a great talk and once again the influence they taught it's not what you know, it's who you know, but that was a great picture with Bernice Johnson. This is one of the charts that I give out to all the students that's showing my welding technicians, Kerry Polk and David Brewer and Toby, who was inspector. Those were the three positions you could have, but once again, we were all there for the show that launched in November 30, 2000, watching the shuttle go up with our hardware in outer space. And to share with you, we cried like babies when that took off, because our work was going in to outer space, all the hard work paid off. This is showing a snap shot of the electrical welding process along Mark Preyer, Tony Sanchez, one of my right-hand man on this project. Once again, they invested 1.6 million dollars to the electron welding system to weld together live missiles for the military, all computer controlled. This was taken just recently, December the eigth, this is the welcome mayor back to college I coordinated for Lincoln Tech for the Grand Prairie, and once again, these young men, forty that attended the college, which is very, very great. I put this here because these young men supported me and in the class called heat treatment metal school in 1977 are the first students to graduate who aced the final exam. My grade was a 94.3. I only missed two questions the whole time and once again, I bet the chief that I would ace the final exam. I went to the back of the room in the corner by myself, I aced the final exam so he could never say I cheated. This is the ISUC E3. I'm with my car with the two commander officers in the United States Navy basic training. I received the (unclear) honor metal for leadership and we're cutting the cake and once again, I had a beard there too, as you could see. And this is my company, my colleagues in the United States Navy in Orlando, Florida in 1974. You could see there's more African Americans than normally because once again, most of these guys didn't swim. I was able to help them swim to pass their test...