 Story_ID: 380231 Speaker 1: My name is Shawn Wilson. I will be the interviewer today. This is Neculai Burghelea, he will be the videographer. And if I can just start by having you state your name and spelling it out for me. Speaker 2: Okay. My name is [HistoryMaker] Brian Lane, that's B-R-I-A-N, Lane, L-A-N-E, Vincent for middle but that's okay. Speaker 1: V-I-N-C-E-- Speaker 2: N-T (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) T. Okay. Today's date? Speaker 2: Today is January 18, 2007. Speaker 1: Your birthdate? Speaker 2: Six, four, five-four, that's June 4, 1954. Speaker 1: The location of, oh, I'm sorry, birth place? Speaker 2: Brooklyn, New York. Speaker 1: So you're a Brooklynite? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So just give me your birthdate again, let me-- Speaker 2: June 4, 1954. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and that's in Brooklyn? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: The interview is at 4 oh, I'm gonna screw it up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Times Square. Speaker 2: 4 Times Square [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. And your occupation? Speaker 2: A designer. Independent, right now consultant for mostly men's wear but I do men's and women's primarily outerwear and sportswear. Story_ID: 380232 Speaker 1: Okay. I'm gonna ask you five People magazine type questions. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Short answers. Your--this would be great for your favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: Ooh, that's a good one, steak. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Caribbean. Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase, that's a good one too, hm, not yet. Speaker 1: So do you say it often? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 380233 Speaker 1: We're gonna start talking about your history and your family's history as much as you remember or, or as much as, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we'll start with your mother's side of the family. So if you can give me your mother's full name and spell it out for me. Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's full name is Etta Walker Lane, that's E-T-T-A, W-A-L-K-E-R, L-A-N-E. Speaker 1: And her date of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is six, oops, I'm sorry, July, July 6, 1932, I believe. Speaker 1: And her place of birth? Speaker 2: South Carolina. Speaker 1: Oh, so she's from the South. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What part of South Carolina? Speaker 2: It's called, I think it's Revlon [sic. Ravenel, South Carolina], and it sounds like Revlin do you know it? Okay. It's Revlin. I, I just had a conversation with her and she reminded me of that and I was like I've never heard of that place. Speaker 1: Now is it, what is it close too? Speaker 2: I, that I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My, my geography sucks. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Typically on that side of the world. Speaker 1: Now she was born and raised in the South as well? Speaker 2: She was born there in that area then she moved to another area but she was mostly raised in New York [New York] and Brooklyn [New York] as well. And that's where she met my father [Edward Lane]. Speaker 1: So what time, what age did she move to Brooklyn, do you know? Speaker 2: I think she was like about six years old when she moved to New York. Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about why the family moved? Speaker 2: Well, my natural grandmother passed away when she was young and it was kind of a, a move over to stay with her uncles and she, that's why, one of the reasons why she moved to New York, so they wanted to take care of her. Speaker 1: So her mother died? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: When she was how old? Speaker 2: I think, I wanna say two or three (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really young. Speaker 2: Yeah, young, young. So-- Speaker 1: So she never really, she doesn't remember her mother much? Speaker 2: Not much, not much but she, you know, she does remember something of her. Speaker 1: How many siblings are in that family, your mother's family? Speaker 2: In my mother, in my mother's natural family, I don't know. And the, the family that she grew up there were five, offhand I believe five, between uncles and aunts that I know, that I grew up with, which were her cousins per se. Speaker 1: Okay. So they were actually her cousins? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Acting as her uncles and-- Speaker 2: And brothers and sisters. Speaker 1: --and aunts, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Her uncles raised her, her cousins more or less were like her brothers and sisters. Speaker 1: What did your mother do for a living? Speaker 2: My mom always worked in nursing. She worked, and she retired in a nursing home but she, she grew up or in the business of working at a hospital. I grew up in hospitals, always hanging around the hospitals. And actually in my latte- early college years, I worked in the emergency room with her because she ran an emergency room triage, and I actually worked with her for about two and a half years after school. Speaker 1: Where did, where was that hospital? Speaker 2: In, also in Brooklyn. I can't remember the name of the hospital but the hospital is no, no longer exists, there's, I think an apartment building there now. But I worked there for about two years and she worked for that hospital for about ten or twelve years and then she left there and went to a nursing home, worked in a nursing home. And then that--she did that until she retired. Story_ID: 380234 Speaker 1: And what about your father? His full name and his date and place of birth? Speaker 2: Okay. My father was born in, my father's name, sorry, is Eddie, Edward Walker, sorry, Edward Lane, E-D-W-A-R-D, Lane, L-A-N-E. He was born in Youngstown, Ohio. And he, the other question was, that's where he was born in Youngstown, Ohio. And then he came to New York [New York] after being in the Korean War and he moved to New York, I, I wanna say like in his late twenties or so, or, or mid-twenties, mid-twenties, and that's where he met my mother [Etta Walker Lane]. Speaker 1: Do you know the story of their meeting? Speaker 2: No. And it's a curious idea. I know he used to come by the hospital and you know it, no, I do know, I just remembered. He worked in the, because he also, when he was in the Korean War, he worked in services, the medical services there. And when he came back, the, one of the jobs he was able to get was to work as a, an assistant in the operating, operating room. Since he worked at the same hospital which was Kings County Hospital [Kings County Hospital Center, New York, New York], he, that's where he met my mom, because my mom worked at that hospital as like a, what do you call it, pin, pink striper or something like that. Speaker 1: Candy striper. Speaker 2: Candy striper. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So he and your mother met-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the early '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Yes. They met, I was born in '54 [1954], I think they met in '52 [1952] or something like that and married. And then I was born in '54 [1954]. Story_ID: 380235 Speaker 1: What street did you grow u- do you remember growing up on? Speaker 2: Ooh, that's a good one. The very, very young age which I do remember visually but I can't remember exactly where it was in Bedford-Stuy, not Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York], yeah, Bedford-Stuyvesant. But I do remember my growing up street was Lincoln Place in Brooklyn [New York] because I pass it still. I pretty much pass every place that I've lived because my mom [Etta Walker Lane] moved a lot in between, throughout Brooklyn, mostly soon as I finished one school, after I finished the three years or whatever there, she moved with my brother and I. And she, so I've lived, I lived on Lincoln Place was the one place I do truly remember like it was yesterday (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you remember about it? Speaker 2: I remember it was the first time that I actually was able to go out, you know, on my own because in those days you could actually just travel the neighborhood and nobody bothered you, no one bothered you. So I remember being a kid and starting my first kind of business by, there was a bingo hall around the corner from my house and a friend of mine, I talked my friend into standing in front and opening up the cab doors and, and getting paid, a nickel, or a penny, so they can get inside. So it was one of the first things I did. Then it was a church across the street that I do remember going into because at lunchtime if you put on a shirt and a tie and you ran in there you would be able to run in and get free food (laughter). So there are few things I do remember. Oh, and the last thing which probably I shouldn't talk about was if you had a popsicle stick there were, because of the, the hall, you, we had a lot of parking meters and if you had a popsicle stick and you stuck the popsicle stick in a parking meter you could take out the last coin that was put in. So we made our fifty cents a day, you know. So it's the little fun things that we used to do, that's why I remember the neighborhood so much. Speaker 1: Who were the people in the neighborhood that you looked up to at the time? Speaker 2: At the time, was a neighbor who lived downstairs Connie [ph.] is, is her name that I remember, I barely remember anything about her now but I remember she watched out for us when my mother wasn't home or if my dad [Edward Lane] wasn't home. And mostly was the, a lot of the older kids because in those days we had good, pretty, pretty good kids in the neighborhood so everybody watched out for each other. And that was a lot. I was very young then, you know. I, I was just starting to go to school so it was before I, you know, got older and started moving around more. Story_ID: 380236 Speaker 1: So do you know anything at all about your father's [Edward Lane] side of the family? Speaker 2: The, the only thing I really know about my father, my father passed away about thirteen years ago, the only thing I really remember about my father's family is being young and going out to Youngstown [Ohio] as a kid. And the fact that my father was good with his hands and he was building a house and he always stayed working on that house and my aunts and uncles were there and I know there was, one of my uncles was as they say slow but he was the artistic one in the family which I always thought that was kind of weird. But my aunts, all my aunts and my uncles, I knew about my uncles were very athletic. One of 'em was All-City for years in his high school. But they all played ball, whenever they got together in the city in New York [New York] they would all play basketball together, they would all play softball together. So it was a very athletic family which was, I thought was very cool, it's just I wasn't into that much. Story_ID: 380237 Speaker 1: What were you into? Speaker 2: I was more in to par- the other part of, of the active things, you know, I did other stuff, I ran, I skated, I roller skated, I did all the other things you do normally as a kid but I didn't like to be associated with organized sports for some reason. You know, I'd get a bunch of guys together and we'd play punchball or we'd play, I don't know if you heard of punch ball. Speaker 1: No, what's punchball? Speaker 2: And punchball is basically you get a, what we called a Pensie Pinkie or a pink ball, soft ball that you use for a handball. And we would actually, literally, set up like in a diamond, like a baseball, and you go to a park that had or a schoolyard that had it and you actually punch the ball instead of having, so you didn't have to have a bat, you didn't have to have gloves, you did everything with hands, that's the way we played it as kids. And basketball wasn't something I was in to, my dad [Edward Lane] was into it but I wasn't into it until later and I never loved it but, you know, ironically, my sons [Evan Lane and Ian Lane] play it. Story_ID: 380238 Speaker 1: So what do you consider your very earliest memories of growing up in Brooklyn [New York]? Speaker 2: Probably the fact that we were able to do things around the neighborhood. We were able to travel from area to area with no problem, we were able to play with friends, we'd meet new people every once in a while. There were some troubling things that happened because my growing up in my time, there were a lot of gangs. And-- Speaker 1: What were the gangs? Speaker 2: The gangs were in--when someone asked me this not too long ago and the names of the gangs and I can't, I remember one was the Corsairs [Corsair Lords] and the other one was maybe the, the Jets [ph.] which had no correlation to that movie. Speaker 1: They didn't dance at all? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --they didn't dance. But ironically, the same time those gangs were out in my neighborhood the play ['West Side Story'] was out on Broadway. So I can kind of, I could always associate to it, so when I would hear the songs, of course, my dad [Edward Lane] used to be very much into, into music and I would hear a lot of the songs and associate it to what was going on in my neighborhood. Now I didn't see, I wasn't directly involved with anything and fortunately my brother wasn't involved in any gangs as well so I was very lucky that--we were as a family, we were very lucky. But at the same time though you, it's very obvious that gangs were out there. Story_ID: 380239 Speaker 1: Now is he your older or younger brother? Speaker 2: Older, he was my older brother. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three years older than me. He was my half, actually he was my half-brother on from my mom [Etta Walker Lane]. So my dad [Edward Lane] took him in as well so he raised both of us until my mom, until they separated or, I'm sorry got divorced. Speaker 1: And when did they do that how old were you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was ten. Speaker 1: So when you were young? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my brother was thirteen. Speaker 1: Now do you consider yourself to be raised as in a single family household? Speaker 2: Yes and no. I, it's, it's a mix because my mom was dating someone who was very influential in, in helping to raise me. He was, he was a policeman--detective, sorry--and he instilled a lot of stuff in me so I don't think, I think of being raised as, as in a single home, single parent home but at the same time though there were there, there, there were people there to kind of guide you and, and I was a good kid, my mother was lucky. Story_ID: 380240 Speaker 1: Now did you attend church as a child? Speaker 2: A little in the beginning. It kind of fell off later. You know, I find myself, it's ironic because I find myself as a believer but I just don't believe in going, you know. And, and I don't, I don't frown upon it and hopefully no one frowns upon me because I feel that way but it's just something, it's always been there, He's always been there for me, mentally, physically, but at the same time I just don't do church. So we kind of got it as a kid, (audio disturbance) you know, we, we got it and knew it was going on. Story_ID: 380241 Speaker 1: So what are your earliest memories of, of kinde- or pre-K [pre-kindergarten], did you do pre-K when you were young? Speaker 2: No, we didn't have pre-K, we went straight into, went straight into kindergarten. And I remember getting along with my teachers, teachers all liking me. I remember being pushed into different activities. I started-- Speaker 1: What were you good at? What did they push you into? Speaker 2: Anything artistic. You know-- Speaker 1: For example did you paint or draw or-- Speaker 2: Paint, I started drawing, I'm really, even though I'm a designer and that's what I do, I'm really an illustrator or an artist and I've been drawing since I was about three or four when my brother drew a stick figure for me and showed it to me and I never stopped. So I've been really big, my favorite table to draw was on was my, back in my day, we had phone tables, a little table you sat at and that's where your phone sat so when you're on the phone, you used that table, so I would use that table as my drawing table as a kid. And I remo- I remembered that about four or five years ago, I had completely forgot about that so that's interesting that I did it. But I never stopped drawing. I used to bother my mother [Etta Walker Lane], bring home paper, bring home anything, bring paper bags, I drew on anything. So I think teachers that I had saw that and they were interested and, and tried to push me into it, you know. Story_ID: 380242 Speaker 1: When John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] died I did a--was assassinated, sorry--I did a drawing of a coin when they issued the first coin with Kennedy on it, I drew that coin in a huge picture and it hung in the Brooklyn Museum [New York, New York]. And, you know, that was, I guess, nine, if I figure my years right, nine, or eight or nine. Speaker 2: So how did you get that picture to hang in the Brooklyn Museum? Speaker 1: They, for some reason, someone saw it and they thought that it would be great to put it in and I thought that was kind of special. I never took pictures of it, I think I only went to see it once, my mom [Etta Walker Lane] took me to see it once. Speaker 2: So you had a piece hanging in the Brooklyn Museum? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Where did they hang it, do you remember? Speaker 1: I can't remember. You know, I, I-- Speaker 2: It was a picture of a coin that was-- Speaker 1: I, I drew the image that was on the coin so I, I had blown it up and drew it like ten times the size. And it real, actually made, I was shocked, they came and said oh, guess what your piece is gonna be there and I was like really? My mother was shocked. Speaker 2: And you were nine years old? Speaker 1: Yeah. Well I, I, I can't do the math (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or roughly, okay. Speaker 1: --I have to-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I would have to do the math, I'm not sure exactly how old I was. Speaker 2: But approximately? Speaker 1: Yeah, about nine or, you know, based on the year that he was, that he was murdered, assassinated, let me see. Speaker 2: Oh, I mean I can do the math. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He was assassinated, yeah, I'll figure it out. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: I think '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What? Speaker 2: Kennedy's assassination, '63 [1963]? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sixty-three [1963]. Speaker 2: If that was, I was nine. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah. Story_ID: 380243 Speaker 1: So what are some of the, who were some of the teachers that influenced you early on, who you, who helped put this paper in your hand and to encourage you to paint and draw? Speaker 2: The only teacher I really remember and I have to associate her with that only because that's the name that sticks with me, Mrs. Grayson [ph.]. And because of that she, I guess, saw something as well and encouraged it in me. And showed me that, you know, you're not a typical kid, you, you got something that's special you should try. I wish I was that good in my language classes when I got older but I didn't have her as a teacher. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: She was good (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) go ahead. Speaker 2: Oh, no, I was gonna say she was really good and, and, for whatever reason her name has never left me. The day I forget that then I'm in trouble. Story_ID: 380244 Speaker 1: Do you remember what it is you wanted to be in your mind's eye as a kid during that time? Did you want to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I do. I wanted to draw, I didn't know what I wanted to draw but I knew I wanted to draw. I liked, I loved anything artistic, I loved music then as a kid my dad [Edward Lane] played a lot of music. Speaker 1: What music did he listen to? Speaker 2: He, he listened to a lot of, even though he listened to the, you know, the basics, Nat King Cole, any James Brown, to, you know, and a little bit of jazz, not as much jazz, I kind of found jazz on my own, but he listened to a lot of Broadway. And I think in the '60s [1960s] and late '50s [1950s] a lot of people bought Broadway film, music, at least a few people and, one or two friends I knew grew up in the same kind of household, you know, a lot of Broadway plays were played in the house and my father always had music. And I can't remember the name, I wish I could pull it out, I remember when I was about three or four years old, as, as I'm told, my dad had a song that he loved and he played on the record player, and I heard it and I loved it so much I walked over to the arm of the record player and I loved it and I kept on putting it because I used to see him put it back I took it and I broke the arm off of the record player because I loved the song so much I wanted to hear it again and again. So music, I mean, I, I always felt that if I hadn't gotten into art I would have gone into, totally would have gone into music, it's one or the other things that's in me still to this day. Speaker 1: Now did you listen to like the Jackson 5, The Temptations? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was older then. Yeah, I was, by that time I was in high school [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York] when the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) when those, when they were popular? Speaker 2: Yeah. But I was, my mom [Etta Walker Lane] thought I was crazy because I would listen to Temptations, James Brown, Jimi Hendrix, a lot of the, the, the music that was coming out of L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you know, out of California, where there was Santana, all those things I was listening too. So I kind of listened to all music as, as well, from soul to R&B, to everything. So I didn't have one, when, when people used to ask me what music do you like the most? I didn't have a, you know, specific. Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I liked it all. Story_ID: 380245 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before you went to junior high school when you're still in elementary school-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what type of a dresser were you? How did you dress to go to school? Speaker 2: I didn't have to wear, we didn't have to wear uniforms so we were lucky that my mom [Etta Walker Lane] would, you know, I wore penny loafers, with the pennies in 'em. I wore jeans or if not khaki-type pants or, or just basic dress pants. A lot of times I wore sweaters or, or a top. I remember when I was young, my mom, when Velcro first came out I had Velcro closure pants which hysterical, you're just standing in the classroom just zip, zip, zip, you know. But, you know, we kind of dressed up in those days. You didn't go to, you dressed okay in school and you came home and you put on your play clothes which were jeans which is so different to now, you know. So, I, I think I would have, I was a little bit dressed up and I found clothing more, I found out more about clothing when I turned like twelve and thirteen years old, I really discovered, I liked buying my own clothes. And it was certain, certain movies that influenced me in what I wore and different things like that. So I guess that's where the fashion part started for me. My dad [Edward Lane] was a voracious dresser. I mean totally to a fact that he built his own little room and his own little armoire so he could put his shoes and press them, pressed his pants and his shirts and all of his hats and everything. My, my dad was, my mom was into clothes, my dad was just as bad as she was, so I kind of take on, out, more after my dad, you know, when it comes to clothing or at least when I found myself. Story_ID: 380246 Speaker 1: What were holidays like in the household, Christmas, Thanksgiving? Speaker 2: Really nice. Our, in our day, we used to go, actually go out on Christmas Eve and, and get our tree and decorate it the night before and then get the gifts. And we could all, we always tried to find out where the gifts were coming from and, you know, we would sneak, and one year we finally found, found this stash of gifts and we got busted and that was a traumatic Christmas 'cause we almost lost all our gifts. But they were, they were, it was, everyone was around, it was a good thing, people coming to the house and it was very nice, you know. We loved it because we would go and, and get more gifts from other people. But, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now Easter Sunday is a big holiday, did your family celebrate Easter? Speaker 2: Yes, and we did--and those and when I was younger we did go to church on Easter Sunday. Speaker 1: Did you have an Easter speech or an Easter poem, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --when you stand in front of the church-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: --and recite something? Speaker 2: No, no. The closest thing that I can remember outside of that was Easter was performing in, in public school at--doing the Easter, singing the Easter bonnet ['Easter Parade'] in front of my class. That was traumatic, so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about July 4th? Did you get a new set of clothing July 4th? Speaker 2: No, not really. No, unh-uh, we didn't celebrate that way, it was all about fireworks and watching fireworks and things like that. No new clothing or anything really special, it was just barbecues and celebrations like that growing up. I never heard the one about getting clothing. Speaker 1: Well, I guess that's southern. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Down south you always get a new set of clothing. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Like Easter. Jun- July 4th, you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Easter you got the hard shoes and, you know, hard shoes and a pair of dress pants and a tie, yeah. Story_ID: 380247 Speaker 1: When you move, what elementary school did you go to? Did you tell me the name of it? Speaker 2: No, because, I don't know if I can remember. I wanna say P.S. 213 [New Lots School, Brooklyn, New York] that's the number that comes to mind and hopefully that's the elementary school I went to. 'Cause my mom [Etta Walker Lane] moved so much I can't remember, you know. Speaker 1: Why did she move so much? Speaker 2: She is, she had the innate power to be able to read a neighborhood. She could tell when a neighborhood wasn't going right and she got us out of there, out of there. So when we bounced around, it was mostly because my brother was three years older than me so he's three years ahead of me so he would not finish the same time but because he was older, he was able to move a little easier. But for me soon as I was done with one area, boom, I was in another area and it was time for a move, she liked to move. Story_ID: 380248 Speaker 1: Did you have friends, people that you were close to because you moved, moved around so often? Speaker 2: Some of them still, I still stayed in touch with. But I'm for whatever reason I make friends easy so, you know, it was, it was okay. Except for the, the middle school era of danger where I had a, a hit out on me for twenty-five dollars, yeah, it was very strange. That, that's worth a book and people have been trying to get me to write it down. Speaker 1: So what happened? Speaker 2: I was dating this girl--middle school--dating this girl and there was a guy who liked her, he was in high school, and he said I should stop going out with her and I said no, I wasn't. So he hired some kids and they systemically came to my school over a period of about six months looking for me. And I don't wanna belabor this and, and lead it out it too long but finally they caught me, two guys came, one guy got away with, got away from, second guy, I avoided, the third ones caught me after school and it was two of 'em and they were about to completely wale me. And there was a kid that went to my school who, if you know who David Ruffin is from The Temptations, looked like David Ruffin, wore, very, very thick glasses, wore a leather jacket, a leather coat, 24/7, all year long, in the summer, in the fall, in the winter, always wore this leather coat and was rumored to have a gun but he was a tough kid but he never talked but he went to the school kind of, and he was like the Fonzie of the school. And when these guys caught me, they caught me sneak- I had snuck, we used to sneak out to go to lunch around the corner from the school and that was Solmers Junior High School [sic. Arthur S. Somers Junior High School, Brooklyn, New York], I remember that name. Speaker 1: What is it called? Speaker 2: Solmers, S-O-L-M-E-R-S [sic.], junior high school. It's in east Flatbush [Brooklyn, New York] off of Kings Highway. And we, I snuck out that day and I came back and then these guys are saying, "You're Brian [HistoryMaker Brian Lane], right?" And I said, soon as they said that, I said, yeah, and I said I'm in trouble now. So it was two guys, they were totally older, bigger, there was no way I was, maybe I'd get one shot in and I was gone. And they cornered me and they were gonna beat me up and all of a sudden this guy in the leather coat came and said, "What are you doing?" And they said, "Well, we gotta kick his butt." And he said, "No, you're not gonna do that today, he's my friend, you don't touch him." And the guys knew who he was, everyone knew who he was, and they backed off, they said, "He's your friend?" He said, "Yeah, he's my friend, you don't touch him." And they backed off. From that day I never had another problem. And I turned to the guy and I said, "Why did you do that?" And he just looked at me and he just said, "You know, what you're a nice kid, I know the girl that's involved in all of this, yeah, she's pretty but you're a nice guy, I always see you around, you don't bother anyone, you don't deserve it." And he walked away, never saw him again, never saw him again. And, you know, that, those years were very strange years because you grow up more. I had a girlfriend, you learn about who you are, your sexuality is up then, you know, like you're trying to figure out. I also went to school, went to the same high- same middle school as Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton], he was in my school too. He was, he was good friends with one of my best friends at the same time but-- Speaker 1: But he's older than you, right, much older? Speaker 2: No, I think if anything he's one year older than me, if anything. But I believe we graduated the same year. And I approached him actually about six or seven years ago I approached him and brought up the name of the person we both knew and he just opened up like, "Wow, how is she?" and blah, blah, blah. Story_ID: 380249 Speaker 1: So continuing you get into high school-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and do you have any idea at this time what is possible to do with your creative talent? Speaker 2: Yes. By then I, I kind of had more of a focus on what I wanted to do. To get into the high school, I went to the High School of Art and Design in Manhattan, [New York] 57th [Street] and 2nd Avenue. And I had to make a portfolio to put in to be accepted or to at least have an interview. And by the time my teacher told me that I had to do it, I procrastinated, being a true artist, I procrastinated, and I did my portfolio I think in a day. I just sat in a, in the lunchroom and library and I drew, and I drew a couple of things, I did about, I think about six pieces. And I looked at 'em and I said yeah, I should be able to get in. And I went and I got in. So, you know, that's one of the reasons why I procrastinate because I like to work under pressure. Speaker 1: Now, the High School of Art and Design was-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --did you draw fashion or furniture or clothing? Speaker 2: No, I was my, my major was illustration, general illustration. At that point I thought I would do like book covers and album covers. Speaker 1: Did you know any illustrators at the time? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And I wasn't familiar with too many because I kind of, I taught myself how to draw in a way. Even though I had like small art classes. You know, I got accepted to go to Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York] when I was in middle school, middle school? Middle school I got accepted to go to Pratt for the summer but for whatever reason I can't remember I didn't go. So when it was time for me to go to Art and Design, I knew I wanted to be in illustration or cartooning. And then I knew I didn't have the patience for the cartooning, it's certain things you have to do and I said no, I don't think I can do that, so I wanna purely be in the illustration part. And then I started to find illustrators outside of the, the comic book illustrators because I learned a lot from the comic books, for coloring, shaping, you know, lines, drawings, and every- and one of these days I'm a bring it back for me, I'll do it. But I knew that book covers and album covers is where I wanted to go or in advertising of some sort. Story_ID: 380250 Speaker 1: The reason I got into fashion illustration was purely because a girl I was dating in school had fashion illustration as her major. And I used to sneak into her class and sit in the back and say I can do that, I'm into clothes, I can do that but I never did it. And I'll never forget Mr. Gatos [ph.], Mr. Gatos was my illustration teacher and slash advertising teacher in high school [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York]. When I told him that I'd thought about going into fashion illustration he told me no, don't do it, you're, they'll eat you alive, there, there's no consideration, it's not a field that I think you need to go into. And he was so against it, it made me wanna do it. So then I didn't really get into it for a while because I went, I wound up going to FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] but I didn't go to FIT until three years of going to Hunter College [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 380251 Speaker 1: Now, what year did you graduate the High School of Art and Design [New York, New York] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Art and Design, 1972. Speaker 1: So in 1972 you finished high school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what was happening at home at the time with your parents and you and were they involved in you in what you were choosing to do as a career? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother [Etta Walker Lane], huh, I always think of it as a joke. My mom was worried that if I wanted to be an artist I was gonna be penniless and cut off one of my ears or something. So she was supportive 100 percent, but wished I was going to do something else but she's, listen, this is what you wanna do I believe in you doing it. My step, who I call my stepfather was still around so that was very instrumental in developing me. My brother was in college at the time so I was home alone. Story_ID: 380252 Speaker 1: Wanting for nothing, you know, I grew up very comfortable, very happy, I, you know, wasn't this, I don't think of myself as a spoiled child but because I hated asking for anything but I, whatever I did ask for I got so it wasn't like, you know, I was destitute or came from a family that didn't have. We did go through times when, when times were rough and I was a realist and I understood what reality was with not having money, so I always dreamt of having money. So when I was sixteen--fifteen and a half, I got a job. Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: I worked at a clothing store named Young and Robbins [Young Robbins Clothes, New York, New York]. And Young and Robbins was on, if I'm not crazy 53rd Street between Madison [Avenue] and Park [Avenue]. Speaker 2: Was that your first job? Speaker 1: First job. Speaker 2: And were you a salesman? Speaker 1: No, I was a delivery guy, called delivery guy. And I delivered clothing. And in the summertime I would when I was out of school, and I worked all through high school [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York] with that when I was-- Speaker 2: Did you look at the clothing? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, all the time. And I learned because they had tailors downstairs, I used to talk to the tailors and I used to talk to the salesmen. And the salesmen would talk about the different customers that would come in, what they do for a living and, you know, so I got to, and for delivering clothing around the city, I got to learn, to this day, I know about pretty much how to get anywhere in New York [New York] from that. People still call me to this day, they ask me okay, I have to get to this, what train do I need? So I learned about the city, I learned about the people, I learned about people who had money, I learned about people who didn't have money, I learned about how, how hard people worked to get what they want. And that's when I decided I wanted to have money, I wanted to have better things, I wanted to work for a living, I liked making money. So it, all of that, that's where all my development came from that. Story_ID: 380253 Speaker 1: And from home, my, you know, my mother [Etta Walker Lane] was really about getting your education, getting it, getting it right, doing it once, doing it right, and taking care of yourself. You know, not to be, you know, she always flirted with when you're, when you turn so-and-so you're gonna be on your own, you're gonna get your own apartment, you're gonna bop, bop, bop. You're out, you gotta do it, and, you know. So I was like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did she hold to that? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. When I was, and I'm jumping age wise, when I was-- Speaker 2: And we'll go back, yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah, twenty-one, I, no, I'm sorry, twenty-two, because I had transferred from FI--from-- Speaker 2: Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: --Hunter College to FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] and I was only there for a two year program so when I got out I looked for a, I looked for a job. I got a job working, yeah, pretty much all day and I got laid off of that job. And when I came home to tell my mom that oh, I got laid off, she said that's terrible because I'm moving at the end of the month. So I had no job and I had nowhere to live, so I had to live in my apartment, the last part of my apartment, my bedroom was the only thing in the apartment, so I had to live there for a month then I had, so I had to build my life. I had to get a job, then get an apartment and start, and that's the way I started at 23, 22, 23 is when that all happened. Story_ID: 380254 Speaker 1: When you were at Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --when you, you graduated-- Speaker 2: No, I transferred from Hunter (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in, in, but in '72 [1972] you graduated-- Speaker 2: Graduated from high school [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: --and you decided to go to Hunter-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to major in, what was your major? Speaker 2: That's funny. It was one thing that I wouldn't wish on anyone to do again, when you're, during that time there was a program called SEEK [Search for Education, Elevation, and Knowledge], I can't remember the actually words, S-E-E-K, I can't remember what they mean, but it was a program where you can attend college and they would pay for it and in some cases, you would get a stipend to live off of. So my guidance counselor convinced me that you should really go after this. My, you know, my parents didn't have money, my, you know, my, my mother [Etta Walker Lane] didn't have enough to really pay for a major college, my, so, neither did my dad [Edward Lane] so I was in this situation where I had to figure out what I was going to do so I said okay I will get a, a regular degree, I'll go to a regular college. And I thought I was gonna be a psychologist. That was good for about the first semester. Then I said well, I'll be, I'll be, I'll go into film, then I took that for a semester thinking that maybe I would find that to be my major. But at that time there were really, [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks was probably the only black director out there so I really didn't have enough of a push to do it. So I bypassed it, still love movies now, still think I should have done it. And then the last choice was I figured I'd go into communications. So I said okay. About the secon- end of the second year a buddy of mine who went to high school with me, very dear friend, God rest his soul, came over and shook, literally shook me and slapped me in the head and said, "You need to get the heck up out of here and go to FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] or another college, you're wasting your time here." And I said, "You're right," and I made the decision, conscious decision to go to, to FIT which would have gotten me in there in '74 [1974] but I was too late, procrastinating, too late and I missed the deadline. So I stayed at Hunter one more year and then I transferred to FIT. Speaker 1: So the friend who encouraged you to do this-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what was his major? Speaker 2: His major was not communication, ooh, that's a good one, I'm not sure what it was, it might have been political science or something like that because he took the easy road, easy route out and he went into that. He wound up going into fashion anyway after he graduated from, from Hunter but he didn't, he didn't pursue the fashion career in school, you know, he did it after he got out. Speaker 1: And he died when he was young? Speaker 2: He died, no, he died I wanna say seven, eight years ago, eight, eight to nine years ago (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, that's pretty young. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah he was young, he was young. And he was probably one of the most influential people and one of the dearest friends, you know, I had. He was a buddy that I could not talk to him for six months and then call him up and it was like (snaps fingers) it was yesterday, we could talk again, no time, you know, no problems. And we would always catch up, so he was one of the few, he's actually, is my oldest son's [Evan Lane] godfather, so yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had your first kid when you were how old? Speaker 2: Around thirty, thirty-one, something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were an adult by that time? Speaker 2: Yeah, by then I was an adult. Story_ID: 380255 Speaker 1: Okay. So just moving back you, you stay at Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York] for three years. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You get into FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You finish the program at FIT in what year? Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: So in '77 [1977] you come out with what sort of credentials from FIT? Speaker 2: No, credentials because I never finished. I'm one of these people that will probably go back when they're a little older, and it's just two classes, that's how silly it is but when I came out I immediately started getting jobs. I, I had that one hiccup in the beginning when I had to find my apartment but I then eventually had continuous jobs and just really because it was so heavy duty in the sense of my workload, I never went back. And then you get kind of lazy, you don't feel like going back. I feel like going back now and to get, you know, to get my, at least get my degree. Speaker 1: So in 1977 when you leave FIT, do you leave because of a job or you leave just because you run out of money? Why do you leave school then? Speaker 2: A little, a little bit of running out of money, and really finishing the program and knowing that all I have is two more classes, I'll go back, one of those kind of deals and figuring now is my time to go out and try and, and do something for myself. Speaker 1: So at this time were there any, like at FIT, did you have any mentors or any role models? Speaker 2: Hm, outside of friends who were older-- Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) who had been out that I can think of, not really. I mean, you know, I had great teachers. I can't remember, their names slip me because you caught me on that one but I had great illustration teachers and-- Speaker 1: Were you aware of like Andy Warhol was a great illustrator (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --and had done-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --really well with himself? Speaker 2: Yes. There was another illustrator named Antonio Lopez who I kind of admired and eventually got to meet on my own and got him to sign something for me and, and showed him my book, you know, later and got nice words from him. He was one of the people that drove me because I, at that point I decided and realized that it's a business and I realized it at ten which I didn't speak about. At ten years old, I said I wanted to draw but I wanted to be paid for it. I made that decision, conscious decision that I wanted, whatever I did it had to be a business and I had to do it and drawing was what I was going to do. And I even said later that I'm away from drawing now because I'm designing but I will go back to it and it's one of my, this year '07 [2007], year is to really truly, truly get back into art because I got a couple of, of jobs in the last seven, eight months that I had to actual illustrate so it kind of brought the bug back. So I gave myself six months to do my own show. Story_ID: 380256 Speaker 1: So then in 1977 you leave school [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], and you're let out--little out of money, ready to start your career-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --what becomes your first opportunity? Speaker 2: First opportunity was doing three dimensional paintings for a, a designer slash artist named Ron Fritts, if I say that right, F-R-I-T-T-S. And three dimensional, by what I, what I mean by three dimensional paintings is he would use old obi fabrics from Japan, the actual kimono fabrics, and attach them to a canvas in a body form and all I really had to do was draw the Asian face, a Japanese face on them, the rest of it was all chipuntoed [ph.] and filled with, with foam from the back, so when you looked at it, it looked like a three dimensional painting. That was my first job, hated it. Speaker 1: Now did he, were, were these works of art that he sold in the gallery (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they were works of art he sold in his own gallery and he sold at other galleries for thousands of dollars because the fabric thems- the fabric itself was worth money. Speaker 1: Now at this time did you consider yourself a part of the New York [New York] art scene? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Did you know other New York artists? Speaker 2: No, not, no, not at that time. I was more familiar with more (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because this is the late '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Seventies [1970s]. And I was closer to the fashion end of it or the fashion illustration end of it. So few, you know, few people out here who were, were into design, more into designers and, and my ex-wife [Marva Lane] was also a designer as well and working with different people so we kind of were in that more designer scene, you know, in the party scene, in the Studio 54 [New York, New York] scene and all that stuff like that. Story_ID: 380257 Speaker 1: So do you know, can you tell me, at this time we're still in the late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Who were the designers you were looking up to? Speaker 2: Calvin Klein, at that time Calvin Klein, Giorgio Armani was first starting. You had Perry Ellis was first starting. Carol Horn, Pierre Cardin was very large in the early '70s [1970s]. And at that time he was starting to wane but still was someone I looked at but Armani probably was one of the designers I really liked the most. Speaker 1: Did you know of, say, Williwear [Williwear Ltd.]? Speaker 2: Yes, and I didn't even get there yet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause between Williwear and Scott Barrie and [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows, those guys-- Speaker 1: Were the black designers. Speaker 2: Right. Were the black designers so you paid more attention to them in the business end. The big end designers were where you were more with the hang out at the clubs and going to the right places, drawing those illustrations because that's who you saw initially. Antonio Lopez was the only Hispanic illustrator out there so I immediately identified with him and the fact that he, to me he was like me, you know. Speaker 1: Were there any other black illustrators? Speaker 2: There were but there were and--ooh, wow, that just went away to, there were two and I wanna think of their names it may come to me in a minute but you didn't really see them as much, you knew they were out there, you knew that they illustrated for like Women's Wear Daily and stuff like that but they weren't as big as say Antonio. Antonio had books, he had all the magazines, the other designers were really allocated to the trades, they kept in the trades. Speaker 1: Did you know of the fashion report [Designer Report] that [HistoryMaker] Alvin Bell was putting out at that time? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't know anything, I knew about fashion report but I really didn't know who-- Speaker 1: Alvin Bell was (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) was. You know, and then you, you, you talk about the Audrey Smaltz [HistoryMaker Audrey Lavinia Smaltz] of the world and-- Speaker 1: Oh, did you know Audrey Smaltz? Speaker 2: Yeah. And only from in passing, friends that knew her very well, you know, so you were connected that way. I didn't know her personally but it was like hello, hello, kind of thing. Andre Leon Talley was just starting so I kind of knew of him (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he, the diva he has become? Speaker 2: He was becoming the diva. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: He was becoming the diva at the time. So which was, it was actually interesting to watch him grow as well. Speaker 1: Well, what was he like early on? Speaker 2: Still out there, very fashionable, very, very talkative, very, very, when he walked in a room, he exploded a room. Speaker 1: What is considered his occupation? Speaker 2: He is a fashion coordinator, fashion writer. He is now the fashion writer for Vogue. At the time that I remember growing up with him, he was connected to the Warhols and all the different hierarchy so he knew everyone so he was really part of their culture and knew the culture so eventually he became, I don't know if he was a designer, I don't remember him as being a designer as much as really being a writer and I've been in different things where people are giving, he's given speeches and different things like that. So, yes, he was involved with design but I don't think of, I've never thought of him as a designer as much as a, a writer. Story_ID: 380258 Speaker 1: Now let's talk about Scott [Scott Barrie] and Willi [Willi Smith]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What were their niches and break them down individually as you knew them to be? Speaker 2: Scott's niche was he made a killer dress, you know, and I remember the black models that he used. Speaker 1: Who did he use? Was it Beverly Johnson? Speaker 2: Beverly Johnson, [HistoryMaker] Pat Cleveland. Speaker 1: Pat was one of the very first, right? Speaker 2: Oh, I had a crush on Pat (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was she the first to have been on--go ahead, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, you would not believe, oh, my God. I had such a crush on Pat, it was amazing. Speaker 1: So go ahead Pat. Speaker 2: Yeah, Pat, Beverly (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And tell me a story about Pat. Speaker 2: Oh, about Pat? Speaker 1: You had a crush on her, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, the story about Pat, I don't know if I wanna put this on film. The (laughter) the crush I had on Pat was that they used to have some of the fashion shows at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], we had the amphitheater. So every once in a while they would have shows there. And that's was, that was my introduction to going to an actual fashion show. She was one of the first black models that were used by everyone. Speaker 1: Halston. Speaker 2: Halston. Halston used her, a lot, some of the designers that, Giorgio di Sant' Angelo. I'm trying to remember some of the designers that were using them at the time. I don't know if Scott used her. And she was the diva of the stage to me. She gave, she brought character, she brought her character, it wasn't just a model walking out back and forth, I have this on, it was like look at me, I have this on, you know, I love it, I love what I'm wearing and I used to have the biggest crush on her. And one day, they had a show at the, at the, I forgot who the designer was, but they had a show at the school, and we snuck in, I was still going to school at the time, and we snuck in, we got backst- we were able to go backstage. And, you know, and Pat Cleveland came out and my girlfriend, my ex-wife at the time [sic.], said, walked up to her and said, "My boyfriend has the biggest crush on you." And she said, "Who is he?" She looks, she said hi. And she was changing, she took off everything she had on and I just stood there and I just stood there like this and I just turned to my friends and I just smiled and said, "Hee-hee." You know, that was like the epitome, and then we took a bottle of champagne and left. (Laughter) But it was, you know, it was just like wow, you know, she was just really cool and that's one of the people I really had a, a crush, models that I really had a crush on but-- Speaker 1: Beverly Johnson? Speaker 2: Beverly Johnson, I wouldn't see her that much but I remember seeing the very first show that Iman modeled in. And I wish I could remember the name of that designer but it was the very first show she ever did after she came here from, from her country. Speaker 1: Was it a black designer? Speaker 2: No, no, it wasn't a black designer, it was a white, it was a white designer that used her. And in those days there were only the few beginners that were really big, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And as far as men, black male models? Speaker 2: Rashid [HistoryMaker Rashid Silvera] was probably the only one that I knew and, and ironically I was able to work with him later. Speaker 1: But he died didn't he? Speaker 2: No, Rashid is still alive (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rashid is still alive. Speaker 2: He should be still alive, unless, unless he died in the last couple of month. Speaker 1: No, no, no. Speaker 2: Oh, no, he's still alive. And I'm trying to think of the other male models. Speaker 1: Was there somebody Zoli [Zoltan Zoli Rendessy] or something like that? Speaker 2: Zoli. Zoli was in agency at the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is the agency [Zoli Management Inc., New York, New York]. Speaker 2: So he was a model that started an agency if I'm not wrong. And it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think you're right, yeah, Zoli. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was another designer, St. Jacques [Sterling St. Jacques] and I can't remember his last, I can't remember his first name, he used to model and he was the only other black model but that again was during the, the fashion heyday, the, the Studio 54 [New York, New York] time. So then all the black models were in, and they were being used heavily at that time. Story_ID: 380259 Speaker 1: But Willi [Willi Smith] I loved. You know, I thought Willi was so cool to see him, and I think it was in Essence magazine they did a story on him and Norma Kamali when Kamali first started. But Willi really, I loved it so much because he was making clothes for black women and he talked about that. And I remember illustrating one of his first illustrations, you know. Speaker 2: So you worked with him? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: You mean illustrating-- Speaker 1: I just, I just saw something-- Speaker 2: And you just drew it? Speaker 1: --and I just drew it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I put it, I had it in my book for a bit, you know, which was, I thought was very cool. And there weren't that many of us in the industry. And that's, I think one of the reason why maybe my teacher told me that they would eat me up because there were no black illustrators at the time. Speaker 2: Do you feel that there was, because there were so few people that you clung together? Was there a black fashion industry club, unofficial club? Speaker 1: Yeah, there is, there was. And there is now. I mean, the urban market has a club now as well. Speaker 2: Well, we have Rocawear, FUBU-- Speaker 1: Yeah and-- Speaker 2: --Phat Farm. Speaker 1: --and it's, and it's basically incestuous because a lot of the people that work for one sometimes may go to the other and bounce around, you know. I worked in that industry for a short period of time but I worked outside it and in it at the same time (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well let's talk about that era-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the '70s [1970s] that was the-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --unofficial era of black designers, illustrators. Who were the people that were in that unofficial club? Speaker 1: In the unofficial club were basically the-- Speaker 2: You, Williwear [Williwear Ltd.]. Speaker 1: Williwear. Williwears was just starting so there was just the Scott Barries, the, ugh, his name is gone too, geez, [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows, you know, was there. Story_ID: 380260 Speaker 1: What was [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows specialty (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stephen Burrows' specialty was the, the scalloped dress. And Scott Barrie's was, and I can't remember Scott Barrie's initially. Speaker 1: Now the scalloped dress did that come before or after Diane Von [Diane Von Furstenberg], Von, whatever? Speaker 2: In, around the same time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The same time. Speaker 2: Diane had her signature vest, dress, you know, which was the print and it was the more-- Speaker 1: And that little wrap around. Speaker 2: --wrap around, that was her key. Stephen Burrows had, Lycra had just come in and, and certain non-cotton dress synthetics were coming in. And the fact that if you use a Merrow stitch around the edges, along the edges of this, of the dress, it would make it curl. Now I'm not a women's designer but that was one of the things that was signature for him. And he sold in stores like Henri Bendel's and-- Speaker 1: And that's expensive to do though because of the fabric (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well it was. Speaker 1: Okay. It was, yeah. Speaker 2: It, but, you know, it wasn't terribly expensive. The fabric was new so, yeah, Georgette, certain different things were new, and he kept it at a level of designer. When you do design it could be tissue paper, if the designer's got his name on it, it's always gonna go up. Story_ID: 380261 Speaker 1: So it was Scott [Scott Barrie], Willi [Willi Smith], Stephen [HistoryMaker Stephen Burrows]-- Speaker 2: I know there's other people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you. Speaker 2: --in there that I'm a shoot myself when I leave this room. Speaker 1: Audrey [HistoryMaker Audrey Lavinia Smaltz]. Speaker 2: Audrey was really more involved with, with Fashion Fair [Ebony Fashion Fair] as a commentator. As a designer, I'm not gonna lie to you because I don't know but I only knew Audrey as a commentator for, for, for not Vanity Fair, sorry, for Fashion Fair, for-- Speaker 1: Ebony (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Ebony magazine. And that's where I really knew her from, so. Speaker 1: Now did you ever go to those circuit of, you know, the circuit of Ebony Fashion Fair shows-- Speaker 2: Once. Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, once I, I went. Speaker 1: Who were those designers? Do you know who they were? Speaker 2: I can't, a lot of those designers were European designers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, they were not black? Speaker 2: They shopped around. Not all of 'em. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They started to bring 'em in, yes, without question when we finally hit a mark where we were recognizable and in some cases it even helped catapult who you were. You know, there's a lot of, it was a lot of black support out there, you know, once you knew you were doing it, there was support from the black community, obviously, but there was also a lot of, moral support from the black community. Speaker 1: Now did people like Michael Jackson help? I mean he was at Studio 54 [New York, New York], he and Diana Ross did they influence black fashion in any way? Did they wear Williwear [Williwear Ltd.] or Stephen's clothes, I mean-- Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean they were still, I mean, you gotta figure it's an image thing and it still to this day it's the image thing. Where a lot of people, a lot of people, black, white, whatever will wear more a, a known designer before they wear anything else, unless that person has the foresight or has the, the heart to wear an unknown name or a black designer. There are lot of designers that will support black, I'm not gonna say that but at that time during those days, you know, if you wore Armani [Giorgio Armani] or you wore better names, you got that more across than Fendi, Gucci, Fiorucci, you know, as in the record. You know, you wore those things, that was more important, that was more important, and some of the other designers got in there. Story_ID: 380262 Speaker 1: From 1977 to 1983 what did you do in that block of time for work? Speaker 2: I worked in advertising. I was paste up mechanical for a company called Retail Reporting Bureau [New York, New York]. And I was in charge of four magazines, bi-weeklies. And I-- Speaker 1: It was called the Retail Reporting Bureau (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Reporting Bureau is the name of the, was the name of the company. The magazines I handled were Footwear [Footwear Plus] and Parade, jewelry something something, and I can't remember the two other magazines. And basically what I would do is, we were a tear service, and what we did was we, we had a service where we tore advertising out of all newspapers throughout the United States and once we pulled those out, if I got a theme from my boss like we're gonna talk about short boots, we're gonna talk about certain dress shirts, or we're talking about handbags this week. I would go out and out of all the ads that they pick, I would pick twenty-five pages of ads and I would put them together. I would shoot 'em with the camera, I would put 'em together, make pages out of it. I would then take all the type, and now they do it all by computer, I would take all the type and by hand mount it with an X-ACTO knife and my fingers, manipulate type. In some cases flip words around if they were spelled wrong and we were on a deadline, by hand, I would change the letters. So that's when I had really good eyes. Story_ID: 380263 Speaker 1: Okay, before we just go back to the magazines-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you have a story about Patrick Kelly. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And we'll go back to your Retail Reporting Bureau [New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) job. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: So the Patrick Kelly story. Speaker 2: All right. When you're ready. Speaker 1: We're ready. Speaker 2: You're ready? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Patrick Kelly, I remember distinctly because I had heard, never heard anything about him until one day someone mentioned him and I said who he is? And he's this guy he does this stuff with buttons and I'm like really, what does it look like? And I saw the dresses, again I'm in menswear so I'm never into womenswear but my, my wife [Marva Lane] at the time was. And so we started looking and looking at his stuff and I said, he reminds me of what Willi [Willi Smith] would have been doing or has been doing for so long. And everyone just gravitated to him. And-- Speaker 1: To Patrick? Speaker 2: To Patrick. And one day I was somewhere and Bette Davis had on a Patrick Kelly dress. And I said isn't that a Patrick Kelly dress? Yes, oh, my God. She loved him and thought it was so cool. He started to blow up so much. When he was in Paris [France], the stories I had heard about him in Paris when he first got there and how he built his atelier and what he was doing with the buttons and doing with the dresses and how different they were. There was another designer [HistoryMaker] Byron Lars, that was out and-- Speaker 1: Was he black, Byron? Speaker 2: Also, Byron's also, and he's still out there now, he's doing things, doing it smaller but he's still doing it, he does the most fabulous things. But anyway back to Patrick. When I, I never got to meet him wherever he was I had just missed him when he was in New York [New York] but all my friend knew him and would tell me, you know, he's--about him and, and how gregarious he was and how like he would make fried chicken and he would do hair and do people's hair because in Paris at that time you couldn't get your hair done in Paris and he was there helping people do hair and do all kinds of stuff (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If you were black. Speaker 2: If you were black. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Couldn't get your hair done. And I don't even know if you can today but everyone said something about him. So a very dear friend of mine, his best friend used to model for him, black, also black. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: I can't remember her name, Coco [Coco Mitchell]. Speaker 1: Coco. Speaker 2: Coco. And-- Speaker 1: Coco was a big model. Speaker 2: Yeah, and she modeled for him. So and she was a good friend of my, my friend, Yvette's [ph.]. So I was going to be in Paris around the time that she was going to be there, she said, "I'll call you," she knew the hotel I was staying in. She called me in the hotel, and said, "Okay, Patrick's having a fashion show, you gotta come." This is my second, third trip to Paris. And I really, outside of working and being with my boss or people I work with, I didn't know my way around Paris and nor was I brave enough at that time to walk. And they gave me the address where it was, I knew I was gonna be able to get a cab there but I was afraid of getting back that I didn't know how to get back and I was afraid of what, what if I got lost, stupidity. Now I kick myself, and I never went to that, that fashion show. He passed away a couple of months after that. So I never really got to see him. So the closest I got to see him is when they gave an event at the Brooklyn Museum [New York, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Brook- yeah. Speaker 2: They gave a wonderful opening fo- of his stuff there. And ironically a very dear friend of mine who I will recommend you for this thing, oh, Patti [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] might have done it already, a friend, [HistoryMaker] Leonard Davis, who was very good friends with him, gave him a lot of black memorabilia, he used to collect a lot of the black memorabilia. Speaker 1: Patrick gave it to-- Speaker 2: No, my friend Leonard gave it to Patrick (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Leonard gave it to Patrick. Speaker 2: Yeah. And was in cohorts with him in, in purchasing things in Paris a lot. So at that event I saw probably 90 percent of my friends that I haven't seen in years at his one event, friends that I knew were associated with him, friends I knew that were around him at the time. So that was my one story that I was almost at a show and I almost made it and I never made it, so. Speaker 1: And Grace Jones modeled his things. Speaker 2: Yes, Grace-- Speaker 1: She-- Speaker 2: --was the other one. I went to, when my, yeah, Grace modeled for also white designers. And I remember going to a show at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] that she was in, the first time I had ever seen her and I think it might have been her first show as well. So I remember seeing Grace. And she is not a friend of mine but also friends of friends. Story_ID: 380264 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you mentioned Norma Kamali, was she a teacher of yours at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: No (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Norma Kamali, no, we didn't have any like superstar teachers at school and especially because I was in illustration, not design. My wife or girlfriend [Marva Lane] at the time had Calvin Klein as a ment- not a mentor but when they come, yeah, a mentor he comes into class, sees what you're doing, helps you out (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Critiques the work. Speaker 2: Critique. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Critic as we called it in school. So she had, she had Calvin Klein but we didn't have any. I remember, remember Kamali because back in the '70s [1970s] before I even went to FIT, there was a block on 52nd Street between, I wanna say between 2nd [Avenue] and 3rd Avenues, near my high school [High School of Art and Design, New York, New York] or near where I used to work and near Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York] because all my schools were in and around Bloomingdale's. They, there was a street that had, Norma Kamali had her first store and you had to walk down the steps to go in. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she have that little short haircut then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She had the haircut then. And that was when she first started. So it was before Madison Avenue and before because now she's on 55th Street, I believe, or 56th Street, she's on 56th between 6th [Avenue] and 5th [Avenue]. And I used to see her and then it's like I could relate to this person starting out, starting a business blah, blah, blah. So that's was one of my influences was, was her because she was starting new, she was doing some sweaters that were in GQ at the time, she did some menswear so I immediately jumped on the bandwagon, you know, when I saw that. Story_ID: 380265 Speaker 1: So you, after you leave the Retail Reporting Bureau [New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --do you get your first opportunity to design at Sergio Valente? Speaker 2: Yes. And what happened with that was a very dear friend of mind, [HistoryMaker] Patti Carpenter-- Speaker 1: Now--go ahead. Speaker 2: --worked at, worked for a company, worked for Sergio Valente as a freelance assistant designer or illustrator. And they were looking for someone, she was going on to another company and they said, they needed someone to, they needed someone to come in as an assistant so she gave up my name. So I went, went in and they asked me if I could draw 'cause they needed someone that can kind of design but they really need someone that could draw. And I said yeah, I can draw. And they said okay, well here draw this and we'll give you a couple of minutes, you know, and I'll come back in twenty minutes or whatever and just draw this and put it down on paper and he walked out the room. And then a gentleman came back and said, "Oh, I'm sorry, I forgot to ask would you like something to drink?" I said, "No, but here's your sketch." And he said, "You finished it?" And he looked at it, he said, "You're hired." And that's how I got that job. At the same time I used to illustrate for a company called Members Only, in the beginning I used to do freelance illustrations for them. Speaker 1: Were they just doing the jackets then or they had everything? Speaker 2: They were, they were doing, they always had the Members Only jacket plus they had other lines around that. So I would go in, do some illustrations, this was purely my own business as an illustrator. They, they knocked out whatever they were doing, they hired me, said could you draw this for me for a book. I would do it and I walked out. At the same time I was working, that was when I, I was actually doing that when I was working at Retail Reporting as a freelance gig. Speaker 1: So you're at Retail Reporting and Members Only roughly about the same time? Speaker 2: Yeah, but Members Only was only freelance because I was, at that time I was developing a freelance illustration business and I was doing stuff for different stores and, and magazines and some things that were being put in New York Times [The New York Times], you know, and I was really bouncing around trying to build that business up on the side. Then the, then the Sergio Valente job came up and I went there and I worked at Sergio for about two years. And then in the middle of the second year is when Members Only came a calling and, and they heard I was working for a design house and part of it was probably, I, oh, he's giving away our ideas, and the other part is hey, we might as well get him to work for us, now he's not in advertising any more. And they started to come after me and that's how I wound up making the decision to take Members Only as a job. Story_ID: 380266 Speaker 1: But Sergio Valente had made, I guess their biggest splash in designer jeans? Speaker 2: In designer jeans and the company that I worked for had their license to produce outerwear and some sportswear, like because the designer jeans were men's and women's. Speaker 1: Well, now that I'm thinking about it, Sergio did knock off with that Members Only jacket. Speaker 2: Oh, everyone did. Speaker 1: And put that little bull on there (laughter). Speaker 2: Of course, they did, everyone did it. We did not, to, to talk about Members Only really quickly, we made a pretty good amount of money over, over the years suing people for knocking us off. We owned the rights to the pocket and the design, the pocket, the coat, we tried to, to-- Speaker 1: The Nehru collar or whatever it's called. Speaker 2: Yeah. We tried to get that one, we couldn't do it but we could definitely capture the pocket and that placement and parts of the collar, we owned. So we made millions of dollars a year just suing people. You know, it was something you did. But going back to Sergio, we had a really large, I wanna say, a large following because Sergio was doing so well. And the, the Sergio jeans was doing so well. So anything we made we did well with. So-- Speaker 1: And then I just, and we should throw in at the time that the other big designer jeans were Gloria Vanderbilt, Jordache [Jordache Enterprises, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Who were the others? Gloria Vanderbilt, Jordache (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jordache with-- Speaker 1: --Sergio Valente. Speaker 2: --Calvin Klein-- Speaker 1: Calvin Klein. Speaker 2: --coming, had come in, in-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in the mark. Ralph would come a little bit later, Ralph Lauren (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, but his were never the fifty dollar ones. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Sergio Valente, Jordache, Gloria Vanderbilt, Calvin Klein (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were the premium jeans of the year. Speaker 1: --they were the fifty dollar jeans. Speaker 2: You do know your stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. They were the premium and the rest were all, before that, there were, was-- Speaker 1: Lees [Lee]. Speaker 2: Lees but there also were, not Apple Bottom that's a new name but something because most of the jeans that came here were from, were from Europe and they became big. It was irony because if you took a pair of Levis [Levi Strauss and Co.] or Lees out to, to, Landlubber jeans, was the first, first real one that I remember with the bell bottoms, if you took any Wranglers [Wrangler] or Lees to Europe, you could sell 'em for hundreds of dollars in those days. Or if, I had a friend of mine was like when you finish with your jeans I'll give you twenty dollars for 'em, I said okay. He would sell 'em for three hundred in Paris [France]. So, you know, you had a lot of that going back. Story_ID: 380267 Speaker 1: But the one thing I was gonna say about Sergio [Sergio Valente], the one thing that really put me on the map with them, with that company, because I'm always trying to do something different, was back in the day of Michael Jackson and 'Thriller,' that was the time that I was at Sergio Valente. Michael Jackson wore a jacket that was-- Speaker 2: That red one? Speaker 1: Yeah, the red one. And my boss came to me and gave me five dollars and told me, I think it was five or ten, told me to go and buy the 'Thriller' DVD and go home and duplicate that jacket by sketch. So I went home and I had drew it, and I figured out how to make it, so I did the initial sketch and sent it out. There's a trade show at that time called Namsby [National Association of Menswear Sportswear Buyers], which was now, it's like the magic show that's in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] every year for the men's show, twice a year. And we were preparing for that show. So he said, "We don't have the jackets. Can you think of anything we can do?" So what I did was I illustrated Michael Jackson in the jacket and I borrowed what I did at the three dimensional house and I got the actual fabric that they were gonna use for that jacket and I shoved it into, cut it out the bottom, shoved the fabric in, painted the actual jacket on top of the fabric, put it up on a poster, we put it at the booth, our booth, we sold something like ten thousand jackets off of this sketch. They were mortified, they couldn't understand how the heck I could have done that. And that was my, my real big hit with them. You know, it seems like every company they, I've been lucky enough to get a hit. Story_ID: 380268 Speaker 1: At the same time you're at Members Only you were doing stuff for Perry Ellis? Speaker 2: That, that was when, well, what happened with that was when I left Sergio Valente and moved on to Perr- Members Only, Members Only, would get licenses. And Members Only was the, the main job, the one job I stayed at the longest, I was, I stayed at Members Only for about eleven and a half years. And in that eleven and a half years the reason I stayed was because they challenged me and they gave me new things to do. One of the things was Karesh [ph.], was one label we had. We had Sperry [Sperry Top-Sider], no, I'm sorry, that was another company. We had Perry Ellis, we signed Perry Ellis as a license, which was a challenge. And we signed Converse which was also a challenge. I had nailed that Converse, getting, it was difficult to get the Converse project but I was able to nail the, the conjur- con- Converse project. After that, during that time the Perry Ellis project was, we had the license to do outerwear for them and only outerwear. I had to come up with an idea for, for a product that was going to be compatible with the sportswear. Unfortunately, you can't design that way because outerwear buyers are separate from sportswear buyers, you have to put it, you have to house the outerwear in the outerwear department so therefore you don't have anything to go with. If it looks like it's gonna be a blazer that you have on, and it's a jacket, it's not gonna fly in the outerwear department because they don't want it. So you had to work around it. And the, our first way, time out, maybe two seasons, we didn't do well at all 'cause we couldn't get, they were looking, we were led down the direction of a very WASPy [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] open line and it, no one wanted it. And one day we did one jacket that had a graphic on it, saying Perry Ellis America. So I figured out a way to make it. We sold it, sold some, we closed it out. Sold well, took those same styles, went back to the stores got better. I took one jacket and I did it, I had, and I put it together and my boss did not want me to do this jacket because I came up with it, on it, on my own and he was like, "No, no, we're not gonna produce it." I went to my production manager who said, "No, we're gonna produce this, if you, if you believe in it, I believe in it, and if I believe in it, the company will believe in it." And they all got behind me and they did the jacket. We sold seven thousand pieces in the first day, the first day. Speaker 1: What did that jacket look like? Speaker 2: It was a, I have it actually in my portfolio, it was a short bomber jacket in nylon, that had the Perry Ellis America on the left sleeve and it had a graphic, later it wound up having a small graphic in the back and it was a very simple jacket but it had that graphic on it. And from that point on the, the whole complexion of doing that prid- that product changed. Because when I first started doing it sales, the sales company, sales department didn't wanna sellanother line because they were busy selling the product that I was doing for Members Only. I was the only designer there so I was doing Members Only and plus I was doing Perry Ellis, they didn't wanna carry it. And I remember two salesmen saying to me, "Brian [HistoryMaker Brian Lane], I don't think we're gonna do well with it at all, I don't think I wanna carry it so, you know, don't take it personal, I'm not gonna carry it." And one guy, his name was Jerry Valano [ph.], I will put that on paper, was the guy that said I'll support it, I'll sell it, and he sold it in New York and New Jersey, he covered New York and New Jersey. And he, when he turned around and made his first personal million dollars off my product by the time I got to that trade show in Las Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], they were going bananas, they were fighting for the line. So then I said here's my second hit, this is where I, I actually made the company a lot of, I wasn't making money but I made the company a lot of money off that product. So that was the fun part. Story_ID: 380269 Speaker 1: So how does it feel to then design, like for a black guy to design something that becomes so WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] identified? Speaker 2: Weird because I also at that time, you weren't really out there, people didn't see you, they know the designer was there and in some cases somebody might have met you in a hallway but no one really knew who you were. And that was a thing where I had a problem, no one would ever let you in the sales room while they're selling the line. No one ever let you present the line. And after they started making money the owner of the company [Members Only] said let's put him in the room and then I started making the presentations. The sales department was a little nervous because they don't want you to be there because they think that you may say something wrong but they knew I had a passion about the product and I was able to talk about it. The stores felt like they had a part of the designer, you know, in them because they were telling, someone was telling 'em why I did this, why I made this color, and what the product was about and what's coming up next and it started to sell. So then I became part of the sales promotion-- Story_ID: 380270 Speaker 1: Right, but that's still like, like not, you know, getting to the bottom of the question which and, and by that I mean, so you see the ad for that jacket, I mean we've all seen it the white guy, the blonde hair, the blue eyes, the red jacket (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got one even better for you. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: When we first did our first ad campaign, I went on a photo shoot, I was in char- not in charge but I went to make, supervise, make sure all the right stuff was put in the line. When we got to a certain jacket, it came in many colors, we wanted to put it in a lot of colors, they they needed another body to get in it so everybody's turned to me and said, "Brian [HistoryMaker Brian Lane], you should put on the coat." So I said, "Okay, fine." I'm like this is not gonna go well, I know it's not gonna go well but I know I wanna do it. So I, I put on the coat, we go out and we do the photo shoot. The photo shoot comes back, the, the proofs I wish I could get my hands on those proofs, proofs come back nice, they're really nice. And I'm just waiting, and I'm sitting back and waiting and they fumbled over themselves to try to figure out how to X me out of the ad because they felt that this is Perry Ellis, this is mostly white-- Speaker 1: It's white, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --but it's a black guy in there. And they, and I enjoyed it, I sat back and I totally enjoyed watching them figure out how to explain to me, 'cause I knew the deal, I knew the deal when I did it, and I did it on purpose (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because Perry Ellis never used a black model. Speaker 2: No, and I said it to him once. Speaker 1: Never. Speaker 2: I walked up to him, he was making, when he was alive, when, when I got the line he was already had passed. He was making a presentation at Barneys [Barneys New York] and I went up and I just said, "So how come you don't use black models, female or male?" And he couldn't answer that, he couldn't answer that, and I just said, yeah, it's okay. You know, it's part of the culture at the time-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --it didn't bother, you know, I got past that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But then behind the scenes, this, there's this black guy, you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --who's designing these clothes for that brand. Speaker 2: Yeah, for that brand. Speaker 1: For that name, yeah, (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, for that name. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I, after they started making money they had less problems with who I was. And I started being, I started getting out in front of people and people started to know oh, that guy works for-- Speaker 1: Which makes you understand more why there's FUBU, For Us By Us. Speaker 2: Yes, exactly. Speaker 1: --'cause there, you know, why there's this renaissance of all these black hip hop designers (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --designing clothes for, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --they have, you know, it's the market. But then you go forward a little bit and you talk about Ralph Lauren-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --it wasn't until Tyson [Tyson Beckford] that he used a black model. Speaker 2: Yes, well actually-- Speaker 1: Did he someone before him? Speaker 2: --he, that was a black male model, he had a, he used a black girl (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He had the beautiful black woman, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: With the braids or something-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --that he used. That was the first one-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --he used. And I could tell you, you could hear a pin drop and the screams from everyone, phone calls, I remember, I'd never forget, the day that I saw that ad was a Sunday, I can't remember the day, a Sunday morning that looking through The New York Times, and seeing that and saying, oh, my God, oh, my, and the phone started ringing, everyone is: "Did you see today's New York Times?" Everybody went bananas, it was really crazy, to, to see that. And I probably, maybe after the third year, second or third, third or fourth year, I started getting out there more and people started knowing who I was. But it, it happened in reverse though, because I never forget during the trade show in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] I ran into a young kid, black, who I had talked to when he was like fifteen, sixteen years old and kind of mentored him and I was telling him, you know, I told him about the industry and what he should do about excelling himself and going after this and doing the best he could do with himself and giving him positive, you know, feedback. And he ran into me at the show and he was working for, not FUBU or--Cross Colours was actually the first one before FUBU, Cross Colours was the first black design product. And he came up to me he says, "Brian, you know, it was great to see you, oh, my God, I'm working for so-and-so, I'd love you to come to my, my party, our company's party tonight in Vegas." I said, "Great give me an invitation." So I had it, you know, he gave me the invitation. Another kid comes up behind him also black and says, "We don't have that many invitations why are you giving it to him?" And he looked at him he said, "You don't know who he is?" He said, "No, who is he?" "He's a designer for, for Perry Ellis." "Really?" He didn't believe it. And then he came, then started the up and down looks because I'm not wearing baggy jeans, I'm not slinging, I'm not wearing, you know, all the paraphernalia that you have to have to be part of the club, you know, I didn't have that on, I'm wearing a better designer or I'm wearing a different designer or I'm wearing my own stuff. Story_ID: 380271 Speaker 1: And I'm getting abused by, you know, why, the way I look, when I used to walk through those aisles before the urban market became what it was, when I walked through the aisles they would just look at me and say sell out. Meanwhile, I had a successful line that was doing very well in the urban market at the same time but nobody knew who I was, nobody (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the clothes, yeah, Ralph Lauren also eventually crossed over and became big in the urban wear, I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, he-- Speaker 2: --like the Polo shirt they started wearing it really big. Speaker 1: But here's the thing, if you look at it, and in my history I can think [HistoryMaker] Brian Lane's history, what always happens is what I call the Cadillac theory. People will always wear, you know, back in the day, in the '60s [1960s] like you had a Cadillac before you had a house, sometimes you slept in that Cadillac, you just had to live beyond your means and show that it was cool. It's prevalent today, same deal. What kids started doing was they started realizing how much Polo was, (cough) excuse me, how much Polo was and then, and the fact that the pricing of what Polo is, made you look like you were special, so they wore Polo. Then Tommy Hilfiger came along. He connected--his brother, Tommy's brother, ooh, can't remember his name right now, saw a rapper, said oh, I love his music, they've always been into music but him and his brother have always been into music, said I love his work, you know, maybe we can give him some clothes. So he started wearing it. So then it became the rappers started wearing it so and Tommy wasn't cheap at the time they started wearing Tommy. Polo on the other hand started realizing that it was a market that whether or not he liked it or not he had it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which I heard he didn't like it in the beginning. Speaker 1: You know, part of that is law, law, lore. Speaker 2: Yeah, lore. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Like folklore. Speaker 1: Yeah, folklore, or, you know, that's urban myth in some cases. Said the same (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I heard the same thing about Tommy Hilfiger. Speaker 1: Timberland [Timberland Boot Company], any of 'em. And a friend of mine worked for Timberland at the time, he said, and she knew they never said that. Speaker 2: But was that friend the first black woman designer-- Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: At Timberland, your friend? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: What was your friend's name? Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Patti Carpenter. And she was there at the time when they were, when these things were going out, so I half-hearted believed any of the, you know, most of these things. Story_ID: 380272 Speaker 1: What causes you to leave, Members Only after eleven years and go to London Fog? Speaker 2: Five good years of making the company a lot of money, feeling it's time to, to move on. Speaker 1: Did you make some yourself? Speaker 2: Yeah, but not, (cough) excuse me, not enough, you know, at that time I didn't make enough or as much as everyone else was making and I knew what they were making. I made some, some switches within the company and, and was able to get a decent salary for myself and my family but, you know, at the time I felt I had outgrown it. I, and to your point, I was the first black designer for--male designer--for Sergio Valente. I was the first black designer for Members Only. You know, they had never had a black designer before. And to that point, I can never forget going to the warehouse which was in Secaucus, New Jersey at the time, and I went to the warehouse and I walked in and the warehouse was all black, Hispanic, European workers there. And I walked in and everyone came over to me and shook my hand. That was probably one of the most moving things because they said I can't believe we got a black guy up in there, you know, this brother working here, this is really good. So any time I came, anything I needed was like, they supported me and I got the nicest support from everyone. And I think my bosses knew, you know, that it was, it was talent beyond color. They didn't hire me for my color, they hired me for my talent so I took that as respect, you know, in that way. Story_ID: 380273 Speaker 1: I just felt after eleven and a half years [at Members Only] it was time to go. You know, and I had, I had been, I, I'm searching for the right word, I was able to work on my own, I didn't have a boss, my boss eventually was let go, I was running the show myself from a design point, I was in charge and I did everything myself. All of a sudden someone else who had been there got moved in and all of a sudden I had a boss. So after that I said, you know, what they could have left me alone, let this guy run it and just left me alone, they didn't have to give me a boss, so I left. They were very upset, it was new owners at the time, they wanted to, tried their best to get me to stay and I just said I moved on, and that's how I got to London Fog. Speaker 2: And London Fog you were designing still outerwear? Speaker 1: I was doing outerwear but it, it morphed from outerwear to sportswear because-- Speaker 2: But your niche was this like WASPy [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] market? Speaker 1: No, my niche was outerwear-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) period because the WASPy, the WASPy market had ended for Perry Ellis, we couldn't get arrested with the WASPy market, the urban market for Perry Ellis-- Speaker 2: Had taken over. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Completely. Speaker 2: But then you, but at London Fog you went back to, was it Sperry Top-Siders, or what-- Speaker 1: With ter- we-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I did a London Fog product which was rainwear, outerwear, some sportswear to a license that they signed on which was Sperry Top-Sider, Fossil, there were a couple of other ones. Speaker 2: Which were all then, at that, at that time I'm assuming, sort of back into the WASPy market? Speaker 1: No, not really (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they weren't? Speaker 1: No, the rising WASPy market never made it, you know, it was always, it wound up being career more than WASPy. So if you did a coat, it's for a everyday guy, you know, like whether it's the fabrications or, or, or the look, it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that's essentially what Brooks Brothers sort of presented in everyday-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --markets for everybody. Speaker 1: But better, better-- Speaker 2: The higher-- Speaker 1: --price point, the higher priced point, the higher fashion. Story_ID: 380274 Speaker 1: So from my understanding you're saying that the, the WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant], the WASPy market ended-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: In the mid-'80s [1980s] or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in the mid-'80s [1980s]-- Speaker 1: --the late '80s [1980s]? Speaker 2: I would say late '80s [1980s] it is, was more towards the late '80s [1980s] because then what you had was the average Joe or they used to call it Joe Sixpack. And Joe Sixpack would basically wear the same thing and it's average. The high-end designer took care of the high-end designer but the average Joe was who I was designing for. And in some cases, sometimes better fabrics, but it there, what really sold were the bread and butter styles for X amount of money. Speaker 1: So then you, after, at London Fog you, you're still designing outerwear, you be, at this point are you known as an outerwear designer? Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much. Speaker 1: And that is your reputation? Speaker 2: Yes. And people would meet me at different events or different shows or something and they said, "Oh, you're Brian [HistoryMaker Brian Lane], oh, I've heard you, you know, I've heard of you before." And, you know, a few designers I know, it was one designer which I was really shocked, used to come pick on Nautica. And the guy who started Nautica went to school with me, you know, he was in, he was in class with me. And one day I ran into, I ran into him and I asked him to help me get a friend a job, which, you know, at this time he's like a millionaire big shot, and he says, "Sure, just call me, give me his name, and I'll try and get him a job." It didn't work out for the job part but he tried. And I started, he said, "So what are you doing outside of, you know, your normal stuff." And I started telling him, he said, "Oh, I know about that already," said, "I've tracked you, I know exactly where you are, I've known, I've known who you've been with, whatever, I know all about you." And I was like shocked that he even paid attention. But the world is small, you know, in, in the field and every once in a while you run into somebody and say-- Speaker 1: Now is the Nautica guy black? Speaker 2: No, he's, he's Taiwanese. Speaker 1: Taiwanese. Speaker 2: I wanna say, yeah, he's from--Taiwanese. Speaker 1: Okay. So every now and then you run into somebody who says-- Speaker 2: That, you know, they know of me, they know what I'm doing, where I've been. You know, so those a few designers out there that are black that, let's say it this way, ten, fifteen years ago, there were a lot of us but no one knew, some of those designers are out now, there's the Tracy Reese, who is a designer now, she's big, she's probably the only black designer that you know of out there, there's no one else. And I had this kind of revelation like a, a month ago. I was having a conversation with someone and I said, you know what no one else is out there. You know, I need to be out there, you know like I need to-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: --to find that niche. Speaker 1: Well, what do you consider places like Phat Farm, FUBU, Rocawear? Speaker 2: I consider them black designers but not designer, that's urban. Urban, yes, those-- Speaker 1: Urban, okay. Speaker 2: --are all the black designers. Speaker 1: But not designers, I understand. Speaker 2: Designer, yeah. Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: I'm talking about that other world that, you know, the higher end (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, you're talking about the-- Speaker 2: Dressy. Speaker 1: --Diane Von (Diane Von Furstenberg) whatever, yeah, that. Speaker 2: Diane Von Furstenberg-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --or just the dressy part, that's what I'm talking about. Urban, it's not that I'm belittling it at all because it really represents (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because it is making a lot of money. Speaker 2: --a ton of money. Speaker 1: But I wanna, one thing to say about that urban, Sean John makes better suits than, than, you know, Ralph Lauren. I think-- Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: --to me. Speaker 2: I've never tried it on. Speaker 1: Now, his, just the, you know, the fabrics are good-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --the looks are good, I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His production, his production is and, and I have to say Sean John makes the best outerwear out of all the three, you know, there's only three labels out there, there's Sean John, there's Sean John, there's Rocawear, there's Phat Farm, there's Enyce, there's-- Speaker 1: Who's the guy who does the one with the rhinoceros on it? Speaker 2: And that's, I didn't get there yet, that's Ecko [Ecko Unltd]. And he's actually Jewish, I think. Speaker 1: Is he? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. Speaker 1: He's not black? Speaker 2: Yeah, no, he's not black, he's not black, he's not black. And then there is the label Akademiks which was started by a black designer [Donwan Harrell]. Speaker 1: What about Roots [Roots Canada Ltd.]? Speaker 2: Roots? Speaker 1: Are they black (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. I don't know. Story_ID: 380275 Speaker 1: For a while, and no disrespect, but I got stuck in urban, you know, like because I did Perry Ellis and wound up being an urban brand without being in the urban world and me being, because it was all by myself doing it, where FUBU and Sean John they had like twenty designers and it's just me making outerwear, man, you know, I was just doing it by myself. So I was never really part of the, the crew until I started working for Phat Farm. And when I started working for Phat Farm then you become part of that clique-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --it's like going to a high school. Speaker 2: Right. And once you're in that world, how is that world different from the designer world? Speaker 1: High school. High school, everyone, designer is high school, the, the, the people on the sides who think they're better than everyone else, in other words. Like, you know, when you, when you hang with the designer worlds, it's more like, you know, like, who do you know? And what do you do? And who have you worked for? And, you know, it's all about that. When you go to the urban world it's, who do you know, right, who do you know? Do you know anybody? And if you don't fit in, you don't fit in. You know, and they will exercise you out, same thing for the other ones. It's similarities but it's a different level. Speaker 2: Right. And what would you say about--let me see how do I phrase this--about the training, I'll call it training in the urban market verses the designer? I mean, yeah, are the, you know (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You mean talking about it now? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Train, train, it's interesting. Training now is different. Being a designer is not the way it was when I was coming up. Being a designer now is they're training everyone but they're mostly, save for the urban world, they're mostly--and I'll speak about them first. A lot, if I look at it now when I worked at Phat Farm, it was, it was a smaller unit, there was only three of us, it was myself and I had two assistants (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you initially worked for them in what year? Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: The year that we're, you're speaking, the year-- Speaker 1: After, yeah it was, I worked for them after I left London Fog. Speaker 2: So that's in '99 [1999]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I worked for them. And I only worked for them, I did a consulting, I, I worked as a consultant so I really just worked one season with them. Speaker 2: Okay. So they had three designers you were saying (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Three, it was myself and, and, two, two assistants. And that was it and we developed it. Now when I look at Phat Farm because I wound up working for Phat Farm again indirectly through another license house, so I was developing outerwear for them again. So now when I look at 'em, that because they're owned by another company, Kellwood [Kellwood Company], is the company, it's really a bigger unit now. It's like a group of designers works this one, a group of designers works on that, and no one talks to each other, it's that kind of like, a farm of just farming stuff out--oh, Phat Farm. They're farming things out. And it's not the same. The training to be a designer in that world is more technical than it is designing. Speaker 2: What does that mean? Speaker 1: Because you work more with computers. They, the, the hiring as of late has been more of someone who can use Illustrator [Adobe Illustrator] and blah, blah, blah, and knows, understands, how to work with a computer and, and if you get an idea, how to do it, drawing it really nice on the computer and then issuing it out to a factory, which is different (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) so let me see, let me ask you this then. Do you consider the designers at FUBU designers? Speaker 1: I consider 'em designers-- Speaker 2: In the sense, in the same sense that you consider Tom Ford a designer? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: And what would be the difference? Speaker 1: The difference would be is one, obviously, they design from a different level because-- Speaker 2: Well, then let's not use Tom Ford. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Let's use, what, who would be on the level of a, a designer on the level of a FUBU? Speaker 1: On a level of a FUBU? Speaker 2: Like American Eagle [American Eagle Outfitters, Inc.] designers? Speaker 1: There's all the same. And that's, that's a part, it's urban but when I mean urban, I don't mean just black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black. Speaker 1: I mean-- Speaker 2: Okay. You mean-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --urban as in the Gap [Gap, Inc.]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and American Eagle-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And Abercrombie and-- Speaker 1: Fitch [Abercrombie and Fitch]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and working it's way up to Banana [Banana Republic] and then working it's up to designer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's what I mean. Speaker 2: I thought you meant black. Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I don't, and because I wouldn't wanna slight the, the-- Speaker 2: Black designers (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) black culture, right-- Speaker 2: Right. Okay. Speaker 1: --and what they do. Story_ID: 380276 Speaker 1: But the way designers are built now, they're more technical in the sense that they have to deal with more, you know, like you could for example, I worked with someone I'd rather not say their name, and one of the things is I talked to the designer and I said, "Well, what's the fabric gonna be?" "Well, I think it's gonna be this." I said, "What do you mean you think? And what's the, what's the measurements gonna be on it?" "Well, I don't know." All they do is design and then they have a tech person come in and do all the technical aspects. So where I grew up doing the whole thing to get the product in, they have three people that may, three different people that may make one piece. And that's where the difference lies in, in what a designer does. When you go to the designer level, and I can speak for women's, you may have people who actually still drape and use and work in the fabrics and try and develop from aesthetic point of view. As opposed to sitting there in the urban market, it's okay, we're making a basic shirt, it's gonna be so and so long by so and so wide, so and so sleeve length and pop in one of this, and pop one of that. And most of my friends think I really have a big bug about this, and it's like okay, it looks great, okay this is a graphic. Another person does the graphic, I'm in charge of graphics, hi, I do graphics. And all he does is graphics. And we decide that we're gonna put Ps on everything but we want Ps from the '40s [1940s]. So they go in and research the Ps, then they get the Ps and then that guy all he does is those Ps, that's it. Then the other person who does the shirts, talks to maybe the, the design coordinator or the director and says okay, we're gonna do shirts but we have to add these Ps, so then they take the Ps and they merge it with the, with the pants and the shirts. Speaker 2: So it becomes an assembly line? Speaker 1: Exactly. And it's not where you could totally see from start to finish what's the price, one of the kind, one of the projects I'm working on, consulting for now, I have to know what the fabric cost is, I have to basically know what my target price on the end is gonna be, they have no idea what that's about. Story_ID: 380277 Speaker 1: Who would you consider to be the black designers of today? Speaker 2: Tracy Reese I would say is by far-- Speaker 1: Let's talk about your own personal line though. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: Because you designed-- Speaker 2: Yes, I did it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) your our own line. Speaker 2: Yeah, I started out, I finally got that bug that people yell at you for years and say why don't you try it, why don't you try it, and I finally did it. Speaker 1: And what year did you get the bug? Speaker 2: I got the bug, two years ago, now. I was making a line for fall '07 [2007] so, fall '06 [2006], sorry, so I started developing in, in '05 [2005]. To really get that started off the ground. And what I decided to do was, because everyone else had been in the market to do things that were priced, moderate priced, I wanted to go more towards the high-end and make a small line. Nice try, went bigger than I wanted to go but I stuck to trying to do better and working with cashmere, better cashmere, heavier cashmere, working with lam- with deer skin versus just working with lamb but working with goat skin versus working with lamb, just working with different fabrics, different skins. And I developed a line that started out as being six pieces and it wound up being twelve to fourteen pieces of leather and cloth. Then I'm trying to bring in the tricks of the trade of what I do, what I do for the better market. Because the better market is usually a beautiful skin, slapped together, put together nicely, made with a great pattern. What I try to do is bring some of the treatments that I did in the moderate price like three and ones, four and ones, jackets (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's a three in one? Speaker 2: Three is one is basically you wear it as it is with a liner on the inside (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You can zip the liner out? Speaker 2: The second way is you zip a liner out and wear it by itself. The third way-- Speaker 1: The liner by itself or the coat? Speaker 2: The liner by itself. And the third way is to wear the coat by itself, that's the three in one. Then you also can do four in one, is when you can wear the inside liner two different ways. You can-- Speaker 1: Reversible. Speaker 2: Exactly. So I tried to bring that and bring it into the market. So I thought I was only gonna do coats then that morphed into cashmere sweaters out of Scotland, handmade in Scotland. Then that morphed into doing a line of bags, high-end bags. One bag I did was part alligator that was gonna retail for about six thousand dollars. Speaker 1: Are there any black bag designers? Speaker 2: Yes, there are but I have no idea who they are (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who they are. Speaker 2: There are no names that I know. Speaker 1: So Balenciaga is that an Italian guy? Speaker 2: Yeah, Balenciaga is it, is it Italian or French, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Or French. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I don't know. Speaker 1: But that's the only one I know that's like a six thousand dollar bag. Speaker 2: Oh, there are tons out there. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, please. There, there are a lot of designers that are-- Speaker 1: Hermes or whatever it's called (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hermes is probably up there even more. There are certain bags, it was a bag I looked at the other day, I can't remember who the designer was, yes, it was either Prada or someone else that had a forty thousand dollar bag. So there are people out there. I mean I could have made my bag out of-- Speaker 1: So that morphed into a line of bags, go ahead. Speaker 2: Right, bags (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that the bags were gonna cost six thousand. What else was in that line? Speaker 2: One bag, I did one bag which was the show piece bag was six thousand which was-- Speaker 1: Was it for men or women? Speaker 2: Men. Speaker 1: Men. Speaker 2: It was all really in the, I-- Speaker 1: Oh, my God. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What did you do with that bag? Is there a sample sale? Speaker 2: No. And it's only one bag. Speaker 1: Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] (laughter). Speaker 2: There's only one bag. Speaker 1: I'm joking. Speaker 2: And had I made it all in alligator it would have been four times that. So did that then a couple of goat skin bags that I did. And one bag that, from my travels to Guatemala, I there's a tribe or a group that wears a certain, men wear a certain skirt made out of wool, handmade wool. I used that fabric to make a bag out of that. So I was trying to bring, you know, homemade, try to (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how much was that bag? Speaker 2: That bag wouldn't have been as bad that probably, that bag probably would have been about a 150, $200. And it, the reason I wanted to do that bag was, one, to one, make the, the bag itself for, for me but to also get the workers to be able to develop, to help make money for them. Speaker 1: In Guatemala? Speaker 2: Right. In Guatemala. So that was my giving back because, you know, I, in traveling with a friend of mine who I mentioned before, I got a lot of that in the travels going to different countries and seeing how people develop things. Story_ID: 380278 Speaker 1: So I had the line, I was ready to go with it and certain things happened with sales, getting the proper sales. Then I was too late to really get a rep, to rep me. And I would have been better off getting a twelve year old British voice on a phone, black or white, don't care, calling for me and getting, trying to get me appointments, I would have been better off doing that than the way I was doing it. Speaker 2: And how were you doing it? Speaker 1: Just making the cold calls by myself and not really getting the, you know, getting it. Because at that time I had taken, taken what money I had and what time I had to put into it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So is there a, was there not a community for you to, to fall back on to, to, we had talked about this unofficial black like fashion community? Speaker 1: There was-- Speaker 2: Where were they? Why aren't they the first ones you go to and say hey, look family, here's my line? Speaker 1: Good question. And one question that was brought up a little while ago with a friend that how come we don't have a consortium of people that are out there. Didn't turn to 'em. I figured, one, because I was in a field that not too many people do is outerwear and that's my primary. It's not that, there are black designers out there doing outerwear, I'm not gonna say that but I don't know that many of 'em. We only have a few (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And what about Stella Mc- is Stella-- Speaker 1: McCartney [Stella McCartney]? Speaker 2: McCartney. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Are those designers black? The clothes certainly look black. Speaker 1: Could be Stellas in England so-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, she's in England. Speaker 2: What's the English guy name, Boateng? Speaker 1: Oh, Ozwald Boateng, yes, he's a designer. And he designs his product. And had his, his show because he had a short lived show that was on, I think it was Sundance [Sundance Channel; SundanceTV], had I seen that show at the same I was doing mine, I probably would have fought a little harder to do it. I was so exhausted from putting my thing together and trying to sell it, that I just kind of said, okay, let me step back and I pulled it back because I didn't think I was ready. Speaker 2: So you said you were running out of money. Speaker 1: Yeah, personally running out of money (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause you'd use your own. Speaker 1: Yeah, we used-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --whatever money I had and time, I, I invested more of my time and wasn't bringing in any of the money, you know. So I was living off my money for the whole time of doing this project and putting it together. Once that was gone, it was done. You know, and that was before, in and around the time that I met with Brooks, with Brooks Brothers. Story_ID: 380279 Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And who did you meet with? How did that come about? Speaker 1: The Brooks Brothers deal came through, I went to a job fair actually and they were the first, one of the first booths I saw, and I walked up. Speaker 2: A fashion job fair or a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's a fashion-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --job fair. And they had been talking about it for weeks and I stood in the line, I did a thing, and, you know, it's kind of when you get in your older years and you get set into these things you really start to say what am I doing? Why am I doing it? And obviously you do it because you love it and you still have a passion. But I needed a job. So I went to the job fair. Happened to meet the head of HR [human resources] and mentioned that I was a outerwear designer and he says, "Wow, that's convenient because we're looking for someone. And not as, I'm not sure as a designer," he said, "but we are, you know, investigating outerwear as a project." And I said, "Okay, well, you know, you can call me," and I left my card with him and, and-- Speaker 2: Do you have to show your book at, at these events? Speaker 1: Yeah, you show your book. He wasn't interested. He looked at me and he felt comfortable and he says, "Well, you know what, we'll set up something. Let's meet, again." And I waited for the phone call for two days, he didn't get the phone call so I even said let me be proactive, I'll call him. Called, didn't get a call back. Called again didn't get a call back. And I said okay. Let me be, even more proactive and send him an e-mail, got an e-mail back in three minutes, and that's how he got back to me. So that started the (unclear). And then I had to meet with the creative director. And when I met with the creative director that's what nailed it. And they said, "Well, we're not sure if we wanna hire you but could we contract you?" And I said, "Sure." At the time I had nothing else going. So I said, "Sure you can." So then it, I had to sit on that for like almost two months before they were ready to ask me what to do. And then once I went there I had one conversation didn't go that well that day, I came back (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What didn't, what didn't go well about it? How can these conversations not go well? Speaker 1: The conversation didn't go well because I sold myself short. When I went in they said okay, this is kind of what--they gave me a map, a, a golden map of what they wanted to do, how many skews, how many silhouettes, they wanted to work with, and what categories they wanted to work with. I then took it upon myself to blow up that and come up ideas but I, I took out what I didn't think was necessary and only brought what I thought was really germane or really was important. And the reason that didn't go well was, he said, "You have any more?" And I said, "No, I took it out." And he said, "Don't ever take out, I want more than I can handle period, just give me everything," and I took that as okay. And I came back and I blew him away because this time they looked and they said, "Okay, I can't decide which ones I wanna work with." And I said, "Was that what you, that was your purpose of me doing it?" He says, "Yes and you, you have totally blown us away." So that started it and we started working. And I was hoping a job would come out of it but it was okay because I got to work out of my house, I was, you know, in a way building my own consulting deal and I was able to do that. So that went over, went on for about four months, back and forth, working out of my house developing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But do they pay you to do that? Speaker 1: Yeah, they pay you, pay, it's like the way I set up in a contract you put X amount up front, you get paid in the middle, and you get paid on completion. And, you know, and you work out a deal with them and, you know, it was negotiable. In about, I wanna say of this year '07 [2007], '06 [2006], sorry, '06 [2006] they made presentations to the worl- because they're, they work as a store and the people who come in to shop them are people who own their stores. You know, they're a retailer among itself-- Speaker 2: Of course, so. Speaker 1: Amongst themselves. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: They may have a, a million franchise stores that come out and-- Speaker 1: International and domestic. Speaker 2: --come in and say, yeah, or we can only sell this, this, and this. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So we'll buy this. Speaker 1: And we're all your A stores-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so we're gonna buy this part of the line. They have stores in Dubai [United Arab Emirates], you know, the new stores in Dubai. And-- Speaker 2: Have you been to Dubai? Speaker 1: No, never been. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Been a bunch of other places but not there. So they, they had the international come in as well as the regular line. I wasn't part of that presentation. It went over very well. And it was funny because my last day, before that, my last day, I was a little paranoid about, you know, it's my last piece that I'm doing, we're doing fittings on a model, you know, it's the last one, you know, how is it gonna react, whatever, and I went and it was very like, "Okay, well, thank you, you know, talk to you soon." And I'm like God, they hated it, you know, like oh, my goodness. I did, what did I do wrong? Did I say something wrong? Should I have been more attentive? You know, should I have been up there, you know, bothering them all the time? And I just said, "Okay, fine," so I left. And doing, being a professional I went back and I e-mailed them all collectively and I said I wanna thank you for a wonderful experience working with you guys, you know, if you need any help in the future, blah, blah, blah. Five minutes later I get this long e-mail saying you're the most professional person I've ever worked with, it was an absolute pleasure for us to work with you, we want to work with you again, we'd like to set you up to start working on the next fall in '08 [2008]. And I was like blown away, you know, like we can't, we'd love to use you for the summer and I was like okay, you know, but they couldn't justify it because summer is-- Speaker 2: There's no outerwear. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: But you could do their, like that, what that season in between where people buy these coat, clothes to go Miami [Florida] for-- Speaker 1: Right, exactly but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --they'll do that as part of spring. They're more-- Speaker 2: Got it. Speaker 1: --they would do a holiday scene where it's more like down coats and, and heavy stuff which was part of my line that I did for them. Story_ID: 380280 Speaker 1: So let's talk about your inspirations. Where do they come from? Where do you inspired to do-- Speaker 2: In creating a line? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Or design? A lot of times it may be where I'm traveling, whether it's, it's vacation or work. And because I have done extensive European travel, a bunch of countries (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When was the first time you were in Europe? Speaker 2: Oh, first time in Europe maybe was, it was definitely during Members Only time and I had been there for five years so I'd have to backtrack, I can't remember the exact year. And I remember exactly where I went though. I wanna say in the early, I wanna say '84 [1984], between '85 [1985] and '86 [1986] I wanna say I went to Europe, my very first trip. And I went to Munich, Germany, Munich, Germany, went to Paris, France, went to, God, I hate saying it that way, I went to Munich, Paris, Florence [Italy], and Amsterdam [the Netherlands] my very first trip which was really crazy and a lot of fun, I learned so much. And then I've gone to Switzerland, I've gone to Copenhagen [Denmark], I've been to Cologne [Germany]. Speaker 1: So when you are designing, do you have a specific person in mind, a specific-- Speaker 2: No, I don't-- Speaker 1: --group of people? Speaker 2: I don't do the certain person, I did the certain person for my line. Speaker 1: And who was that person? Speaker 2: My certain person was a mix of different people, black, white, Hispanic, whatever. Speaker 1: And who were those people? Speaker 2: The blacks was Denzel [Denzel Washington] was first because I have a friend that, that knows him very well. And I was actually gonna try and get that connection to get there. Will Smith was another one for a younger, a little bit younger guy. Antonio Banderas was one for the Hispanic one. Sean Connery was one for the white guy, you know. Pierce Brosnan was also a white guy. But, you know, it kind of all wraps around for the men, for the men a little bit more sophisticated. But then what I do is I aspire up and then I work down. And I don't try and do down and go up, I try and get, those are the guys that I would want to wear my personal stuff. When it comes to designing for other products a lot of times I design for the market and which means is, who's my customer? Who am I really trying to go after? Who am I not trying to insult? Or who am I not trying to go past? And to be a realist and, you know, form and function or design and function go hand in hand. If I make you a coat, that guy's gonna be able to wear it, every day. You know, one of the things I instilled in, in London Fog was that the guy I'm selling to is, goes to the mall, you know, he shops with his wife, he's, you know, like he throws his coat on because he's cold not because he wants to necessarily look better. I'm trying to do that. But he's putting on this coat because his wife bought for it for him because 80 percent of the shopping, shopping structure is, is women. You know, they buy the clothes for the men. So therefore I'm trying to get something that's gonna appeal to her but it's gonna make him look good but it's gonna have a lot of pockets, it's gonna give him all the things that he needs. So that's where, that's my nucleus. And then everything else around it is, is pretty simple, get the right colors, find in the colors in the Europe, find the colors in the United States, find the colors in a fruit basket that I'm in a supermarket. You know, I get an idea from, from a women's coat. I get an idea from a pair of shoes, you know, different, it is always something that I'm always finding, and I'm always thinking. So, you know, my inspiration is pretty much anything that moves, a curtain, you know, if, if I like the way it flows then I'm gonna do--for example, in Phat Farm, one of the ideas that I had for Phat Farm was to bring linen because, you know, I said, we're consistently insulting these kids by giving them the same stupid jeans and the same, and the same product, and I don't mean just him, I mean just the, the whole industry. And I said give 'em linen, give 'em something special, give 'em a linen jean or a linen jean jacket. And at first they were kind of, kind of against it but I found a really, really interesting linen that my wife [Marva Lane] at the time had in her closet. It was for, completely for a women's dress and I said but if you flip this over it looks kind of cool, it looks almost like denim. So I had them develop it, it was the first point in time I ever got away with that, most places, no, no, it's too expensive get something else. And I did it and we made, it sold out in two weeks. And it sold to all the stores and people just grabbed it. To this day whenever I see the guy who owned that company with Russell [HistoryMaker Russell Simmons], he always says I remember that linen you did, I fought you on it, and it sold. So, you know, every once in a while, you, you get inspired to do something and, and sometimes, if you're lucky enough you have the guts, you go ahead and do it. Story_ID: 380281 Speaker 1: So how did you find it working with [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons? Speaker 2: Wonderful. I mean he, he had names for me, I don't wanna curse on the, the, on the tape but, you know-- Speaker 1: He had names for you? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, what did he call you? Speaker 2: He, my nickname, yeah, he called-- Speaker 1: What was your nickname? Speaker 2: Old Motherfucker was my nickname, excuse me for saying that. He always said it. And when he found, because I'm older than he is, so when he found out that I was older than him he was just like oh, get the hell out of here. And I'm, say different things, and he says, oh, my God, now what do you do, you know. And ironically years later I'm working with another company doing a product for him, they had to make a presentation so they asked me to be at the presentation to help them along because one, I'm black, two, Russell's there, gonna be there so maybe he'll recognize me. Now Russell didn't say anything, he looked at me, and we had been away from each other for a good four years, four or five years. And he would look at me, and he didn't say anything, he kept on walking by. So then I was introduced again and he looked at me when I walked up he says, "Wait a minute," says, "I know you," and he said, "Yeah," he said, "He used to work with my assistants." And he said--and we both said at the same time, "Old Motherfucker," and I said, "Yeah that was me," you know. And, and, and it bothers some people when I say it 'cause they think it's, it's insulting. I say no, it's not insulting, it was just for that-- Speaker 1: A term of endearment. Speaker 2: 'Cause that was the only time I really heard him curse, you know. Then when he went off on something else was a totally 'nother, 'nother story. But he was very inspiring, nothing came out of his mouth that wasn't positive, that wasn't positive for the black race, that wasn't, you know, that wasn't, it was nothing negative because he would always say, "That's an insult, how dare you." I made one jacket, and it came out horrible and I knew it was bad, and I didn't want 'em to do it, and they made it any way. And I said, "Whatever you do don't bring it to this meeting," and they brought it anyway. And Russell came in and I just said, "Oh, my goodness," and he walked in and he said, "What the, is that?" And he went off, he said, "This takes us back." And I just sat there and I said, "See," and I looked at the president of the company and I said, "See, I told you, it's, I don't like it, and I knew he wouldn't like it." And if it's insulting to our people, he doesn't want it and that's a cool thing. Story_ID: 380282 Speaker 1: So Russell [HistoryMaker Russell Simmons] came in and he said, "What the, is that." Speaker 2: Right. And he looked, he looked at the jacket and said it was, it was, it took us back ten years. Speaker 1: What does that mean? Speaker 2: Meaning that we as a people in his eyes from, from a fashion standpoint, he was always about doing the better fabrics, polo shirts, you know, which were normally considered very WASPy [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] until Ralph [Ralph Lauren] started wearing 'em, he-- Speaker 1: Until Ralph? Speaker 2: I'm sorry, making 'em, Ralph Lauren started making them, you know, and kids started wearing them. Once you got there, the kids kind of sort dressed better, they were wearing khaki pants, they weren't wearing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jeans. Speaker 2: --low jeans and stuff. And then it was a group of, a big group of jackets that were heavily embroidered that are out there, that sh- he felt that were, it just really wasn't fashion, it was just really street, you know, it wasn't good enough. And he, and basically that's what he said, that that coat wasn't good enough, he was really saying, coat wasn't good enough and just it was he felt it was disrespectful because it had the logos all over it and he said we've gotten past that, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, you know, what's so funny? Have you seen those sweat shirts, those hoodies lately? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh. I'm amazed, I'm actually doing a new label for someone and I wanted to jump upon that because that's based, that was based off a Japanese designer's graphics, or a company called BAPE or Bathing Ape [A Bathing Ape]. And he started doing, they started doing very large graphics and then everybody just jumped on the bandwagon and I said, "This is coming," I said to a friend, "This is coming watch out," and boom it's all over the place. So what I did was I wanted to do a version of that for this one company I'm doing work with, and I did something that almost looks like camouflage but it's wool and with rabbit hair and then with a big fake fur collar. Speaker 1: Nice. Speaker 2: So, you know, that's my, it's graphic but it's not doing exactly what everyone else is doing. Speaker 1: I'm gonna pause for just a second. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So you were just saying that that would take, the Japanese designer with the big logos-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you were going to use that (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That concept, yeah. And, and to make it be close to it but to make a version of it because right now that's the trend and that's gonna go away really quick. It's gonna last for this season and I think it, people will still have large graphics and things and it'll be in the urban, it's an urban setting, it's fine for what it is because Japanese art and Japanese things mixed in with hip hop is, is out there. But the one thing I do have to say is that urban as we know it, is changing. Speaker 1: What does that mean? Speaker 2: Urban as we know it-- Speaker 1: How, how do we know it first of all, define how we know it? Speaker 2: How we know it is, big jeans, basic labels whether its Rocawear, Sean John, Phat Farm, those labels, every label has a five, six year run and then, and, and I only know this because I've been in the business long enough, and then it goes away and some new buck comes up and he takes over or, or brings some freshness. And what's been happening where you were over logoed before with the name and the label, now you're kind of over logoed with a graphic. So therefore no one's really looking for the labels as much, they're looking for texture and fabric, therefore, it's gonna make a slight change and it's gonna go away from the big jeans, oversized jeans. 'Cause now if you look at the kids, for a while, I did a short stint working in Bloomingdale's as a sales rep, I mean, you know, gotta make money. And in working there I noticed really the shopping habits of, which was one of the reasons why I wanted to take the job, I noticed shopping habits of the kids. And the kids were coming in, yes, to buy this other jean label, never heard of for $250 and up. There's another label for seven- I was selling $500 jeans from Italy, $500 jeans and people were buying them. Now it wasn't just us as black people buying 'em but people were buying 'em, it was amazing. So, you know, that kid is looking for something on the outside, something different, always something expensive so it'll look like he spends a lot of money but they're looking for something new. Story_ID: 380283 Speaker 1: What do you think it is about black people and fashion that goes hand in hand? Speaker 2: They take more chances, they look for more color. I think, you know, it's almost like an insult but at the same time it's a pat on a back that we really have an insight on, on fashion for whatever reason. It's color, it's fit, it's looking good, it's the peacock theory, it's the, you know, it's, it's all about really, really dressing where other cultures the dressing isn't as important or they can carry the same things. Like you look at the French culture they'll wear something--and this is what I'm told, they'll wear something, the same thing for a while, they can, but it's new, and they invest, it's like an investment for them. And which is, which is not for us, we tend to buy trendy things quicker but there's a small, small group of us that will buy, will save the money and buy the right thing because they know if it's a good piece, it'll last forever. I have shoes that are twenty years old. I have some things that are older than my kids [Evan Lane and Ian Lane], you know, what I mean, so it's, it's, if you have a good eye and you have a good sense you'll buy it. It's those people who go out and buy things just for the heck of it because it is good, you know, it's nice, it has a name on it. Story_ID: 380284 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you said early on in the interview that Williwear [Williwear Ltd.] had the opportunity to design for black people? Speaker 2: Yeah, well he [Willi Smith] was, his, his muse was more black women and I read that in an article I think it was from, in, in Essence magazine. Speaker 1: So you consider him a designer versus urban wear? Speaker 2: At the time, it, it was called something, if you were designing for black dis-, for, for a black customer it was called something else and I can't remember the name of it but he was, he was a designer that was, designing for the young woman, the young woman, not a professional but the young woman. I, I, I don't think that his look initially was professional but no one's was professional, professional was Chanel, you know, when you think in that sense. Even though women were buying, there were other designers out there, but, you know, like when you look at it from a label standpoint they were buying, you know, Chanel or Chanel-type looks for, for a professional, shirt and tie for men. At that time, you know, women were wearing blouses and different things. What, what Williwear does, did was he brought you, kind of a more casual sensibility on it. So, yeah, eventually it could be your casual wear to work. Speaker 1: But the office became much more casual. Speaker 2: As we went-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, over the years it got more casual. Hell, when I worked at London Fog, the salesmen used to, don't, some of the old, old timers used to tell me that whenever they went out on a sales call they had on hats and shirt and tie and suits. You know, so, now, you know, these days people sell in jeans, why? Because a lot of the businesses are selling off of jeans now. Story_ID: 380285 Speaker 1: So when you look forward with your career, what are you looking most forward to? Speaker 2: I'm, well, I'm looking forward to change because my, in the years that I'm, I've been in this business I should have gone on to something else. Unfortunately, I still have the bug so, you know, the designer bug, I'm looking forward to either maybe doing other product or other life style products, you know-- Speaker 1: And what is-- Speaker 2: --whether it's home stuff, stuff for the home, you know, whether it's accessories (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so becoming furnishings? Speaker 2: Furnishings, home furnishings, or, or accessories, you know, things that if I had-- Speaker 1: Maybe ties or-- Speaker 2: Could be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Could be ties, could be scarfs, could be throws, could be throws for the couch, could be things to keep on your tabletop, could be vases, any of those things, geared more towards men even though I do have a, a ladies', now a ladies' background because I'm doing things, some things for women. Story_ID: 380286 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you're doing things at Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] now? Speaker 2: Sears was basically a technical thing, that thing that I talked about that people do, all they do. Speaker 1: So what on, what part of that assembly line did you furnish then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was in the, what they call I've been trying to think of the word that best, best describes the word for it, it's best--construction, they call it construction. So where no one in that, at that time knew exactly how to build a jacket because they mostly build outerwear. Outerwear is always the last thing on the totem pole. A lot of times people don't understand it but that's why they say, they call me like this outerwear guy because no one, there's no outerwear guys, I'm a dinosaur. So I was basically there to really help in how to construct a garment, like know you're, if you're gonna make this like this you have to have this or it needs to have this because a storm fly, you need, if you're gonna have a zip front jacket. Why? Because if you have on a zip front jacket and it doesn't have a fly with the snaps or buttons on top, if it's the winter, air is gonna get through, so you have to have a storm fly which is in back of the zipper so a lot of people don't know, okay. If you're gonna have a zip off hood, you gotta have a zip off hood cover or you're gonna see the zipper or it's gonna hit, or if you're gonna make Velcro you can't put on Velcro with the hooks on the top because if you take off your coat and put it in your sweater, the hooks are gonna stick in the sweater. So you gotta put that on the body and make sure you closed it, close it. So little tricks of the trade that you learn over the years that you have to do. And that, and that's one of the reasons why they hired me. So I kind of like morphed from doing tech work with a computer and also doing it, giving information, sitting in on fittings, make the suggestions on how something should ma- be made or if it looks like it's not gonna fit, giving construction ideas and-- Story_ID: 380287 Speaker 1: So now do you still consider yourself a designer or-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, even though I haven't been able, I take that back, yes, because I have been able to design for some companies. I'm working (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Brooks Brothers. Speaker 2: Brooks Brothers was pure designer. Two companies I'm working with now, a Chinese company, one that's called Star City [Star City Clothing Company] and the other one's called BSD [ph.]. Both of those lines I'm doing for them and that's a designer, that's in design mode or a design consultant. And then working here and there, consulting for different, at one point I was doing four different labels at the same time and I was about to shoot myself. Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] was the best thing that came along because when I first started with Sears I had to work out of Chicago [Illinois], so it got me away from everyone else so they would leave me the heck alone and I was able to concentrate, so, you know. Speaker 1: So we didn't talk about the coat company, the leather coat company that makes the biker jackets? Speaker 2: Yeah, Schott [Schott NYC]. Speaker 1: What, Schott. Speaker 2: Schott was a consulting gig for them, two different times. They came through me, to me through a friend who I was basically just helping out with design and I wound up taking over the project so I wound up doing five different labels for them. But one of the key ones was I developed a line of, of racer bike, like hard-core racer bike jackets which had all the armor and everything built in. And I would have to do the jacket and the pants to go along with it because it would be on a bike. So I had to go out to China and I made two different trips to China. And one China trip we did, we developed a whole group. I went there to see how we, how they actually make it because I didn't know. So I, and in making that redesign while I was out there, we made the coats. They were very successful, there were a little high end, they went for about eight hundred, nine hundred each. But they sold and one of the jackets I developed was a mesh motorcycle jacket. So it breathed, it would breathe while you're riding. Speaker 1: In fits like a glove then, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, no, kind of, but it had the armor in it as well. Speaker 1: Nice. Speaker 2: So you had the armor and you, it was made out of mesh but the mesh was hardcore mesh where if you went down, it had Kevlar in it so it would burn off slowly so you wouldn't hurt yourself but it had all the armor in it. And BMW picked up on that as their exclusive jacket for their B- one of their BMW bikes. Because of that the company called me back to go back out to China again and develop a whole new program, like four or five styles for them again. So that was exciting because not only did that work but I also did their, what they call their urban market, very basic generic jackets and a couple other groups. We were supposed to do a, a workwear group based off on European workwear but that kind of fell to the wayside, they were trying to go a little bit too far outside the box. Story_ID: 380288 Speaker 1: So when you look back over the career you've had so far, and you still have a lot of career ahead of you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what has been the most fun? Speaker 2: This part of my life has been the most fun but--because I'm doing, I've done so much, but it's a lot of hard work. The most fun, I, I think, I had was my time at Members Only where I was learning the business more and we traveled more and I traveled more, I learned how to travel Europe and do my thing and I grew up there. So that was the most fun. Most knowledge I got was from working at London Fog because that was more of a corporate world and I've learned how to be a businessman, you know, from that, from that aspect. The irony of it is, for example, working at Members Only make tons of samples, figure out how to bring it down. Work at London Fog, bring it down another two notches to where you're especially, you're specifying what you're doing, instead of trying to think of an idea, you come up with the idea, figure out how it's gonna sell, build that one piece. Where the other ones, yeah, I built two or three to get to one, this one was like one for one. And even though it's a little dangerous, it really, really it, it trains you and it gives you, it disciplines you to be able to create a product and think of it. So now I, when I design, I design as a business man more, as much as I design creatively. Story_ID: 380289 Speaker 1: So with your own line, do you have any aspirations to do your own thing, Brian [HistoryMaker Brian Lane]? Speaker 2: Yes, I developed a line, which, I, I put together a line which I was gonna sell in '06 [2006] and started off small, wound up being big, bigger than I thought. And pulled it out and it, it, it was successful in viewing, everyone liked it, no one disliked it, I had no problems. I was a little more high-end but I really couldn't get the sales together (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But any desire to keep that going, to move it forward-- Speaker 2: Yes, but what I-- Speaker 1: --to do something with it? Speaker 2: Yeah, what I wanna do, what I did was I pulled it back because I personally think, thought I was not, it wasn't ready yet. Even though it could have, could have sold, it wasn't ready yet. So now I will go back and do it again. It's two things, two, two goals, one, to get that off the ground, to do it again, two, to rebuild my art and make that grow and start selling art or just producing it. Speaker 1: Illustrations or-- Speaker 2: Illustrations, paintings, everything, so. Speaker 1: Have you started to do that work? Speaker 2: Play, played around with it because I've gotten some, I work with some, some products where I had to illustrate them and that's what started me on it. So once I got in to that I started to do some hardcore painting, not anything outside of watercolor or hand drawing is the only thing I've really been doing. But that's a goal for me to have a show in the next six months. To have like maybe six or seven pieces, something. Story_ID: 380290 Speaker 1: So I wanna end this by talking a little about your family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You were married? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What year did you get married? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-three [1983]. Speaker 1: And you married a designer? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you married in '83 [1983]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How long were you married for? Speaker 2: I was married until seven years ago, 2000, so. Speaker 1: And how many children? Speaker 2: Two, boys. Speaker 1: And how old are they? Speaker 2: Twenty, the oldest is twenty, Evan [Evan Lane], and the youngest is seventeen, Ian [Ian Lane]. Speaker 1: So that's a nice family. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, great. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Very large kids. The oldest is about 6'7", and the youngest is about 6'7". Speaker 1: Why are they so big? Speaker 2: My ex-wife's [Marva Lane] side of the family has very tall people in it. And my ex-wife is five-- she's 5'11 1/2". So we forgot about the height, you know, when you just make sure all the toes are there and everything's working and, and she's healthy and the baby's healthy both times, we didn't think about the height until we took him to the, the pediatrician and he said do you realize how tall they're gonna be, so they're about-- Speaker 1: So can they really determine that early on in the percentiles? Speaker 2: Within three years. Speaker 1: Oh, within three years, okay. Speaker 2: They, they have a gauge, yeah, they have a gauge within three years. When I took my oldest son there, first, the first time, he said okay, wrote down the notes. When I brought my oldest son back again, like, you know, six months or whatever months later, and he walked in he says, "Where is he?" And he looked at him and he just got up and walked out of the office and went outside in the street, and he just came back and said, "Do you realize how tall he's gonna be," I can't believe it, and they figured him to be about 6'10", but he's gonna be about, about say, he's twenty-one, he's gonna be twenty-one, he's gonna be about 6'7", 6'8", I think. And the youngest one I have no idea, I have no idea, if he gets another growth spurt he may say, he my hit about 6'9", 6'10". Speaker 1: Well, what do they wanna do with themselves? Speaker 2: The oldest one is in college, he's at Stony Brook University [Stony Brook, New York]. He is business, he's a business major, minoring in political science and minoring in, well, I think he just changed it, in Japanese so he speaks Japanese. And the oldest--the youngest one he's not sure what he wants to do yet. He's artistic, he's very artistic and very, he almost kind of mirrors me in the sense that he loves film and he loves art so he might wind up in one of those two. And plus he loves basketball, so who knows. Story_ID: 380291 Speaker 1: This is from my own line and I just wanted to show this is my main label. And the label, the logo, in the back that you can see where it says BL was really, I, put that together in probably 1971 and it's something I've traveled along with and I just created my signature on top of that so that was my main label, and it's something I always wanted to do I guess. This guy was my first ad for my own line that made trade magazines, shows, one of my goat skin jackets with a cashmere liner. And then just to flip through, this is probably the high line of, of my line. Speaker 2: The highlight? Speaker 1: The high line of-- Speaker 2: The high line. Speaker 1: --the line because this is 680 grams of cashmere which is roughly oh, oh, just about a quarter inch thick of cashmere with a rabbit, rabbit, with a deer skin snap out vest and cashmere corduroy vest under the collar which is here. So that's probably one of my favorite pieces. Speaker 2: Can you just hold that on that page for a moment? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) that's fine. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah. Speaker 1: And then I just wanna talk about the linings, another thing, the linings I basically work with a factory in Italy that makes for a designer named Roberto Cavalli. And this is a specialized fabrication that I developed with them so I was able to use that inside, say this lamb jacket that has a, a rabbit collar so this is like a really, really special piece and, you know, it wasn't too expensive, it wasn't too crazy (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Roberto usually use that on the outside though. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I used it on the inside because I was really trying to trick it up to be that special. And to shoot off the rest. This which was one of my favorites, it likes someone here, is a gold jacket that I made for Converse. I did the label Converse in Boston [Massachusetts] and developed a whole program around them and it was part basketball, part urban kind of deals so this is one my favorite, that's one of my favorite jackets as well. And just kind of to talk about some of the other things I did between Perry Ellis and the fact that there was a magazine called Code, that they were trying to put together and they eventually did, it lasted for maybe a year, a couple of years, but I was part of the committee to come up with one, the name and what the history about the, what we were trying to do with the magazine and pretty much that's about it. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Are you in the picture over there? Speaker 1: Yes, that's me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm in the picture right there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): A very nice picture. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And hold it a little more vertical so that it doesn't, yeah, that's good. Speaker 1: Okay, the glare I know it's gonna be-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 1: --a pain. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And, you know, what you can see it this way, you can-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --adjust it if you want. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and then just talk about the one job that got away. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: All right. The one job that got away from me is the Michael Jordan job from Nike [Nike, Inc.]. And I was developing a product, trying to get a product to, to develop with them. And what I was trying to do for them is develop all the men's project, product. So I came up with an idea, I made a presentation, it was a great, great concept, they really liked it, this was a quickie thank you note that I gave to them, kind of giving them an idea about what I thought the line could be, breaking it up this way as a package. I figured the best way to make presentations is to do it like this. So I put that together and then put a little goodbye thank you and I made copies of these and left them with them. And kind of just talked about all the different things, all the different finishings and using logo buttons and everything like that because I really wanted it to be a sophisticated idea, concept for them. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Open it, open it so that I could see that part. That's good. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: I wanted it to be really an, an interesting concept for them to take it, instead of just doing urban things to do something a little bit more special with the horn logos and all the different things like that. But lo and behold someone else got the job and it was one of those things that got away from me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. Speaker 2: Okay. These are some bags that I developed because I took the line and did just not only coats but I did sweaters, cashmere sweaters, out of Scotland but I also did bags and this for example is a goat skin bag that I developed and this is really for men to wear, you know, on a day to day basis. But the one I'm most excited about is the one on the bottom, which is my, it's a fabric used, corte fabric used in Guatemala. And this actual plan that you see here is hand woven wool and it's worn by men, by one group in Guatemala. And I just feel in love with the fabric and I wanted to turn it into a bag because everyone has a bag and the bags are generally one color black or brown but I wanted to have a little lift to it and add this part in the line, so this is one of my favorite pieces. All right. Speaker 1: Well, this is a project that I did for a bag company called Tumi [Tumi Holdings Inc.]. And it was the first time in twenty years that I picked up a, a watercolor brush at all so it was very great that they asked me to do this so I did this for a project. They didn't get the project but it, what it did for me was it showed that I can actually still swing a brush and it's just showing some other ones that I did for them. The fun part was that this was my, for my very first portfolio, one of my first illustrations. And it got me in doors and it got me a lot of work so I hate to get rid of this, I'm very, very partial to that piece. And just to flip (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hold on just a second let me just, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. I forgot-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 1: --that was even there. And just to flip through-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to look for other pieces that I've done. Speaker 2: The Bill Blass? Speaker 1: Yeah. That's what I was going to. This was the first time anything, any of my work was ever produced and I did a, a hang tag for a company called Bill Blass. And--which everyone should know--and this was on their men's products. And basically my first time seeing it was walking into Saks [Saks Fifth Avenue] and seeing it on the first floor and seeing tons of my little tags hanging around which is really amazing for me. That was the first push I ever had. And just to flip a little more just to show some other art work. Speaker 2: This is my other favorite pieces and these, these are just for quickie projects that I did for different people and they're really like tests for me, for me to really do another piece on. So these are things that I've played with for a while. Gotten great rea-, I mean I've gotten great reaction. This is what's really pushing me into doing my own, you know, this one I love because I actually just love this woman's lips, it's one of my big things on that. But the funny part is one of the first things that I ever did was, when I was about seventeen, I did hand drawn T-shirts kind of like this kind of feeling, this kind of feeling, I did hand drawn T-shirts for Bloomingdale's. And I just basically went up, called up one day asked if I could show my T-shirts, she bought 'em, they sold out in two weeks and it was what, one of the first things, it was, I was just this little raggedy kid who didn't know what to do and I had to, I had a part-time job working in a clothing store and he told me how to write up a bill of sale, how to, how to set up everything, how to deliver it, where to go, I didn't know what I was doing but I was very successful and I never did it again because I was too embarrassed to ask my mother [Etta Walker Lane] for money for the next collection. That part just drove me nuts. And 'til to this day, whenever I speak in classes or make any presentations to anyone I always tell that story so to make everybody feel that no matter what you do, you should just keep on doing it and try 'cause no one's gonna tell you, okay, everyone's gonna tell you no, it's not gonna work. That's it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And any-- Speaker 2: He'll tell you. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --anecdotes that you, you might have. Go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay. This is when I was baby. I have no idea, I think, I'm about two or three years old so that must be '55 [1955], '57 [1957]. And I know it was taken in Brooklyn [New York]. I have to quiz my mom on exactly when and where it was. Okay. This is a shot of my, myself on my wedding day with my dad [Edward Lane] and this was in 1983. I had a lot more hair and he had less (laughter). But it's one of, one of the good times before my dad got ill that we were able to actually talk and he had a way good time at the wedding, that part I remember, totally remember. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This a picture of my, my mom with both of my sons. My oldest son, Evan [Evan Lane], and my youngest son, Ian [Ian Lane]. And this, and my mother doesn't like to take pictures any more so it's very difficult, this is very rare for her to get her, get her in a good mood like this but like this is maybe about five or six years ago, or it's--yeah, about five or six years ago, when we took this shot. And this picture is of my dad, this must be about '83 [1983], '82 [1982], 1982, I, I imagine. Somehow whenever I put on a hat, my dad, my, my dad comes out of me 'cause whenever I wear a hat someone will say you look just like your father (laughter). So my father was the king of hats. He had more hats than you could ever think of but he was, he, my father was a lot of fun, and he tried to have as much fun as he could whenever he could so that part I do remember of him...