 Story_ID: 651652 Speaker 1: --Spell it for us. Don't say a middle name, but if you have one 'cause I don't have your--you know, your questionnaire. Okay, so can you do that? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Trymaine Lee--that's spelled T-R-Y-M-A-I-N-E, and my last name is, again, Lee, L-E-E. I do have a middle name--it's Dewitte. I rarely use it, which is D-E-W-I-T-T-E. Speaker 1: Okay, we like--we like to be for- formal in this process. Speaker 2: Trymaine Dewitte Lee. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, that's--and can I have your date of birth? Speaker 2: I was born September 20th, 1978 (clears throat) excuse me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your--that's okay--and your place of birth? Speaker 2: Stratford, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and then I want to have today's date and our, our location. Speaker 2: Today's date is February 20th, 2014; and we are at 4 Times Square, located in Times Square in New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: And also your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a journalist. Speaker 1: Okay, you say it with pride. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, you should. Okay, we'd like--you're a very--you're a beautiful writer, by the way. Speaker 2: Thank you very much. Speaker 1: Okay, very--I mean you could tell that you wanted to do literary writing. Speaker 2: Thank you. That is where--the direction I thought I was going in (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. I saw that. Story_ID: 651653 Speaker 1: We ask five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food--I hate to be cliche, but fried chicken, macaroni and cheese, and collard greens. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Favorite (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's almost cliche at this point, but it's--what can I say (laughter)? Speaker 1: That's okay. Favorite color? Speaker 2: Navy blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring, definitely spring. Speaker 1: Favorite--it's coming soon, right? Speaker 2: Definite- yeah. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: St. Martin. Speaker 1: Okay, and favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying. I think that's too--that's tou- too tough to answer I think (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, no problem, you don't have to have one. Story_ID: 651654 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your growing up. And I'd like for you to tell me about your--you know, your parents. Can you give me your father's name and what you know about his background first? Speaker 2: I wasn't raised by my father [Kenny Watkins]. I was raised by my-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my mother-- Speaker 1: Your mother. Speaker 2: --and my stepfather. Speaker 1: Okay, your st- okay, give your stepfather then. Speaker 2: George Taylor, and he's since my former stepfather at this point. But my, my stepfather, George Taylor, was a--was a brick mason. He'd build you a foundation to a house; build you a deck; fix your car. He was--he was that kind, kind of man. My mother was a nurse's aide at a local psych- psychiatric hospital. Speaker 1: Okay, so how long was your stepfather in your life, just for chronology sake. Speaker 2: He, he was in my life from--he married my mother when I was seven years old. They got divorced maybe five years ago; and I still communicate with him from time--every, every now and then. Speaker 1: So he's for all intents and purposes your father-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in a way. Okay, now I want to--let's talk about your mother; and if you would give her--you know, her year of birth and what you know about her and her name. I think you ga- but her name and what you know about her growing up. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Wanda Taylor [Wanda Worthington Taylor]. She was born Wanda Worthington in August--mid-August, 1954. I believe--she's sixty years old now, so I believe 1954, I believe. My mother is, is truly, you know, one of the, the lights of my life. She is a loving person, has always been warm, and always so supportive. I can remember I--and then I, I repeat this, this story often, but I can remember as, as a--as a young child before going to school, she would say, "I am--?" And then I would say, "Somebody." She would say, "I am--?" And I would say, "Somebody," and I believed it. Until this day I, I really feel like I am somebody, not just because she told me. And I believed it because I truly believe that once I, I believed that in myself, I could go out in the world and nothing could stop me. And so that's one of the fondest memories. But even throughout my childhood, she always wanted the best for me. She always supported me. There was never a time where I couldn't go to her and feel comfortable talking about anything. And of course, she is my mother, but I could talk about anything with her; and, and, and feel confident that, that she would help guide me in the right direction. And to this day I still hear her voice and when I talk to her, you know, every week. You know, but I often still hear her voice and--but more than anything, I think it was the confidence that she gave me--that no matter who you are, no matter where we come from, no matter what the circumstances are, if you believe in yourself and have pride in yourself--one, one key thing that was that as, as a young black man, to be proud of myself and, and love your people, and be proud of yourself. And I've carried that on. And I feel that like all that I've done, even when I--even before I became a journalist and before I was doing what I'm doing now as an adult, I felt--a point of pride for me is always making my people proud, and I think that goes back to making my mother proud. And, and that was--you know, so I just--I just love my mother. I could--I could talk about her all day. The whole interview could about my mother. But yeah, she's just a---just--she's just a great woman. Speaker 1: That's nice. Story_ID: 651655 Speaker 1: What do you know about her growing up? Speaker 2: She grew up one of eight children. My grandparents, Ida Worthington [Ida Worthington Dyitt] and Horace Worthington, had eight children; she was the youngest. My mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] is kind of scrappy--still kind of scrappy. I mean, she's a wonderful, loving woman, but she's a little bit of a scrapper, and she came up being the, the baby. And she hated being the baby; (laughter) and so she always grew up, you know, just, just getting into it with her brothers and sisters. They grew up in, in South Jersey in--well, traveled between Atlantic City, New Jersey; Berlin, New Jersey, and I think for a time they lived out in Ohio. With such a big family, you know, it was just--you know, family is very important to, to everyone because there were so many of them. And my grandfather and, and grandmother did all they could to kind of provide everything they could for their--for their, their children. My grandfather, they called him Big Daddy. He was--he was always on his CBs [ph.]. So he, he--you know, that's--that was his--that was--or Big, Big Papa or Big Daddy; it's one of tho- I think it was Big Papa or Big Daddy. It was one of those, but he was a loving man, but he was also very stern, that kind of old school, very, very gruff kind of man. But he was the, kind of the nucleus of the family. Unfortunately, he was killed before I was born, and so I didn't get a chance to meet him. I think he was--he was killed about four or five years before I was born. So unfortunately I--you know, I never got to meet him, but you always hear stories about, you know, how--at his funeral how--. They, they lived in Berlin, New Jersey; and there's, there's East Berlin and West Berlin. East Berlin was historically the black side of Berlin, and West Berlin was the white part of town. My grandparents bought a house in West Berlin--one of the few black families there. And, and, and so when he died, you know, the streets were lined with white people, black people. Everyone respected him because he, he didn't take anything from anybody at all, and he--and he commanded respect, and everyone knew it. To be a Worthington in, in that community meant something; (laughter) and so my aunts and uncles, and then my mother, and my grand- you were a Worthington and that really meant something. And so, you know, unfortunately, I, I--you know, he seemed like such a loving man. I wish I had the opportunity to meet him and just wish I could spend a little time with him, you know, but--and the circumstances of his death still have, have a kind of a resonant impact on my family today. My, my grandparents--where we're--where we're from is outside of Camden, New Jersey, and so they owned a small apartment building in Camden. And so a gentleman came to, to rent out an apartment, put a deposit down, and just disappeared for six or seven months. He came back looking for his money or the apartment, and my, my grandparents told him, "Well, you know, you, you gave up your deposit because you never showed up. We were ready to, to rent the apartment to you and you never showed up." So one, one day--my grandfather worked at a lumberyard, and he, he worked the, the late shift. He came home and there was a knock on the door. As soon as he stood up, the guy fired--you know, fired through the window--through, through the window on the side of the door and killed him right there. My, my, my grandmother was there, I believe one of my uncles was there, and it was just a tragic moment for my family. You know, of course as you can imagine, I had--I had four uncles, three aunts in their twenties; and it just--it just kind of ripped the core from the family, ripped the foundation from, from under the family. And to this day I don't think the family has truly, truly gotten over it in a sense, you know. Of, of course it's not as, as raw, but I--but I can only imagine when you lose a parent, especially in, in such a violent way, that, that, that never goes away, and so compounded with the fact that he was such a great man and, and died so tragically. And, and weird enough one of my aunts who is kind of the historian of the family, she gave me copies of some of the newspaper articles. And I spent much of my career as a, a police reporter, and so I've written about countless homicides, countless tragic endings. And I always approached it empathetically, partly because, you know, there's been--you know, violence has taken loved ones in my family. But to read these stories, and, and it's so matter of fact and so cold. And this was the, the, the, the--you know, the, the center of this family. It just--and not, not to, to skip over it too much, but I just as journalist it, it reminded to, to always approach it with compassion, because this, this is someone's loved one. This is somebody's father, somebody's brother, but yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now 'cause there's--we've got a lot of violence in Chicago [Illinois]. There's just violence all over. Speaker 2: It's true, it's horrible. Story_ID: 651656 Speaker 1: So let me ask you, how did that affect your [maternal] grandmother then; and can you describe your grandmother? Was she active in your life? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, my grand- my grandmother was--played a big role in my life because my grandmother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Her name? Speaker 2: Ida Worthington. Speaker 1: Okay, that's right. Speaker 2: And, and later Ida Dyitt [Ida Worthington Dyitt]. She passed January of last year. My grandmother was the first person--I can remember being at McDonald's with her when I was young and something was wrong with the order, and she demanded that, that it be fixed. And just as a five year old, a six year old, I was like you can do that? You can stand up for your--it's like, something's wrong and you can just like say that, you know, it needs to be fixed; and it happens? That was like the first time I think that whole idea came to me. My, my grandmother was, again, strong, strict, but loving. They owned a boarding home. The, the house that they lived in, where my grandfather [Horace Worthington] was killed, they ended up turning it into a boarding home, at which my mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] worked at when I was--when I was--for many years, five or six years when I was a kid. So I would go to school in, in the neighborhood and then come back there after school where my mother worked, and my grandmother worked, and you had boarders. And so she ran this boarding home for, you know, fifteen years maybe, maybe a dozen or fifteen years. And she was a hard working woman, immaculate, like the house was always immaculate (laughter), and you had to--you know, you had to always present yourself, you know, shirt tucked in. You always had to say--you can't say yeah; you had to say yes. She was that kind of woman. You could never slip up, but she would also you know, cook for you, give you little treats, you know, hug you when you wanted it. And there was so many of us. She had eight kids, so there were dozens and dozens of grandchildren and now great-grandchildren. But, but after my--when my grandfather passed, I think it had a profound effect on her, because shortly before he passed, they had been working through things in their marriage, and eight kids, and some of the older ones, and you saw the younger ones; and who's gonna do what, and who's gonna take care of who? We never really talked about--I never--I never had a conversation with my grandmother about my grandfather's death because for so long it was the kind of thing that you just didn't really address because you knew--you, you kind of knew the, the bottom line facts, and you knew that it was still so painful for everyone that I never felt comfortable necessarily bringing up. I know like growing up, my mother never let us have toy guns at all. It was not a game at all for her. But my, my grandmother would just talk about, you know, how handsome he was, and he was a very handsome--very handsome--(laughter) very handsome man. He had this headful of gray hair, and he was just--he--he's what a man--he just look like a man, what a man is supposed to be. And that, that was my--well, my grandfather, seeing the old pictures. But I, I never--I never talked to her about it, so I, I, I--I'm not sure how it impacted her, but I noticed that after his passing she had eight, eight children to take care of. She eventually remarried, Mr. Bill [William Dyitt], who was a great guy. So when I grew up, most of my life Mr. Bill--and I can't recall when they actually got married, but Mr. Bill, for all intents and purposes, was like a grandfather to me. The kind of guy that always give you quarters out his pockets or, or half dollars out of your [sic.] pockets and, and candy. He, he was just a, a great man as well, but it was always clear in my family he, he was never my grandfather (laughter). You know, as I don't think my, my, my aunts and uncles, and, and my mother never looked at him as a father, but, but he was embraced by our family and he was loved by our family. And he, he was a, a really good man. Story_ID: 651657 Speaker 1: Do you have siblings, sorry? Speaker 2: I do. I have--I'm, I'm the youngest, so I have an older brother-- Speaker 1: His name? Speaker 2: Ol- Oliver Lee; and an older sister, Erica Lee. Erica is the, the oldest, so she's forty-three, my brother is forty-one, and I'm thirty-five [years old], so I came well after them. Speaker 1: All right. So like how--wait, thirty-five and thirty-one, right? Speaker 2: Thir- Speaker 1: You said-- Speaker 2: I'm, I'm thirty-five; and he's forty-one. Speaker 1: Oh, he's for- oh. Speaker 2: And, and, and she's forty-three. Speaker 1: Thir- that's thir- is it thir-? Speaker 2: No, it's--it should be-- Speaker 1: Wait-- Speaker 2: --six and seven or, or eight and six, depending on-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when it is. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Story_ID: 651658 Speaker 1: Tell me what your earliest memory is growing up. Speaker 2: My earliest--my earliest memory growing up. One of my earliest memories--earliest memories, (pause) huh that's a tough one. I, I--one of my earliest memories would be--we have different fathers, my, my brother [Oliver Lee] and sister [Erica Lee] have a different father than me. And he worked at the same place where my [maternal] grandfather [Horace Worthington] worked before he was killed. It's like a--84 Lumber that wasn't far away from where we lived. And there was a Christmas party, and I, I remember playing with the other kids around the soda machine, and we're all clamoring around this soda machine waiting for someone to put some money in it, and then the cans coming out. And I must have been--you know, four or five [years old] or something like that--young. I just remember being there (laughter) with them. And a lot of other mem- my oth- other memories, I can remember probably being around five or six or maybe seven. In the community where we lived, there was a reservoir, you know, where the--where all the water runoff would go. And we would go--me and a couple of my buddies from the neighborhood would go with a bucket and get the little, little toads, the baby toads. So it'd be dozens of 'em, and they'd be li- (gesture) small. And then we go to our neighbor and try to sell 'em for like fifteen cents each. And we would go out there and you know it was--and we made a couple of dollars, you know; it was always fun. But I can remember just--and that's--that was--where we were from, it was outside of Camden [New Jersey]. It was right when you get into kind of the, the Pinelands of New Jersey [New Jersey Pinelands National Reserve]. So it's only about twenty minutes outside of Camden, but you're out of the city. And so it's this--it's kind of a wooded area. It's not really rural, but there are trees and there are reservoirs. And you know, we'd get box turtles that'd be crossing the street, and, and we'd go by the reservoir and, and get the toads and you know, ride our bikes through the woods and, and those--I never--I have great memories of, of childhood. Story_ID: 651659 Speaker 1: Was this called Chesilberg [sic.]? Speaker 2: Chesilhurst, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Oh, what--Chesilhurst? Speaker 2: Chesilhurst. Speaker 1: Chesilhur- Chesilhurst, New Jersey, okay. And so how lar- is it a suburb or is it a small town? Speaker 2: It's not really a suburb. It's a small town. It's, it's kind of a band of--there's a great book called 'Small Towns, Black Lives' ['Small Towns, Black Lives: African American Communities in Southern New Jersey'], right, about this band of small black communities in South Jersey. It starts with Lawnside, New Jersey; Chesilhurst, New Jersey; East Berlin [Berlin, New Jersey]; West Echo [ph.]; so it's, it's just kind of a block of all of these little small towns, maybe fifteen hundred people, but they're all kind of connected. All these towns are connected. Speaker 1: And when you say 'Small Towns, Black Lives'--these are mainly black towns? Speaker 2: They're all black, yeah, mostly black towns. They're-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --they're kind of pockets of black--they're black towns. You know, one, one--just the, the landscape is kind of a working class poor kind of area, and so--and that's the one interesting that about when you go to other cities and you talk about white flight, and you know, white folks fled the cities and left these--you know, the, the cities--inner cities primary black. We're from, everybody's working class, black and white together. So Chesilhurst is probably about 70 to 80 percent black, but your neighbors are white. His dad is a security guard somewhere. You know, they all--we all know each other. They all--they all grew up--grew up together. My mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] grew up with--my best friend, who was a white dude across the street named Robert Applegate [ph.], my mother and my uncle and them grew up with his uncles and them in, in Berl- the Berlin area. So even though that generation were at odds (laughter) at a time, I ended up being best friends with, with, with, with the son of, of you know, guys who my uncles, you know, get into it with back in the day. Speaker 1: Okay. See 'cause a lot--and it--they're small too-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's the thing-- Speaker 2: Very. Speaker 1: --New Jersey's different as a-- Speaker 2: New Jersey is different. Speaker 1: --state and--'cause there are a lot of cities. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then there's North Jersey, South Jersey. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now Chesil- Chesilhurst was in what? It's in? Speaker 2: South Jersey. Speaker 1: It's in South Jersey. Speaker 2: So it's probably a quarter between--a quarter between Camden [New Jersey] and Atlantic City [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's, it's you know, twenty minutes outside of Camden; then you have another probably thirty-five or forty minutes to Atlantic City. Story_ID: 651660 Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up [in Chesilhurst, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: One, one thing that always reminds me of, of, of just growing up would be the smell of, of fried chicken cooking. 'Cause I'd always remember hitting the doorstep and, and the screen door, and I can remember the smell of dinner just hitting me. From the time I was really little until I went away to boarding school [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania], and I would come home and my mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] would always have a basket of, of fried chicken breasts. And that's one of the best memories I had because my moth- my mother's house was always so warm. I mean physically it felt warm, but everything about it was warm: the, the, the colors were warm; the sofa that you could never sit on in the living room, that we could never, ever sit on (laughter), but it was all home and it was all warm. And the kitchen was all warm, and my mother would always--I can remember waking up to the smell of like breakfast. And the thing about it is, if you didn't get up on time, you--you're gone miss breakfast. She--you gonna get it while it's hot or you don't get it at all. And--but I just remember the, the smell of, of breakfast, the grits, and the eggs, and bacon and the toast. And my mother would make the, the toast--the, the, the secret is you gotta get the butter on the toast right when it comes out. You gotta get it right when it comes out so it's still a little crispy, but the butter seeps in. And all of that just reminds me of, of, of growing up. And, and also--I mean--and also the out- the, the smell of cut grass, because I would always have to cut the grass. (Laughter) And I could remember the, the smell of that grass also, because we spent a lot of time outside playing in the yard, playing in the front yard, playing in the street. We had a street full of kids, so we were always playing football, always playing kickball, you know, you're always getting into it with somebody, tussling with somebody down the block. So just that, that outdoor smell and, and the smell of, of home cooking always remind me of growing up. Speaker 1: And what about--okay (unclear) and sou- sounds--what about sounds? Speaker 2: Sounds? Speaker 1: Your--? Speaker 2: No, no sounds really trigger anything really. Speaker 1: See, people have different senses. Speaker 2: You, you know and I'll, I'll you what, one thing--one sound that does remind me of home growing up--I'm not--I'm not into gospel music much, but growing up, even though my mother wasn't really religious, when she was cleaning, she would open up all the windows. And talking about smell, the Pine-Sol, that smell, and she would always have gospel music playing. And so--especially during, during the spring or summertime, every single window up in the house--open, the, the wind's coming in blowing, that, that smell of the Pine-Sol, and, and the gospel music playing. Now that's, that's one distinct smell and sound that always bring me right back to that time coming upstairs from--my room was in, was in the basement--coming upstairs, and she has all the chairs either pushed away or on top of the table; and, and, and the--and the gospel music playing. Story_ID: 651661 Speaker 1: So you didn't necessarily go to church. You weren't a churchgoing family, were you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, what my, my mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] did when I was young, I would go with my [maternal] grandmother [Ida Worthington Dyitt]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as one of the younger ones, the younger cousins always went with my grandmother to church. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: My, my, my brother [Oliver Lee] and my sister [Erica Lee], I don't remember them being around much, but since we were young enough where they could just take us. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, you know, we always went to church but always with my grandmother, never--my mother just wasn't into church; now she is, but when we were young we never went together to church as a family. Speaker 1: But she, she was listening to gospel music. Speaker 2: Just loved gospel music (laughter), I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so what--are there any songs that you remember that she would listen to? Speaker 2: The one, one, one that I can remember, and I forgot the name of it, but "I'm coming up on the rough side of the mountain" ['Rough Side of the Mountain']. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Singing) "I'm coming up on the rough side--," I always remember that one. And my grandmother wrote a song, and my grandmother was no musician. It's 'There's Gonna Be Some Rain' [ph.]--it's gonna be some rain sometimes in your life, but something be sure the Lord will show you the way. (Singing), "There's gonna be some rain in your life sometimes," oh, "but get on your knees and pray. The Lord is gonna show you the way." And I always remember that. My grandmother, again, she was not a singer, she was not a musician by training at all, but that song--may- maybe she wrote others, but that's the one I remember. And my mother would sing it (laughter). Speaker 1: Your mother would sing that? Speaker 2: My mother would sing it, yeah. Speaker 1: Wow--and so would, would the--was that ever sang in church or you're just (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was never in church. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: It was just at home. And my grandmother would be singing it; my mother would sing it. And to this day, it's kind of not--it's not--it's not a joke now, but we always bring it up because that was my grandmother's song. And then you--it does remind you there's gonna be some rain sometimes in your life, and it there really is. There's always gonna be some rain (laughter); get on your knees and pray. The Lord's gonna show you the way (laughter). Speaker 1: That's--so what, what church was your grandmother go- taking you to? Speaker 2: There was a nondenominational church called Christ Fellowship--or, or was it? I forgot the name of it. It was--it was fellowship--Fellowship Restoration [ph.]. And I can remember for a long time they didn't have a church, so we'd meet in, in a local school gym. And so we had Sunday school in the gym--in one corner of the gym; then church would be in another part of the gym. For years and years it was always at the school. But there, there was also a Mount--Mount Carmel Church [Greater Mount Carmel Church of God in Christ] in East Berlin, New Jersey [East Berlin, Berlin, New Jersey], where we went as a kid. And there were (unclear)--'cause there were a bunch of small other churches that we would visit occasionally at, at you know, family ties, you know someone was a minister or someone went to that church. But Fellowship was where we went to most- mostly. Speaker 1: Okay, so how far was East Berlin from Chesilhurst [New Jersey], Chesilhurst? Speaker 2: Fifteen minutes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not far at all. Story_ID: 651662 Speaker 1: That's what you were saying, that your [maternal] grandfather [Horace Worthington]--your mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] had grown up in West Berlin [Berlin, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right, okay that's where their house had been, okay. Okay, so tell me what family life was like? You know, what was it growing up? And I'd like to go within the household; and then we'll go outside, you know, the-- Speaker 2: Growing up I was--I was the baby of the family, and so I'm, I'm, you know, six, seven years younger than my, my brother [Oliver Lee] and my sister [Erica Lee]. So I, I felt like I grew up as an only child almost, because by the time I was say eight, they're already, you know, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen years old. And so I always--I always looked up to my brother. My brother was a little more mischievous. My brother was always the one getting in a little more trouble. My sister--I always saw my sister as the smartest person in the world. I, I, I just looked up to her, and for some reason she just seemed so smart and, and so studious, and she was always doing the right things. Now my brother was, was funny; he was always cool; he was--him and his buddies would be break dancing. They would go out looking in the trash looking for refrigerator boxes; and they would bring it back to the yard and be break dancing out front. They were always in the BMX bikes and, and racing, and my cousins were into dirt bikes. They were always so cool--and music; he was into girls and always dressing well. And so I think I actually got in--I was influenced by both--(laughter) by both of them. But growing up, I can remember some of earliest memories--and going back to actually the earliest memory question, I can remember waking up really early on Christmas just in like my, my underwear and a t-shirt. And, I couldn't sleep all night, so I'm waiting for Christmas--Christmas morning--and I'm going to awaken them up. I'm like, "Yo, we gotta go upstairs, we gotta go upstairs!" And me running upstairs and them following to, to Christmas presents. But that was such a joy to me and, and to get them and to wake them up and say, "Come on we gotta go." Growing--growing up was, was pretty good. I mean, there were always lean times that I didn't recognize as a child. My mother worked a number of jobs. She worked at the movie theater at one point; she was the local welfare director for our part of Camden County [New Jersey], which is not--you know, not much. But she's working the movie theater, working at the--at the welfare department, and she had another job--oh, she'd also work for my, my, my [maternal] grandmother's [Ida Worthington Dyitt] too every once in a while. She worked hard. I never felt that we were going without, but I know we didn't have ample, you know; but I, I never felt it because we were family and we were together. Growing up was good, though. Growing, growing up--growing up was--we had a good time. I think fortunately those lean times were buffered by the world outside. You know, I loved playing and I was always in sports, so going out and playing football down the street. I loved it. I loved going across to, to Rob [Robert Applegate (ph.)] across the street and just hanging out with him in, in his backyard. I loved exploring behind our houses and going out there and just running around, finding turtles, going back and getting tadpoles; all that was great to me. And so it was buffered by, you know, the lean times. And also my stepfather [George Taylor] struggled with addiction, and so that was part of my life that was a little more unstable 'cause I, I loved this man, you know. He was my father for all intents and purposes. Every day I can remember us going fishing. I couldn't wait to come home and go fishing, especially during the summertime. He taught me--he's the first one that had me out in the yard cutting grass and up on--up on the, the, the roof cleaning the gutters out even though I didn't like it. But it was--he was teaching me the whole time, you know, hard work. I'd be out there with him throwing bricks as he's, you know, building a foundation. Story_ID: 651663 Speaker 1: But then there was a point when I realized, you know, he [Lee's stepfather, George Taylor] was struggling; and that had a serious impact on our family. My sister [Erica Lee] had already moved out of the house. My brother [Oliver Lee], he moved out when he was like eighteen [years old] so he was just on the verge of, of, of getting out of the house; and so I was there-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --(laughter) as a young man. Speaker 2: 'Cause you were--'cause when he--when your--when your mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] ma- they married, he--you were seven, so your brother is at that point, f- ? Speaker 1: You know, thirteen--thirteen, fourteen. Speaker 2: Fourteen, yeah. Speaker 1: Fourteen years old. And so by the time I'm ten and eleven they're already kind of halfway out the door. My sister was already gone. My brother was halfway out, and then there I was, not understanding what this addiction meant. And I understand-- Speaker 2: What was he addicted to? Speaker 1: I wanna say it was crack [crack cocaine], you know. Speaker 2: Oh, so he (unclear)-- Speaker 1: He--but I mean, he, he had--he had--you know, he had-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --been struggling with different addictions throughout his life, but I just couldn't-- Speaker 2: Was there alcoholism too? Speaker 1: Not much. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No, not much that I could, could ever recall. It was--it was drugs. But it was just hard balancing this great man. I mean 'cause he was great, you know, for me. He, he, he was never abusive at all. He'd give you the shirt off his back; I mean, even through all the times of his years of addiction, if I needed anything at all, I could turn to him. To this day, if I called him and I say, "Hey, Pop, you know, something's wrong with my car, how--?" He's there. If I wanted to just talk to Pop, I could always call Pop. But I knew it was taking a toll more on my mother--I think the hardest part was seeing my mother as a wife dealing with a husband who is an addict, you know. And that was a very difficult time. And so it was like the, the best times discovering the--myself, the world beyond; but also dealing with this kind of very turbulent situation in the house. Story_ID: 651664 Speaker 1: --Were times--he was a master craftsman. Like if you needed a deck built, you would get the most beautiful deck you ever seen in your life from someone who isn't a licensed (laughter) contractor because he took pride in his work. And my stepfather [George Taylor] taught me to keep--take pride in everything I did. Seriously, when you cut that grass, make sure lines are straight, don't miss a piece, do it right the first time, put a little elbow grease in it--get me up early in the morning. We're going outside and get--getting that grass, raking the leaves; we're gonna tackle it now. But I can remember as I got older coming home and, and Pop's truck's not there, and I would know like, man, because he would get twenty, thirty thousand dollars for some jobs. He would get a quarter or half a upfront, and that's--and he, he, he couldn't fight it, couldn't fight it. And so that was always tough because to see this man that I really respected on so many--so many levels succumbing to, to, to drug--drugs and you know. It was substance abuse. It was difficult. I mean, it wasn't unheard of. I mean, we know all kinds of people in our families, in our communities who are struggling, but I don't think people realize the impact that it has on the home. And it's not like everyone's a ho- a hardcore monster. These are loved ones. And so, so my memories of, of those early days are, are mixed--more eye opening than anything else. I don't think I was ever afraid. Now sometimes I was really angry, 'cause my mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] was upset and there'd be something going on there. So I'd be really angry, saying all right, all right, man. All right, we're gonna have to figure something out (laughter). But they were also great times, going fishing every single day. That work ethic that I--you know, I, I hated when I was young, but realized that he was instilling in me that, that ethic to make sure everything is right the first time, you know, it's priceless. Speaker 2: Trymaine [HistoryMaker Trymaine Lee], so when he would go off, what would happen? How long would he be gone for and you know, what would hap- what would happen when he would come back? I mean, just-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --even the demeanor and things like that. Speaker 1: It would--it would be days, days at a time. I think coming back, you, you, you feel that there is a sense of shame almost--that he knew that he, he was wrong. I personally, you know, couldn't even really talk to him sometimes. Like, I--I'm not even gonna--I can't even talk to you. Like, 'cause it, it came a point where I felt like, like you letting us down, you letting me down. Like, is this how it is? Are you choosing that over us? And that's how I felt. That's actually how I feel to this day still. You chose that over us, even though I know that once you understand what addiction is about, the struggle is real. And I don't think if anyone--if, if--no one would choose to drink the dirty water over the clean water, so if you had a choice you'd, you'd clean your act up. So it's not as cut and dry as making a choice and your decision between your family and, and your addiction. But the fact remains, though, that the addiction had a stronger hold on you than anything else, and so. Speaker 2: Okay. How prevalent was it in your community [in Chesilhurst, New Jersey]? How much are you aware of? Was, was he anomaly or did you know of lot--you know of a lot of other instances? Speaker 1: He, he certainly wasn't an anomaly, but because of the community we come from, I think the benefit that we weren't in the inner city, in that people were working class people, and people worked, and people were homeowners, it was easy to hide it. There was probably a lot more alcohol abuse. In terms of the drug addiction, you know, I probably knew more people who were selling drugs than who were using drugs. So I saw that side more than that, but clearly there were selling to people in our community. And so it wasn't like you had, you know, drug ad- drugged addicted zombies walking up and down the street. No, because everybody was working; they were functional addicts. But it was definitely there. Story_ID: 651665 Speaker 1: So tell me about your friends. Who are they? You know, you mentioned a friend across the street. And you mentioned the friend you were--. So what are their names; and what is the block that you're even--I mean, you know, where are you living and who's on that block and I mean I've heard what's behind the house. Speaker 2: Right, right. Well, when I was growing up, you know, over the years, of course, so many friends--friends kind of fall to the wayside, so most, most of my friends from childhood are not my same friends today. Across the street there was Robert Applegate [ph.]. You know, his--that was the white dude from across the street I was talking about. His father was a security guard. His mother was a homemaker for a long time, then she worked at the elementary school [Chesilhurst Elementary School; Shirley B. Foster Elementary School, Chesilhurst, New Jersey]--Mrs. Applegate, who I still see. I go home, I see Mrs. Applegate outside. She has this long red hair, and she would always make us like--set peanut butter and jelly sandwiches outside and ice tea. We were--we were really tight for a--for until we were--until we were probably in sixth or seventh grade, when I went away to school we were--we were tight. There was the Foxes [ph.] next door, who we were, you know, okay with. Down the street there was a big family, the Neece [ph.] family; they had like five kids. There was a guy, a younger guy, named Kiko, Victor [Victor Kiko (ph.)]. A Puerto Rican family lived catty corner. My buddy around the corner, Sherif--that was my closest friend in school, Sherif Collins [ph.]. So we, we were--I mean there were a bunch of us; and then behind, behind us there was another street full of kids. There were the Duncans [ph.] at the end of my street. Mrs. Brown [ph.] kind of around the corner, they had a son and a daughter that were tight with my brother [Oliver Lee] and sister [Erica Lee]. It seemed like the, the neighborhood was full of kids, full of young people, from as young as we were to teenagers, my brother's age. Yeah, now most of my friends now I went to Milton Hershey School with, a boarding school out in Pennsylvania [Hershey, Pennsylvania]. So my brothers, my tight family friends, all went to Milton Hershey with me; and at this point it's twenty some years ago. Speaker 1: Right, because I mean you were there for a while too. Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 651666 Speaker 1: So your elementary school that you go to in, in-- Speaker 2: Chesilhurst [New Jersey]? Speaker 1: --Chesilhurst, yes. Speaker 2: Oh and this is--I--the school--when, when I think back at the school it seemed so big. It's now called Shirley B. Foster Elementary [Shirley B. Foster Elementary School, Chesilhurst, New Jersey], after a beloved principal [Shirley B. Foster] who was the sternest woman you'll ever meet in your life. I mean she was serious business, but beloved. She passed away so they, they renamed Chesilhurst Elementary [Chesilhurst Elementary School] to Shirley B. Foster. It was a small school still because the town's predominantly black, probably 80 percent to 90 percent black. You, you know, we, we grew up with all the kids in the class, so our classroom size was maybe fifteen people; and you knew everyone in class 'cause we all grew up in this small town together. It was actually one of the worst performing schools in, in the state. I mean it ranked down there with Newark [New Jersey] and Camden [New Jersey] I think proficiency test wise. But for me, I, I was part of the gifted and talented program, so we'd go outside and look at ladybugs and do all kind of stuff. For me it was a great experience. That was the first time I, I would win writing awards. I, I would--it was like a, a great environment for me because the teachers were warm, loving teachers. My, my, my mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] knew the, the teachers. I knew all the students; and so it was always strange to me that we performed (laughter) so poorly when it seemed like such a great environment--a safe school, a small school. But you know, it was--it was literally one of the worst, worst in the state. Story_ID: 651667 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you, so what is making you different? What is, what is making you write? What is making you be accepted in the gifted program [at Chesilhurst Elementary School; Shirley B. Foster Elementary School, Chesilhurst, New Jersey]? What is happening there? Speaker 2: I don't know how different I was necessarily, but I know, again, I had a conf- I had self confidence in myself, first of all. And so I was always--and, and it was precocious at times, and it was a little--you know, a little probably too much at times when I was a younger person. But I was always confident, and I was always inquisitive, and I was always asking questions, and I was always--you know, being raised the way I was raised by my moth- my mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor], I felt that, you know, you take pride in being as smart as you possibly can be (laughter). You take pride in doing what you're supposed to be doing. And so, so I just--you know, I just went all in, but I think--but I also think I had at a very early age a combative nature also with authority. I actually got suspended a lot for fighting because--oh, if it wasn't--that's, that's, that was the other juxtaposition. I was great in school, A's and Bs; I was smart. The teachers--I was good in class, but if something is not right, it's not right. So one, I would talk back sometimes if it wasn't right, but also other students. You know, if we--if we had a problem, when we're--we might as well have a problem (laughter). So I--at the same time I'm doing--I'm doing well in school, I was getting suspended for fighting. I was--I was never disrupting the class, but again, if we had a--had a problem, I had no problem expressing myself to the teacher at all. Speaker 1: So what would you say to the teachers? Speaker 2: One, one time example, and this is where later on down the road we can see it was kind of the gift kind of emerging, but at that time it wasn't a joke at all. I can remember in the lunchroom there was a food fight that I did not participate in. I was in, in the cafeteria, and a food fight erupted, and everyone's throwing stuff. And I wasn't telling anyone to stop, but I also was not participating. I wasn't throwing my food, and I just was not interested in taking part. But I remember we all got in trouble. And the health teacher, and I forgot her name, but she, she was--she--we had health class after, after lunchtime, and so she made us all put our heads down. And I was trying to say like, I didn't do anything. Why am I being punished for what everyone else did? So I wrote this letter saying that we should come to school and protest. We should burn the school down if they don't listen to our demands. And then so I passed it over to a friend of mine, and they were like--were like giggling and passing it around. The teacher grabbed it, she looked at it, her eyes got wide, she said, "Trymaine [HistoryMaker Trymaine Lee], go to the office now." I went to the office. The principal, Ms. Foster [Shirley B. Foster], God rest her soul, said, "Trymaine, what is this; and what are you--?" Went through the whole thing, called my mother, and my mother came to the office. And she just looked at me like, but she understood (laughter) because I was serious. Why, why am I being punished for what a few other people did? It's not right for the rest of us who were not participating in this. And that's the kind of thing that I would get in trouble for, you know, time and again. And I didn't have the tact at the time, but I knew it wasn't right, and I knew, going back to my [maternal] grandmother [Ida Worthington Dyitt], if something is not right, you can stand--you can raise your hand and say, um, excuse me, this, this isn't right. Speaker 1: Now how old--what ye- what grade were you in at that point? Speaker 2: This must have been--the school only went up to sixth grade, so I must have been in probably fourth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Probably third or fourth grade. Story_ID: 651668 Speaker 1: What about your teachers? Are they black or white? Is there a combination, or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most of the teachers were black. Like, Ms., Ms. Griffin [Yvonne Griffin] was, was black; Ms. Chambers [Sandra Chambers] was black; our health teacher was white; no black males, but it was mostly--Ms. Covington [ph.]--who were kind of somewhat related to mostly black female teachers with--so there might have been only seven teachers in the school [Chesilhurst Elementary School; Shirley B. Foster Elementary School, Chesilhurst, New Jersey] total--six or seven. And I would say four were black women--four or five were black women. And then we had Ms. Wagner [ph.] was the health teacher. So she was our only white teacher, Ms. Wagner, and the rest of them were black women. Speaker 1: So you have really--you're growing up with a lot of black women around, your grandmother [Lee's maternal grandmother, Ida Worthington Dyitt]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --your, your, your mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor]. I mean you have your father [Lee's stepfather, George Taylor], but I mean that--up until seven [years old]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, it's a lot of women. Speaker 2: But it was also--but it was also balanced by-- Speaker 1: Your brother [Oliver Lee]? Speaker 2: To this day I still--you're right, I still love black women (laughter). I love 'em deeply, my mother, my grandmother, my aunts. But I also grew up with a bunch of strong uncles who--my uncle Gary [ph.] and my uncle Clifford [ph.] were, were Vietnam [Vietnam War] veterans. My uncle Clifford was a little, little wilder than--so--but so he was the, the kind of the cooler, you know, sometimes out of control uncle. My uncle Gary flew an airplane. To this day he still has an airplane, so I would go up flying with him. And we'd go and say oh, there, there's West Berlin [Berlin, New Jersey]; there's Chesil- and I could see it. My, my uncle--my uncle Alfred [ph.], who married my aunt Pat [ph.]--one of the hardest working men--I can always remember being over--my aunt Pat's house was around the corner. Everyone lived in a neighborhood still; so in West Berlin, my aunt ended buying a house there. My, my grandmother's aunt lives across the street. This whole three blocks--'cause see this, now you're triggering all these memories. I can remember my uncle Gary lived next door to my grandmother's house. My aunt Pat lived around the corner. Uncle Birdie [ph.], who was my grandmother's brother, lived across the street. It was all family, and so I'd have to run to one house to get some sugar, run over here; and then my aunt Pat had a pool, so we'd all be over there in the--in the backyard. But my uncle Alfred would always be asleep 'cause he worked like two jobs. He worked the nightshift and another shift. So you started running around, and at some point he would wake up groggy eyed saying, "Y'all better cut this noise out." But he was a kind man, and they had a big family. I mean so, again, my, my mother had three kids, and she probably had the fewest (laughter) out of--out of all her brothers and sisters. So yeah, so there were a lot of strong women in my life; but there were also a lot of men on the periphery that, that were also very strong influences, and that you know, everyone kind of kept, kept you in line. You couldn't go anywhere in the neighborhood without being kept in line. And so even though I lived in Chesilhurst [New Jersey], most of our time was spent in Berlin because that's where the family was; that's where the boarding home was where my mother worked at for a time; my grandmother was there; my uncles and aunts were all there, and so a lot of my childhood was spent there. Story_ID: 651669 Speaker 1: The other thing I wanna ask is when did you start getting--I don't wanna say--they don't track students, but when did you get upgraded? Not at the beginning, right, did you? Speaker 2: Like it was--the early gifted and talented days? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Probably around second grade. Speaker 1: Sec- ? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And do you remember why or there being any discussion or do you? Speaker 2: I don't remember. I remember--I do remember always testing out above the ninet- 90th percentile in like the, the CAT test [ph.] back in the day, and so I'd have to assume it was that. And there--but there were only a few of us. There were maybe three or four of us in each group that they would break out: me and a white dude around the corner named David Mitchell [ph.]; another buddy of mine named Tom Moraney [ph.], whom I--my mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] grew up with his--he's, he's mixed, and she grew up with his, his dad in Berlin [New Jersey]. And so there'd only be three or four of us--another girl named Carrie [ph.]. I don't--I don't--I don't ever remember there being any explanation, but we were going out and doing fun stuff so I, I was like (laughter)--you know. Speaker 1: And--but you're--how large are your classrooms then 'cause you--? Speaker 2: Only--I mean-- Speaker 1: If you (unclear)-- Speaker 2: And we were the whole class, I mean, and we didn't even bounce--the teachers would, would, would, would change, so I mean we would be in the same class together, maybe, maybe twenty--fifteen, twenty, twe- probably about twenty-one kids--twenty kids. Speaker 1: Okay, so those were small classrooms. Speaker 2: They were pretty--yeah, was pretty small. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And it was--it was a pretty small school [Chesilhurst Elementary School; Shirley B. Foster Elementary School, Chesilhurst, New Jersey]. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to that school until age s- ? Speaker 2: Until seventh grade. Speaker 1: Seventh grade. Speaker 2: So I graduated in sixth grade. Story_ID: 651670 Speaker 1: I wanna ask, so how does Milton Her- how does Milton Hershey [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania] come into the picture? Speaker 2: So by the time I was in sixth or seventh grade [at Chesilhurst Elementary School; Shirley B. Foster Elementary School, Chesilhurst, New Jersey]--in, in, in our community, once you get to the, kind of the basketball courts, that's where everything is going on. So there's older kids there; some people smoking a little weed [marijuana]. It's, it's--it, it kind of is the dividing point between--our town is small, but there's a lot of action going on the other side of Chesilhurst [New Jersey] and, by the courts. And so my brother [Oliver Lee] was already a teenager. You know, he was doing his own thing, and there was--my mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] was like--and I was coming home by myself every single day. My mother saw there was something in me--pardon me--and she, she knew that she wanted more for me. And this coming home by myself every day, who, who knew--I wasn't a bad kid, but again, who knows what could have--what forces could have been pulling me one way or the other? And, and so there's a school called Edgewood [Edgewood Regional High School; Winslow Township High School, Atco, New Jersey]. It was--it's now it's called--it's--the name has changed, but Edgewood is the major high school--not the greatest school in the world at all. It pulls from our community and a bunch of other small communities around it. And so I actually went to Edgewood for maybe three or four months, but I had applied to Milton Hershey several months earlier. My mother actually wanted to send--my mother and my aunt wanted to send my brother and my cousin to Milton Hershey, but they felt like, you know, they were trying to get rid of 'em. You know they'd go like, "Oh, we--what are you trying to do to us? You trying to send us away to some school somewhere." But for me, I had wanted to play football, but I could never get to practice 'cause my mother worked. I want- I was inquisitive. I wanted to, you know, ride h- I wanted to do all kind of stuff that I just could not do in our community. But we heard about Milton Hershey. It's like they riding horses? They--they're on canoes? Like, they, they--the football and sports and, and basketball, and you know for me it sounded like a, a good thing. Because it was like there was nothing happening where--you know where we lived, so I was like, you know, sign me up. And so I can remember driving all the way out to Hershey, Pennsylvania for, for the test. And they do like a psychi- psychiatric evaluation; they go over your records and, and still you know, not necessarily knowing what this was, but I knew it was something different. And the campus was beautiful, and you're seeing kids walking around. I was like this is great (laughter); and I--so I--so I never felt that, what my brother and my cousin felt. So eventually I got the acceptance, and it, it would turn out to be one of the most pivotal moments in life. Speaker 1: Can, can you tell--do you--did you ever ask your mother and your aunt how they had heard about the program, even for your, your brother, 'cause sometimes-- Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: --(unclear) are not aware of, you know, programs. Speaker 2: Oh no, I have no idea. You're a- I, I have no idea. I, I can remember talking about it with my mother years ago, but I do not remember what she said. Speaker 1: Because your mother is--she's having a wa- she's juggling a lot of things. You got-- Speaker 2: She has a lot. Speaker 1: --three kids and you know, and a husband [Lee's stepfather, George Taylor] that's not functional. You got-- Speaker 2: Right. And money and she's trying to make ends meet and you're right. And so for her baby (laughter) you know she was--and that's the thing, she was--my mother originally got married when she was sixteen years old to, to my brother and sister's father, so she is a young mother. She had been married for years and years. So my mother had been-- Speaker 1: So she's young now even. Speaker 2: Yeah, she's sixty [years old]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So my mother had been, you know, just balancing everything and doing it for the most part with a smile on her face (laughter)--for the most part, you know, there were tough times. And you could read my mother's face like a book; you know, you see when she's unhappy, and she'll let you know first of all. But for the most part, I'm amazed at what, what she was able to just weather and still be such a positive individual. If you meet her, you'd think she's a grade school teacher. She has that kind of vibe--very nurturing--nurturing. She'll wanna do crafts with you. She's that kind of a woman, but she also is not gone let the grass get too high outside. She's not afraid of hard work. She'll get out there and lift something and move something. You say, "Mom, this," (laughter) "put it down; I got you." But yeah, so, so somehow she had heard about the Milton Hershey School. You know, we, we applied, got accepted, and, and again, that would be, you know, a life changing moment for all of us (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now do you remember the day--so you went there for an interview? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now how far a dri- how far a distance is, is the school from, from Chesilhurst [New Jersey]? Speaker 2: About three hours. Because we're, we're about thirty-five minutes from Philly, and then it's about two hours--two hours and change further west into Pennsylvania from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] going towards--you know Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] is on the western side of the state, so we're kind of in between. Hershey is probably about in between Philadelphia and Pittsburgh. Speaker 1: But you're like twelve or thir- twelve or thir- I don't how (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I was younger than that because--yeah, well, I was probably twelve [years old] because when I finally got in--well, my first day, when I actually went to the school, like, packed up my stuff and went, it was November 5th, 1990; and so however old I would have been, twelve may-- Speaker 1: November 5th. Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990]. Speaker 1: So that's a strange time to be going off. No, because-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--oh yeah, 'cause I went--yeah, I went to Edgewood. I went to Edgewood--I went to the high school, the neighborhood high school. I started in late August or Septem- September, got a word somewhere, you know, in, in, in-- Speaker 1: I think--you don't remember there being any incident, like a series of incidents, and your mother's like, "We have to get him out of here"? Speaker 2: No, I think--no, I think it was probably--there was no one incident, but it was ness- I mean definitely, my brother and sister [Erica Lee] were out of the house; her husband is, is struggling with addiction; I'm coming home by myself; and she really did want more for me; she really didn't want me to be--you know, end up wasting time at the basketball courts, because first of all, I loved basketball and sports. I would've been--when you go play basketball at the courts, that's where you go to play ball. And she just didn't want me going down that path. Because there were a lot of young people--and again, that's the thing about our communities, and--but I think people misconstrue. It's not everyone's some bad delinquent kids that are getting in trouble (laughter). It's, it's hustling to make ends meet; it's, it's you come from families that don't have much, and so at some point, you know, I'm gonna get my own money however I can, kind of situation. So a lot of young people might in our--in my community were going that route. And so I think she was really saying to herself like you know what? We're not--I'm not gonna let this happen, and so, so any one moment? No, but I think it was just that moment in time and what life was for us at the time. There had to better options, and I think she found a better option in, in Milton Hershey. Story_ID: 651671 Speaker 1: So you show up in--there [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania]. Now do you remember the--do you remember going for the, the--I mean you talk about you saw kids, and there're nice lawns (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, and it's a nice campus. So when you go back, what--do you remember even packing to go; and then do you remember arriving on the campus? Speaker 2: I, I don't remember packing, but I remember my mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] had to work. She, she worked from three to twelve [o'clock]. She worked that, that second shift, so she couldn't take me so it was my [maternal] grandmother [Ida Worthington Dyitt] and my aunt Liz [ph.], who--my aunt Liz is another really important woman in my life. And I should probably call her more often and talk to her more often because I don't think she knows how much of an impact she's had on me. She was--my mother was pro-black in a certain kind of way. She was be, be proud of yourself. We're sitting there watching--I can remember sitting there watching the news with my mother. I forg- I guess it must have been '83 [1983] or '84 [sic. 1985], whenever the MOVE bombing in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was--Osage Avenue. The police basically dropped the fire bomb on top of a group of row homes, killed a bunch of members of a radical group called MOVE. And I remember her kind of explaining it to me a little bit. I remember watching a show called 'Sheriffs' [ph.]. It was about--set in a Mississippi town--and explaining things to me. She was that kind of, of a pro-black. My aunt, I think she wishes she could have been a Panther. She, she ended up going to the [U.S.] Army, ended up having--getting married, having kids of her own. (Unclear) she was the one who--my mother and my aunt are all about antiques and stuff like that. She was the one who had--would have old Black Panther Party newspapers. She was the one who would, would have that kind of things--go over her house, it was a museum. And she would show me stuff and talk about things. To this day, at a family reunion or during Thanksgiving we'll talk about this kind of thing. She's always been like that. So it's my grandmother and my aunt Liz who take that drive out with me. And I just remember arriving, and I was a little nervous because now, now it's real; now I'm not home anymore, I'm not with my family; but I was also still very excited because let's get it started (unclear). Where are the horses (laughter)? Where are the canoes? And it ended up being--and, and my first--my first roommate was a guy named Elliot Kent [ph.] from Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, which is not far from Hershey [Pennsylvania]. And I remember him. He was real cool and was showing me around, walking through the--through the student homes saying, "This is who this is, that's who that is; there's your bed, here's some of the rules," like, "don't do this, you'll get in trouble," like really breaking it down to me. And then from that moment on it was--it would be a rollercoaster ride in a sense that my time there--I loved my time there. Some people didn't have a great experience. I did, despite--going back to my issues with authority, you (unclear)--we'd have house parents that, that weren't always the most just people; and there was racism, and I, I, I recognize racism when I see it. And so I might be seventh or eighth grade, and my, my counterparts might not understand what's happening here, but I hear the--I hear the words you're saying. I, I see how this is playing out. I see how you're picking and choosing in the student home. I, I see all this, and so even though you couldn't tell me much 'cause I was a good student and I was smart, so when I'm stepping up to you there's not much you can say (laughter) except try to punish me. And punishment is not necessarily gonna work, especially, mind you, this is my seventh and eighth grade mind coming from where I'm coming from, all these compe- kind of--not even competing interests. So again, I was still was getting in a little bit of trouble. I was still fighting a little bit because, again, my temperament at the time was just like, you know, I'm not--I'm not scared to fight you. And so--but first year, probably seventh grade, eighth grade--all that really started working itself out, out, out, out of my system; and it was smooth sailing from there and it was a wonderful experience. Story_ID: 651672 Speaker 1: One other thing I wanna know is what were your boys back at--you know at--or your friends back at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Chesilhurst [New Jersey]? Speaker 1: --in Chesil- what were they saying when you said you were going [to the Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania]; and what did they think of the whole thing? Speaker 2: Well, well, on one hand, once we moved to seventh grade, a lot of us, you know, kind of lost touch during the day mostly. Like my buddy Sherif [Sherif Collins (ph.)], he was in a whole different wing of the building [Edgewood Regional High School; Winslow Township High School, Atco, New Jersey]. I didn't see him much. I can remember no one really knowing what it--what it was about. I can remember coming back, some, some older kids who kind of I wasn't really gonna say cool with saying, "Ah, you--ah, you went off to that school, dah, dah, dah," that kind of thing. Now it wasn't as bad as someone can imagine, and I, I felt fine with it. Like man, it's not even like that. They didn't realize everybody's from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; everybody's--now trust me, it's like you'd rather be there than here. But I remember just dealing with a little bit (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what, what--were they saying you'd rather be there than here? Speaker 2: I think I--oh yeah, I'm--no, I'm saying that though they were saying maybe it some white school, they didn't realize that it's mostly black and Latino-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and that we all come from these communities, and everything is free first of all, and then you can--it was a great--I don't think people realize what it was. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And so I don't remember having many discussions about you know, when I was leaving because again, for the most part, now we're seventh grade; now our interest are kind of into girls more; and we're starting to get a little older so it wasn't the same when we were younger when all we had was let's go out and, and get a game of football; let's round up--let's go around the neighborhood and see who can play kickball. So I don't remember at all the conversations when I left. When I came back, I can remember a little bit of that because I was gone, and that's the one thing about the school situation. I wouldn't trade it for the world and it was such a pivotal moment, but you are removed from your family. You are removed from your community. So you're coming back and it's a little different, because now your experience is different, you're home, and you just don't have that--it's--the relationship certainly changes, not necessarily in a--in a profoundly negative way, but it's definitely different once you come back. Speaker 1: And you were coming back how often? Speaker 2: Probably holidays or least, you know, four times a year; and then after a certain point you're allowed to come home for the weekends. So you'd have like X number of weekend visits a year. But since I was involved in sports throughout the whole time, so I was playing football, basketball, track, I wasn't--I didn't come home as much because we'd have games on the weekend. So I, I probably got home a year maybe, you know, six times a year maybe--if, if that. Story_ID: 651673 Speaker 1: Who's starting to mentor you? I mean, you say you--you said you saw things unjust and maybe along the racial line, but how--but are you talking about with the white students? Speaker 2: No, not the--not the students. It was the house parents. Speaker 1: The hou- okay. Speaker 2: That's what it was--it was the house parents. So you have two house parents who lived there with fourteen kids who, depending on the student home, you know, 60 percent of them are gone black or Latino or some sort of Asian--it's gone be something like that--sev- or 70 percent, depending. And so you know, I had--I had a couple house parents that were, were really--you know, you, you could tell. One, one--I had one house parent later on--this may be eighth grade--and he was a, a World War t- I don't know if he's a World War II [WWII] veteran, 'cause he's an older guy, or whether he was--I, I forgot which war he was in, but he talked about how the black students would, would--just couldn't test well. And he talked about the Bell Curve theory, and this is what I remember because I had done a little bit of reading on it even though I was in--no, actually at that point I might have been in ninth grade--about how blacks are, are inherently at the lower end of the spectrum. And, and that started the (unclear)--I was trying tell people like they're saying we're ba- basically borderline retarded. They're saying that mo- 80 percent of us are suffering some, some, some sort of mental retardation. I want everybody to understand what they're trying to say here. And pe- some people got it, like my best friend, like my boy, Martin [ph.], who to this day is my brother, my best friend. You know, he was--he's more like, you know, "I'm just trying to get through this, man." Like, he, he never wanted to cause trouble, but he would get away with it by being cool with them. Where I didn't have--I had no desire to have to necessarily be cool with my house parents. If we have to have an adversarial relationship, I, I would enjoy that; I'm fine with that. You know, so I still was a little--had a little bit of issue, but everything else in life was fine so that was kind of just part of who I was. Speaker 1: What are you learning about life there though? What are you--what are--what is different that you're learning; and what are--how are they messaging, and, and probably, you know, I'm asking another question as how are they deprogramming? Speaker 2: I don't know if they're--(unclear) deprogramming. Well, one thing, I, I remember having a moment where--and I was always--I was probably more, more of a, a voracious reader when I was young than I am--I am now. And I can remember reading about some of these Native American boarding homes. And I would see--I would see images of, of Native American youth in suit jackets and ties, and--Christianity, and I'm like, man, this is basically what they're doing to us. And again, it, it is different because as Americans we're part of the culture, but I said they're really--what are--what's happening here? But it wasn't so nefarious, because what it did is it took a lot of us out of situations that weren't the healthiest. And again, mine was relatively mild in a sense that I'm growing up with someone [Lee's stepfather, George Taylor] that's--I love who is suffering from some sort of substance abuse to some of my other friends who, you know, have dealt with violence where their parents were, were killed or murdered, or suicides, or growing up in the projects in, in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where it's really rough, not just the living in that environment, but within the home you're hungry. And so the range of my friends in Milton Hershey [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania], I mean, it rains the, the gamut; but the common core is that we're all hoping to get better. And so one thing I'm learning, tough, I think it reinforced the fact that the byproduct of society and the byproduct of years and years of racism backed by our government, back by our institutions, backed by all things--and I'm not saying I had that language when I was (laughter)--when I was that young, but I said you know, we're all in a situation, and I don't think it's by any choice of our own. And, and there are systems here the, the way stereotypes and, and prejudice manifest, and you internalize it yourself. I, I--I'm, I'm, I'm learning a lot about human behavior because I'm around for- thirteen other different kids from different places all dealing with different issues at home, within themselves; learning about, you know, the hierarchy within the student homes, which kids will also be governed; they're trying to force us to do something, and if it's not right, it's not right. You'll learn how to, to, to toughen your skin because even though we were all cool, we were around each other, other so much that there would be fights because we were around each other all the time. It was just--you learned a lot. I learned probably more from that experience than any one individual there who took me under their wing. Later on it would be all my football coaches, who I learned a lot from about being a man and trying to--all those things. But early on I think it was just--and I don't wanna say this 'cause this is being--this is hyperbole, and that's like 'Lord of the Flies.' But you end up--and it's almost like--no, I won't say it's like jail at all. I don't wanna s- imply that, but it's fourteen people, young guys, and we're kind of doing our own thing (laughter), kind of, in, in the bounds of the, the, the structure that they've given to us. Story_ID: 651674 Speaker 1: --Women (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With women. Speaker 1: --with, with people, but also women. I already had healthy relationships with women. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: But you had a lot of time to talk. You had a lot of time to--we're walking around--we had something called rec [recreation] on Saturdays where you went to--they had a big gymnasium and a swimming pool and pool tables. And you spent time with your girlfriend talking a lot. And you couldn't really go anywhere--be hiding. I mean--'cause I mean you could sneak off, and people did sneak off behind the ice skating rink and the bushes, and you snuck off a lot. But a lot of it was in plain sight with kind of people monitoring you, but a lot of time-- Speaker 2: But would people-- Speaker 1: --talking. Speaker 2: --get--but were there pregnancies (unclear)? Speaker 1: Oh yeah. No, there were--they were secret. Every once in a while there would be some sort of, "Where did she go?" You know, and there were--I mean there--no, there--that's the one thing. I mean, there was another side to the school [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania]. There were some negatives happen, because there ended up being some stories of molestation and, and abuse among some students and also among some people affiliated with the school, where there's the house parent's son, or a friend of the--so there was some of that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, but limited to a degree, because I mean there have been stories recently. The school has come under fire. Speaker 2: It has? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, one, one--a few--I wanna say two years ago--or probably a year ago now--a young man that was HIV positive [human immunodeficiency virus] applied and was denied; and the school said they would be at risk to other students because there is sexual activity among students. Because we had something called hooking out, where you hook out to your girlfriend's student home, right. So you sneak out and you know run through the, the, c- the, the, the farm field and the cow field and you, you knock on your girlfriend's student--the, the window and you know, things happen. But because of that, the school couldn't make other students aware that the young man was HIV positive, right. You have to protect that status. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: And so, so it ended up being a lawsuit, and they ended up eventually admitting him more recently after that--after a prolonged-- Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: But again, there is a lot that happens. There's some drug--people--pe--some people smoke weed [marijuana] still--and sneaking--'cause you go home. Some people come--go home. Speaker 2: Oh no, they have everything that--right. Speaker 1: You come--you, you go home and people bring stuff back, I mean--and, and in the town. So even though we're set in Hersey [Pennsylvania], and there was always this kind of juxtaposition between the poor kids and wealthy Hershey kids; and there would be fights, and there would--the, the storeowner would look at us funny 'cause they knew who we were because we were the only--you could tell we're not from there, kind of. They were still using drugs, those kids; they were still alcohol, so you--if people had friends out in the community, they would sneak out, go hang out with them. You know, Harrisburg [Pennsylvania] isn't far, which is--which is the capital of Pennsylvania, you know, a second tier city, but a city nonetheless. So I mean the school had--has issues, but I think you had the choice of-- Speaker 2: Another life. Speaker 1: --you could do whatever you wanted. Because like for me--and again, going back to my naturally combative kind of--kind of thing, I was great in school, but I didn't have to--I didn't have to pretend that--to be cool 'cause I was cool, 'cause I was playing sports, girls liked me, but I was also in the airp- the model club and the--and the remote control airplanes. I could do what I want. Who's gonna say something to me (laughter)? By virtue of feeling good about myself and also I--being young and immature and my willingness to use the (laughter)--be confrontational. Story_ID: 651675 Speaker 1: So did you find that you had--academically was there any transition? Were you doing better in your, you know, elementary school [Chesilhurst Elementary School; Shirley B. Foster Elementary School, Chesilhurst, New Jersey] than you were doing there-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or did--it was a smooth transition? Speaker 2: It was--it was pretty smooth, because one thing they're doing--we're talking about tracking here, and I, I never--as an adult sitting back, I'm not sure if this is the best way to, to, to--you know, for academics to work, but in that school you would te- you would test in the beginning and so they would place you. And everyone kind of knew, and they never told us but, say seventh grade, there were 7-1 through 7-8. The smartest kids were 7-1, 7-2, 7-3. Once you get to 7-6, 7-7, 7-8, those kids were not dumb kids, but there was just a different--they were just different. And so I was in 7-2, so everyone around us in our class--and the whole class moved together to every single class. And so my peers, we were all pretty much on the same level testing wise and so we were challenged enough, and I, I felt--I felt pretty much the same. Speaker 1: Okay and this is at--this is at Milton Hershey [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: This is at Milton Hershey. Yeah, there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was no real transition. Speaker 1: Okay, so the--okay, so who--so are, are there teachers having an influence on you; or who's sort of guiding you and--because you're--you know, that's an early time to be--you know, it's one thing at ninth grade-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but you're really little babies. Speaker 2: Right, we're young. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And I think--I think--I think a lot of it you're doing on your own, espe- definitely not seventh and eighth grade. I don't remember--teachers still kind of viewed me a little bit of--not a troublemaker--they still viewed me a certain kind of way a little bit. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So even though I would raise my hand and answer the question correctly, even though my, my scores were, were good, I still was just immature and working through whoever I was. And so I never got any--necessarily love from my seventh and eighth grade teachers, definitely not, and it felt (laughter) adversarial. Speaker 1: So they told you, "Be quiet," you know, "don't--"? Speaker 2: I can remember a situation in seventh grade--actually eighth grade. There was a science teacher, and we had these classes where it was like a free period kind of, so it was like a study hall, but not a study hall. It, it was a--it was less structured than study hall, but it was still you're just in there hanging out basically or, or doing your homework. And someone stole her pocketbook, or stole fifty dollars out her pocketbook. So--and nobody liked this teacher anyway 'cause she was really mean anyway. She was not a nice teacher anyway. I ended up getting her money back for her from a girl, and I'm not gonna say her name 'cause I, I know--I still know this, this person--'cause I just didn't even wanna get in tr- like all right, well, you know, I didn't want all us--all us getting in trouble for you taking her money, whatever. And she looked at me. She didn't say thank you, and she, she almost looked at me like an accusatory look like I did it. One thing I've never been is a thief. Now I might cause a little trouble (laughter); I might talk back to you a little bit. Like, I would get kicked out of her class frequently because she was so mean where I couldn't take it myself, so I would end up standing up for us and saying something that I probably shouldn't have said. But I couldn't--and, and I remember when I graduated I told her, I said--I said, "Ms. (Unclear), you never even said thank you that time. And I didn't--I didn't steal your money." Actually--and she didn't, you know, give much of an exchange, but I wanted to tell her before I left that I--that, that bothered me. And so that's more how my feeling and how it was, and that was shaping me. But it was also we were kind of, not saying on our own, but we were learning a lot from each other. And I think friendships and standing up for each other, and it was like--it was us. Story_ID: 651676 Speaker 1: And I think I learned more from that. Now later on, probably once I got more into sports my freshman year [at the Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania], I had a great coach called Coach Buehler [Joe Buehler], who was my also like--English teacher, but he was also, and my position coach. I was tight end, defense (unclear). He ended up, since he's my English teacher in class, he would have me read the stuff I wrote in the next class. So he would say, "Trymaine [HistoryMaker Trymaine Lee], I want you to read this little poem you wrote," or whatever. And he was respecting me, respecting my work, but also pushed me on the football field, and, and would--and would--and would praise me when I was doing well and you know, and get on me when I wasn't doing well; and he ended up being somebody that I respected. And our coach, Coach Guyer [Bob Guyer], who to this day, he seemed like--and these, these are all white men here. This Coach Guyer seemed like so steady and so strong. He was always on time with everything. He always did everything the exact same way. We looked up, up to him to the point where in the hallway where we might cut up in front of a teacher and you see Coach Guyer, you would straighten up. So my coaches had more of a profound impact on me than per- any, any teacher. Well, some of them were my teachers, but perhaps more than any teacher did. Because again, especially with Coach Buehler, he recognized my talent on and off the field, nurtured it on and off the field and in the classroom and on the field. And, and so by ninth, tenth grade, my athletics started shaping who I was. Speaker 2: So you're playing football; you're playing--are you playing any--? Speaker 1: Football, basketball. When I was--earlier I played baseball, like seventh, eighth grade. And then once I got to, to high school--'cause the middle school went from fifth to eighth grade--once I got to high school it was all basketball and football. And I would play--I would--I would join the track team just because it was springtime and I'd be outside, you know. I wasn't very fast. I wasn't track fast, so I would throw--I would throw the discus and the shot put and compete not very well, but I was starter in, in football and basketball. Speaker 2: And so who--what, what teams were you playing then? Speaker 1: All teams, all, all the public schools. Speaker 2: You were playing-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: --the public schools. Speaker 1: Yeah, so even though we were small, and this--I mean, we were a smaller school, but we played-- Speaker 2: But you weren't a public school? Speaker 1: No, but there were no other necessarily private schools (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But the, the--to play with-- Speaker 1: Like, we'd have an exhibition against--there was one school called VisionQuest, which I think they were like adjudicated youth or something like that. So we'd have an exhibition against them, but we were in the public school league. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 651677 Speaker 1: What other things are--so you--girls are a part of things, the (laughter) (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was a good p- that was a good part of things, yeah. I think discovering--I think--and that again, I was part of--going--that was the second part of the growth in, in your confidence because even though I was very confident, I was still kind of shy and a little reserved--kind of, in certain ways. Like socially I just wasn't that out there, especially with girls I was a little scared. And then I started realizing that they kind of like me already, like they just liked me a little bit and so it was just easier. I didn't know if they liked--before I'm thinking how--they don't--I don't know if they even liked me. Once I realized it's like oh, they had already kind of liked me a little bit, it made the whole thing easier 'cause I'm coming to the table saying she might like me. I have a good chance at her already thinking I'm cute or something. And so but that was great, and I had--but I had serious relationships. Like ninth grade [at the Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania] I had a girl who was a senior. I ended up dating all the seniors when I was in like ninth and tenth grade, all the older girls. But they were real relationships, and I--again, as an adult, you look back and say okay, how serious could it have been? But the time we spent talking, the time we spent like really being in this relationship to me was so healthy because it was an important part of my whole high school career. So even though the, the, the fun part with the girls getting to know they like me, but those relationships were, were real friendships to me. Story_ID: 651678 Speaker 1: So now the other thing I wanted to ask was what music are you listening to? You know, what is--what things are you are you aware around the world? You know, what are--what things are you talking about? Kids talk about things that--you know, they do talk about relationships-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or the--well, girls do. I don't know about that. Speaker 2: I mean, at that point we were in-- Speaker 1: Sports, sports-- Speaker 2: It--it's funny, when I think now--and if I ever have inkling of these seventeen year olds and their pants hanging down, and their music and I'm listening to it. And I've been listening to rap music for twenty-five years, and so I'm kind of tired of it. Okay, you're killing people; okay, got you. You're selling drugs, okay. You, you, you know, you're enemies; okay, I got it. And I think that these kids like man, look at--come on man, straighten up. I'm thinking to myself, when we were--when we were that age, we were listening to Ice Cube, and N.W.A. [Niggaz Wit Attitudes], and all of our music--and 2 Live Crew, and we--our music was--and that era, we, we were coming of age when we talk about addictions, the early '90s [1990s]--late '80s [1980s] or '90s [1990s] when we were coming of age, the highest murder rates across the country. The crack epidemic was in full bloom. And it's starting to fizzle out, but the murder--in, in, in New York City [New York, New York] you had two thousand and something murders. Last year I think we had 345. Two thousand--Chicago [Illinois], thousands. Everything is going crazy 'cause everyone can sell crack [crack cocaine]. Everyone can sell drugs, and so everyone is doing it, and all the violence. And so our music reflected that. And so our style--we were wearing cross colored jeans, red jeans, green jeans, and silk, silk shirts, and polyester shirts. And we were in our slang and the way we talked. You know, we weren't bad kids at all, and fortunately we were kind of removed. So we were just, you know, being fifteen and sixteen years old--or prior, actually we were being fourteen and fifteen years old. Speaker 1: Were your pants hanging down? Speaker 2: No, at that point, just a little bit. See when we started-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we call it sagging just a little bit. Our behinds were never out. We would never have done that like these kids now. And again, we were--you know, no one was telling us--telling us to pull our pants up, but we were--we started it a little bit. It was getting down there. And so when I look back--but so, so part of it's kids being kids, right. So sometimes you can't over think it. Now does it say something about (unclear)--it says something, but we can't always rush to say look at these kids, and you're ruining your life, and you're a little thug, because I'm like when we--when, when we look back at pictures of me and maybe we're throwing the middle finger up, maybe we're, we, we used to do this (gesture), like we got guns in our hands. What are we doing? What are we doing? But we didn't--you know, we were just--it was part of culture. And so that's, that's the thing when I look back, especially around--and I don't wanna jump ahead too much. When I--when I think about Trayvon Martin, seventeen years old, I think about hoodies, and that's what we looked like at seventeen years old--we, we were that. You know, we weren't troublemakers. Did, did, did we fight a little bit sometimes? Did--was our mus- was our music vulgar? (Laughter) Yes it was. Was our slang and the way we talked sometimes vulgar? Yes, but--so anyway, just drive this home saying we--that's who we were. That's who we were at the time. So we were--you know, that's, that's what it was. And then we also, the R and B, Jodeci, and--but it was all hip hop. Speaker 1: It was all hip--? Speaker 2: It was all hip hop all day (laughter) it was all hip hop. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 651679 Speaker 1: So what--but who was your favorite--what, what are--what favorite artists did you have from that or lyrics do you think from that time? Speaker 2: I liked a group called Naught- Naughty by Nature because they were from Jersey [New Jersey]. So what I ended up doing is, because I was so close to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], most of my friends there they were like New York kids and Dominicans from Washington Heights [New York, New York], and Harlem [New York, New York], and, and Brooklyn [New York]; and then there were Philly kids; and, and I was one of the few from Jersey, so my natural--I was always with the Philly kids because we were so close. So when I went home, I would be going over to Philly and hang with them later on. But I always listened to like Naughty by Nature. They're from Jersey. Of course we still listened to Queen Latifah, and Ice Cube, and you know, Boogie Down Productions. My brother--my older brother [Oliver Lee], I had the benefit of hearing all the good music and knowing what, what the good music was because my, my brother was a hip hop head. He was a deejay in a little rap group. He was--he was all into it, so I was always around that, break dancing from the early age. So I guess th- thinking back to '90s [1990s] again, of course, you know, some of the early Jodeci 'cause that, that blend of hip hop and R and B was, was big. I'm trying to think we're talking about--it was--it was the golden era. You had Biggie [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.]--Biggie's "Ready to Die"; "Illmatic," Nas. The greatest rap music that ever--"Doggystyle," Snoop's [Snoop Dogg] album; Dr. Dre's "The Chronic"; all the greatest music came out. And we're--we had the benefit of our age of hitting the tail end of the MC Lytes and Run-DMCs. We're old enough to, to kind of remember some of that. But going into that golden age--Wu-Tang [Wu-Tang Clan], all their debut albums--they call it the golden era of hip hop and, and it's serious. And so we were just (laughter)--we were just all into it, dressing like 'em, talking like 'em, you know. But it was-- Speaker 1: But you had the East Coast, West Coast too, right, right? 'Cause--or was West Coast then? Speaker 2: Yeah, that-- Speaker 1: Was the west-- Speaker 2: --that, that happened a little later. That, that's-- Speaker 1: That happened--oh, so you're earlier-- Speaker 2: When we graduated [from Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania] in '96 [1996], Tupac [Tupac Shakur] was killed in '96 [1996]. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Biggie-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --later that year. Speaker 1: --now were you a big Tupac person? Speaker 2: I was, I was because he was with a group called Digital Underground and so--which was, you know, kind of a goofy--the humpty, humpty hump and--'The Humpty Dance,' and it was kind of a goofy group. Then my brother had all the early Tupac tapes, "Strictly 4 My N.I.G.G.A.Z."--excuse me, excuse my language--all those early ones; all those early Tupacs. I was already into Tupac before. So to this day like me and my best friend, Martin [ph.], you know, we're still Tupac fans. You know, Tupac--and, and the thing about Tupac was he spoke to me in particular in a different way because I felt very much like adversarial because I understand what's happening here. But he was also--he, he--his mother is Afeni Shakur. He was rooted in the Panthers [Black Panther Party]; and Geronimo Pratt, and all these figures that I had been reading about and I knew about even at seventh, eighth grade, and it meant something me. And I felt like it's okay to stand up again, and if it's not right you could fight it (laughter), and why not? And why shouldn't we, being young, gifted, and black and strong, and articulate--why not? I mean so that--he played like a serious role (laughter) early on. Story_ID: 651680 Speaker 1: So when you're graduating--do you remember your graduation and--I mean but what are you thinking you're gonna do? Speaker 2: I--I said that I wanted to be a journalist, and I don't think I knew what that meant because later on, I mean la- junior year and senior year--well, first of all, I had advanced placement communication classes, so I had my first two class, class periods free so I'd have a camera walking around the hallway, knocking on doors in the classes, telling people to come out, taking pictures, developing it. We had a--we had a--that's, that's the one thing I loved about Milton Hersey [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania], developing those interests. Not only could I walk around the school taking pictures with my friends in the landscape outside, I could just take my time doing it and also with video, producing vid- producing and editing videos. We had a darkroom too where after you took your pictures--we were using film 'cause digital cameras didn't exist (laughter) then, which make me feel, feel kind of old, but--so we'd go in there in the darkroom and develop. And the whole process you had to take your time. You had to do it in a little bag and get all the film out, then you had to use all your different chemicals, and, and then you had to test it to make sure how much exposure you're giving them. We're doing all that, you know, in my, my, my--you know, tenth, eleventh, twelfth grade year. So ultimately I was writing for this, this--the school yearbook. So even though I was involved in most of the sports, I would be writing about the (unclear) hockey team; I'd be writing--I was writing, so I knew for a fact I wanted to write. I just didn't know what that meant because I didn't know any journalists. I, I had been interviewed because I played on the football team and I was good, and so after the game sometimes they would talk to you or they would take your picture. Your picture would be in the newspaper all the time, so a little familiar with what it was. I loved USA Today back in the day for some reason that--I read that every single day. Part of it was the graphics and it was the information, and, and I was always been into small bites of information. So they'd have cool, colorful graphs, so I'd be reading about Yasser Arafat, and some of the things going on in Chicago [Illinois], and you know, I was reading all--about all kinds of stuff. So I knew I wanted to write. That's--long story (laughter)--long, long answer. I knew that I wanted to be a journalist, but I just didn't know what that meant. Story_ID: 651681 Speaker 1: And is anyone counseling you on what it means? Speaker 2: You know what, and that's the one thing going back to it--and I was talking to my niece. I have a seventeen year old niece who is graduating high school, so I'm, I'm working with her on college applications and essays. And, and I don't remember my counselor [at the Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania] ever giving me any good advice. I really do not. I remember going in there and me and my buddy, we wanted to Grambling University [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] 'cause we saw the football team first of all. So that--I knew where (unclear) I was like, "Yo, we're going to Grambling," the, the band's playing, the football team, like--it's an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities]. And I remember talking to, to my teachers, but even though my grades were good, and this is one thing looking back, I never tried my hardest. And so me getting Bs, I--'cause it was easier to me, and I never tried, even football. I was, you know, a starter, I was good, you know, but I was never trying my hardest because it was--it was kind of easy to me. And so looking back at it, I don't know if he saw my, my attitude, and as you see I'm kind of--I'm kind of casual. I'm just gone--you know, here I am. I don't know if he saw that and, and didn't have the highest expectations for me or whether my class rank wasn't the greatest. My GPA [grade point average] was good; my class rank wasn't the greatest, but he never--but what happened is, though--I kind of bypassed all that--because football recruiters were coming to the school to look at me, and so all the D II [Division II] school around there would come to my class. Or, or the, the coach would call up to the class and say, "Trymaine [HistoryMaker Trymaine Lee], you have somebody here to see you," and it would be Shippensburg University [Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania, Shippensburg, Pennsylvania]; Clarion University in Pennsylvania [Clarion University of Pennsylvania, Clarion, Pennsylvania]--all these D II schools. And so ultimately my decision was made because Shippensburg was not far from there, I could play football, so I just decided to go to Shippensburg University. But again, no one was really counseling me. I just kind of figured--you know. And that's one thing, (unclear) me talking to my niece about colleges--no one in my family necessarily knew what the process was. So even my mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor], she was supportive, but I, I, I never even remember asking my mother anything. I was telling her my plans and she would support--she said, "Oh, that sounds like a good idea," (laughter) so. Story_ID: 651682 Speaker 1: So Shippensburg, was that a community college or (unclear) (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, it was--it was a four year university. Speaker 1: Oh, be- why did you, you get your associate's [degree]? I mean that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --well, unless my information is wrong. So you-- Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I, I went to Shippensburg University [Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania, Shippensburg, Pennsylvania] to play football. And, and I found myself in a--in a difficult personal dilemma. I thought--well, my ex-girlfriend told me--and I don't know how much I will actually want to talk about that on here (laughter)--but my ex-girlfriend had some girlfriend told me that she was pregnant. So mind you, I'm in school; I'm, I'm in college; I'm playing football; everything is, is, is working the way it's supposed to work. This is--of course I'm in college, and of course I'm doing well, and I love my classes, and I--my friends, I went with six of my friends from high school [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania], so we're all together. And then the phone call comes, and I said I'm a statistic. I did all this hard work; I managed to maneuver past all these pitfalls; and this is what--this is what's gonna do me in. I'm seventeen years old, because my birthday is in September. So I was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you're still young. Speaker 2: Oh, I'd just turned eighteen, and I was like--and I actually fell into like what I would think--see now is probably a depression. Now I didn't feel bad about myself, but I've hit, hit the bottom saying what--what's--a baby? Wait, what? I stopped going to class. You know, I would still go to class, but I was like not tuned in at all. In football I was dropped from second string to red shirt, which means I wasn't playing. I would throw up every morning because we had to go work out in the morning. I was throwing up. I was just kind of done 'cause it really had an impact on me, 'cause I'm like no, this cannot be it. And so I ended up leaving school, 'cause I could have stayed on academic probation, but I was like I'm not gone be in remedial classes. I rather just leave and figure it out later than have to sit in classes and go over stuff that I already know, so ended up going home. And one day I got a phone call from my ex-girlfriend saying, "The baby's not yours," (laughter). So I said--I just hung up the phone and I was like--and I literally said it's time to go, enrolled in community college [Camden County College, Blackwood, New Jersey], the writing program, started writing poetry, started--I mean that moment--and that's why I say I would never change anything. It was actually the lowest point in my life, because I said to myself I sabotaged myself by my own actions. I did this to myself and now I have to--I have to deal with it, and I was so hurt (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so you got out of--out of Shippensburg? Speaker 2: I just left. Speaker 1: You left; and then you went into community college? Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, so that explains, okay. Story_ID: 651683 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What happened in high school [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania], 'cause you didn't talk about that? Speaker 2: It was the, the summer between my junior and senior year, and actually I'm almost crying now--(unclear) talk about it (crying). Speaker 1: It's okay. Speaker 2: It's amazing that to this day, thinking about Latoya [Latoya Lawton]--she was, first of all she was a wonderful person, a young sisterfrom Brooklyn [New York]. And my last name was Lee [HistoryMaker Trymaine Lee] and her name was Lawton, so we were always in home room together, and we were always like in these--those little--between classes where you're together by, by your last name. And she was a little rough around the edges; and she came--she was from Brooklyn, and she had these thick braids, and Timbs, and she was like-- Speaker 1: What are Timbs? Speaker 2: Timberland boots. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Timberland boots. And, and mind you this is--we met in seventh grade--well, in the ninth grade, so we're 1992, 1993. And so--but she was beautiful, beautiful young girl with all kind of swagger and just confidence, and she was just--whatever. And so we got--we would get into it and (unclear), and we had--we had this big walkout in our school because they ended up firing a bunch of people on the board who were alumni. So we walked out for like a week of school. We just marched out, the whole school, and we had rallies, and some of the student body presidents would stand up and rally. We said we're leaving, so we just left. And that's what we--it's all these protests. It's always been like some sort of protest, right. So we walked out and then me and her were walking together from the school to--we had to walk like a mile past Hersheypark [Hershey, Pennsylvania]--whatever--we're just talking. And we really just got close in those couple of days of, of--when we were together during the walkout. And it became like a brother and sister relationship, like probably--not one of the few platonic relationships, because when you're high school there are many platonic--. But we really became like a brother and sister where I'm looking out for her; she was looking out for me no matter what. Don't say nothing about my brother she would say to people and whatev- vice versa. So I was home for the summer. We were all home for the summer, and I got a phone call from her saying that they were going to Jones Beach [Jones Beach State Park, Wantagh, New York] for like a little beach party, her and a couple of friends. And she was ironing some white jeans, and I remember she was ironing them in my room talking to her--whatever. And it was all good. It was like, "All right, you know, Toya, it's our senior year coming up." And I can--I still remember in our yearbook talking about how next year's gonna be our greatest year. And she wanted to be a nurse. I remember even then she wanted to be a nurse. And the next day I got a call from my, my friend who was still one of my best friends, Bernard [ph.]. He said, "Yo, man, Latoya died last night." And I was like, "What?" He was like, "Yo, she drowned." And I was like, I talked to her at like eight o'clock, because she was going--she was going to the beach. She was going to Jones Beach. Come to find out she could never swim. During gym class she would take the F rather get in the water. She's like, "I'm not messing with water. I ain't getting my hair messed up. I'm not--I'm not getting in the water," but she jumped in to save her cousin. Her cousin was out there and started pulling her out, and she went to go save her cousin and died tried to save her cousin. And I remember just like I was--I was trying to process it. And my mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] came home, and I was like, "Mom, Latoya died," and broke down and had probably one of the strongest cries I ever had in my life. And it was just--it was just so hard. I mean, it was like she was so young and so beautiful, and then we would never experience life (unclear)--even to this day when I have little achievements or whatever, my whole career I think to myself like man, I would love--I live in Brooklyn now. And I would love to like, like, "Toya, you know, I--this happened or this happened, or isn't it crazy this happening in the community," or something? And it was just--and it was just a rough year. And then--I mean that--around that same time I had a stepbrother who was murdered. Yeah, my, my, my stepfather [George Taylor] had three sons, and, and he was end up being killed in Camden [New Jersey]. And it was just a--it was just a bunch of that at that time period that reminded you that life can still be hard, that there is going to be rain, it's going to happen. And it was like--it was just rough and, and to this day, again, you know, I can't talk about her without choking up. And it's probably once a year I'll sit back with myself and just think about her. But yeah, we weren't-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --we weren't even out of high school. Speaker 1: --so you were--you were real close then? Speaker 2: We were really close. I mean, this was like--I mean, I really looked at her like my sister, I really did. And again, we formed one of those kind of relationships that me and her shared because we grew up with each other, so you live with each other; you eat with each other; you fight with each other; you're together anyway, but me and her had a special kind of bond, and we were just really close. And, and, and, and I think back about how young we really were. I guess she was--she was younger than me. I think she might have been fifteen years old. And I, I could see on the--on the program her, her--you know, her age, but she was like fifteen years old--sixteen years old. So to think back now and these young people don't realize, and we didn't realize then, your whole life is ahead of you. Your whole life is ahead of you. We didn't even get started yet. We were just get- we were--we weren't getting started yet. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: We were still so young, and to have it taken in that manner--and then the, the funeral was packed. And everyone--but the thing about it is as close as I was, other people were close to her too. Everyone was--you know, it was a mess (laughter). Then going back to school our senior year with that kind of--it wasn't a weight necessarily because it didn't feel like it pushed you down necessarily. It was just so sad, but it also was one of those kind of things where you rally in her spirit, right. You gonna do something for Toya; you gonna do it, you know. So yeah, that was--that was--that was tough. That was tough. Speaker 1: So you have that that happens; and then you think--then you're in your so- was sophomore year, or? Speaker 2: No, this is--this is our junior year. Speaker 1: Junior year in high school [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 651684 Speaker 1: But then in the--in the freshman year or--of, of college you find out--you know-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --you think-- Speaker 2: The baby thing. Speaker 1: --and your--right. Speaker 2: Yeah, so it, but I mean it ha-- Speaker 1: You thought you were gonna be a baby da-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --right. Speaker 2: I thought I was gonna be somebody's--you know, but I think--all those things coming together really strengthened me; it really did, and, and it offered me an opportunity to say it's time to--it's time to go and get it. It's time--you have one life to live, and it's shorter than we all think; you know, it's short. I'm thirty-five years old now. Hopefully I'm blessed with another day, another year, another five years, another twenty years. But I'm not--there's no time to waste; you know, there's no time to waste at all--so, leaving Shippensburg University [Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania, Shippensburg, Pennsylvania]; the baby situation played itself out where the child is not my child; I'm going to community college. It takes me like three years to get out commun- 'cause then I'm working at the same time, paying for it. But I'm (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what community college are you going to? Speaker 2: I went to Camden County community college [Camden County College, Blackwood, New Jersey]. And so I'm, I'm you know, taking my first real journalism classes. I'm, I'm going to Camden [New Jersey] and Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--open mic nights, spoken word poetry; I'm writing a little--you know, free articles for, for the local hip hop magazine; I'm starting to network and, and tell people what I'm trying to do. It was like now (unclear) it was all--and, and that point also my maturity and, and my worldview were coming together in a good way to where I was able to shed the immaturity of being so confrontational for confrontational sake; or, or because I know it's wrong and I'm gonna step up in a certain kind of way. I started really paying attention to, you know, current black liberation movements and the red, black, and green started to mean something to me, and as our people started to mean something to me in a certain kind of way, and I started paying attention to issues that were impacting us--you know, food security, civil rights violations. All that kind of stuff was all coming together in a way where it was strength and it was strong. And everything else consuming the neo soul movement was in full bloom so I was listening all my--the music I was listening to was very conscious, feeding everything that was going on inside of me. And I really felt like I was on the verge of something really great. I didn't know what it was; I really didn't know what it was, but I, I felt it coming. And that was kind of the start of that next phase of, of my entire life. Story_ID: 651685 Speaker 1: What happens with school then? Speaker 2: So at Shippensburg--so I end up leaving Shippensburg after one year basically, and I go to Camden County community college, you know. And, and that's where my--the turnaround kind of begins, not turnaround, but it's kind of a new thrust. The trajectory at that moment changes kind of dramatically. I'm more involved in my writing; I'm more focused and determined than ever. Since I had a number of lows in recent years, you know, I recognize that life is short and it's time to really go hard--and not only for my career's sake, but to try to make a difference, and, and, and that you can, and so it was really just that beginning of that, that push. Speaker 1: So how do you end up going to Rowan then? Speaker 2: I ended up getting my associate's degree from Camden County College [Blackwood, New Jersey], and in between (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then you get your associate's degree in 2000? Speaker 2: In 2000 basically. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I ended up trying my hand at writing without a four year degree, but I was still missing some things. I was--I was very--a natural, I'm a natural writer, but I just didn't have the structure of what a newspaper article was supposed to be like, what journalism actually looks like. I didn't necessarily have the structure. So I had the kind of--the colors, but I didn't have the proper palette. I didn't know what I was doing with what I had naturally; and so I decided to go back to school to get my, my four year degree, so that's where--how I ended up at Rowan University [Glassboro, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay. And why didn't you go back to Shippen- Shippen- Shippen- ? Speaker 2: The, the only reason I was at Shippensburg University [Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania, Shippensburg, Pennsylvania] in the first place was because the colleges that were recruiting me were from Pennsylvania. And, and Hershey [Milton Hershey School, Hershey, Pennsylvania], my high school was in Pennsylvania so I was out there. So all the schools coming to get me were from Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And so now that I was back home in New Jersey-- Speaker 1: Just go to-- Speaker 2: --there's no way I--yeah, it, it was convenient; I was--I was a drive to campus, you know, at that point. So that's how I ended up choosing Rowan University. Story_ID: 651686 Speaker 1: And Rowan has about ten thousand students, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ro- Rowan--Rowan's a decent school, but even beyond that, which I started to recognize then, but I know more now, great journalism program. I mean ju- Rowan University [Glassboro, New Jersey] has a great journalism program, I mean great journalism professors. There was a, a couple that actually really had a, a big role in my continued trajectory. Speaker 1: Who were they? Speaker 2: One professor name was Kathryn Quigley--we called her Quigs. She was this very quirky, kind of funny white professor. She was--she was just funny, and nice, and smart, and had been a journ- a journalist in--you know, before she became a professor. And she not only, you know, delivered--you know, offered us the skills and told us how to--the skills of journalism, but she also gave the freedom to--for me at least--to be myself within this, this kind of structure where journalism is. Another was Julia Chang [Julia MacDonnell Chang], who, who was another very--she, again, noticing the potential in, in, in, in her students, saying you're pretty good. And so they allowed me to write this series of profiles. I started this series of profiles on campus, so I was writing these features from professors, like, the, the one professor that was a former Black Panther [Black Panther Party]; the one who was--you know, was a director for an orchestra. I started getting all these interesting characters on campus, the, the, the sister who won Ms. Black Rowan. I was doing--and then I was also--when activists would come I would write about their visit. And the editor--one of the other students was really kind of, you know, in that same vein, so he's, "Oh, Trymaine [HistoryMaker Trymaine Lee], this, this person's coming; can you write this up?" And so I was starting to say okay. It was all starting to come together because I was learning the actual structure of journalism, what a lead is, what a nut graph is, different kind of anecdotal leads; and you know, I was just learning. I said oh, okay, I see, I, I, I need to get the who, what, where, and why on this kind of story, and this is breaking news. And, and, and if it's a feature, I can kind of use more colorful language; your kicker at the very end; you could--I started--okay, I see what it is here. My natural ability, the, the kind of my inquisitiveness and what's drawing me to certain stories; and then the ability to, to kind of put it together in a way that makes sense was all coming together. Speaker 1: So you--so you do well there. Speaker 2: I do well (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-- Story_ID: 651687 Speaker 1: What are you doing during summers? Speaker 2: During summers I was still working. I, I would work a number of jobs, which another, you know, very kind of influential job I had that had a great influence in me was a job at a place called Circus Time Amusements, right. It was a, a Jewish owned company in Cherry Hill, New Jersey. And what they would do is they'll provide those moon bounces--I don't know if you ever see at like a block party or a Christmas party, the kids are jumping around in it; or a gladiator joust for adults; cotton candy machines. And the owners were a father and son, a Mr. Weinstock and Mitch Weinstock [Mitchell Weinstock], the, the, the son, and they were characters, one--very shrewd, very, to me, Jewish, you know the cultural thing. It was my first kind of interaction with a culturally Jewish person. But they would also--and I don't know--I've come to learn that there's a part of Jewish culture where if you kind of seek the knowledge and information, they'll give it to you; if not, though, you might be relegated to a certain kind of situation, you know. So in this situation what they would do is, it was a lot of students, a lot of people who may be on their last chance, people struggle with substance abuse who--you know, there were a couple of guys were alcoholics, clear alcoholics, but if I'm the crew chief and I have a student, a young guy with me, and I have you with me, we'll go out. Let's hit this thing up. "How you doing, ma'am? Here--where, where's the energy coming from here?" Plug everything up, get the check, "Kids, stop bouncing." I would run the show, right, for like eighty-five dollars a day for a four hour job, and we'd drive in and out. But sometimes we would get sent on longer trips. And one, if I didn't wanna go drive five hours away then I just would say, "oh, no, I, I can't work today," or, "I'm not--I'm not gone be able to do it." But one time I can remember a group had come up--went up to New York State, 'cause there're a bunch of Jewish day camps and, and Jewish camps up here, so they went up to do a job. And then while they were out there they called 'em and said, "Hey, do you guys wanna hit this other job on the way back?" So they were gone for like three or four days, exhausted. I mean it's hard. It's hard work, one, 'cause you got to roll everything up and it's just--it's just difficult. And he said--and, and so they're coming back, and I'm at the shop that day. So I worked at the shop and I was helping to straight- straighten things up and I was gonna leave. He said, "Do you wanna make a couple of extra dollars? I'll give you some--," I was--I said, "Look," I said, "I've been here all day long. Thank you for your twenty dollar," (laughter), "you know, but I'm, I'm, I'm not going to--," he said, "Watch this," he's like you know, "what's gonna be funny? They've been out for four days. I'm gonna throw twenty dollars in the air, and they're gonna jump at it." He said, "Watch." So I'm packing up, they come in, and he's like, "All right guys, twenty dollars," and everybody was like--and they jumped and I said wow. It said something to me about one--I don't necessarily wanna get into it because I might trip myself up. But it--I don't know, yeah, it just-- Speaker 1: It said something, the difference between the cultures and, and (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cul- class-- Speaker 1: --class. Speaker 2: --how, how, how hierarchies work, you know, how hier- continue, again, here are the hierarchy. Here's I'm, I'm giving you some bread, so here's some crumbs; watch you--let me watch you jump at these crumbs. It, it taught me--again, reinforced a lot. And again, this is nothing necessarily negative against them. They were great. And again, they were great to me because I respected myself, so they weren't gonna disrespect me and so they were cool; I mean they were--they were great guys, but, but I--but--you know. Speaker 1: But you wanted to be more than that. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not gonna--I'm not gonna be jumping for crumbs. (Laughter) I'm not gonna be doing your dirty work, making--the thing about it is, is we all understood the economic structure of this, of this thing. A moon bounce you could buy for three thousand dollars, a nice one. You rent it out for $300--$350 for four hours; you're paying a, a, a crew chief maybe eighty dollars; you're giving these guys fifty, sixty dollars a day. Your expenditure on that side is three--two hundred dollars? Your--I mean just the way the math was like they're getting--they were making millions within like four month period, millions, but they were--you know, it was just--anyway, but-- Speaker 1: So you didn't wanna do that? Speaker 2: I'm not do- I'm not doing it. But, but again, that's what I was doing with my summer-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --because it was easy work; it's four hours. As a crew chief, at a certain point hours accrued, so they could send me out with a crew of people to do it; I'd go by myself to a, a private party, set up a moon bounce, you know, play with the kids, tell 'em to stop jumping, and get eighty-five, ninety dollars. And so that was--you know, that was one of my jobs. Story_ID: 651688 Speaker 1: What are you thinking you wanna do; and is there internships you're looking for? 'Cause journalism, it's har- sometimes it's hard to get started and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --journalism is changing around the time you're-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --coming out. Speaker 2: Well, see, and this is where we're talking about guidance and, and, and sometimes people are, are born into great situations where they already know the workings. I had no idea necessarily--what an internship was necessarily. Mind you, by the time I went to Rowan University [Glassboro, New Jersey]--first of all, I knocked it out in one year, so I did about two years' worth of work. I would go at nine in the morning and leave at nine at night, so I knocked like thirty credits in one year. I was just at school all day, but I was older then, I was twenty-three or twenty-four [years old] at that point. I'm, I'm grinding, working hard, and so I hadn't had an internship ever at that point. Ms. Chang [Julia MacDonnell Chang] and Professor Quigley [Kathryn Quigley] both said, "You're really good. You need to find a way to get an internship," like, "this is how it works." And I was like, "Well sure, are they--where, where do I?" (Laughter) "Where are these internships you speak of? Where, where can I go get one?" And she said--Ms. Quigley said, "You know what? The Philadelphia Daily News, they have an internship program. They're, they're accepting applications now. You should really submit--you know, you should put your resume in and some of your work and see what happens." So I said cool. I submitted my stuff and I got accepted. And that moment there I actually--I don't show much, you know, excitement when I'm happy, like I don't jump up. I actually jumped up and like screamed, like what--this is my first--I'm gonna get paid to write. I'm writing for the Philadelphia Daily News, which--you know, it's the Philadelphia Daily News. It's one of the biggest tabloids in the country. I was just so excited 'cause I knew it was gonna be different. I said if you give me a chance to get in the door, nothing can stop me, and I really believed that. You're gonna give me an opportunity to write? And you're gonna pay me? There's no stopping me, and that's exactly what happened. I got in there, and it was such a defining moment in my career, not only because I was finally working in a real newsroom, but it--up until that point I kind of imagined me, you know, taking a, a little bit of my, my--the essence of Richard Wright and some of that kind of stuff in 'Black Boy,' and all those things that really were important to me and combining it with this journalism thing; and doing it in such a beautiful way, and the prose were gonna bounce of the lines, and everyone was gonna love it and say oh my god, this is amazing. Story_ID: 651689 Speaker 1: What happened was, I was--ended up be on the city desk. And I'm in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where a young man was just murdered, and I'm seeing his brains there. And then his parents are screaming; and I have to find a way to talk to the people and get the information. I have to run from the crime scene to the neighborhood; and I was like, this is sad. There was one moment I can remember in particular where it was in North Philly, and all these, these row--lines of row homes--the streets are very narrow, right. And there was a situation where there was two cars shooting back and forth at each other down this very narrow street. A brother and sister were, were hit, like an eleven year old and like an eight year old boy. They were both critically wounded. I go to, I think it was Temple University Hospital [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I went to one of the hospitals in--on--in that part of the city. And I go into the waiting room, and there are like fifteen, twenty family members, people are crying, people are up- everybody's waiting to see what happens to these kids. And I go in there and I say, "Excuse me, ma'am, my name is [HistoryMaker] Trymaine Lee," and I'm, I'm just--I'm shaking, I'm sure I'm stuttering, I'm sure I, I sound and look nervous 'cause I really was because this was my first time--one, the family is here. And, and it was such a sad situation, so I'm already kind of shaken up by the fact that these little kids got shot. So I'm already--and, and she's like, looked at me like, like what are you--like what do you want, like no, we don't have any comment right now. So I, I come out defeated 'cause I have to go back still it, it--it's a horrible situation, I have to go back to the newsroom. And I'm like what happens when you don't get the information, like I don't know what--I'm supposed to go back without anything? So I sit in, in the lobby, and I'm sitting there thinking to myself like, do I wanna do this? One, it's horribly sad; one, I don't know (unclear)--and two of the younger cousins came out and said, "It's all right. Everybody's upset right now, but we'll talk to you." She was like, "We see that you kind of really--you know, you're, you're coming here, and you really wanna tell the story." I was like, "Thank you," got the story, went back, still a little shaken up, but then I was like, I was open; I was honest; and I came with my whole self, my true self. And not that I had to learn that, that's what I did naturally, but--and not to say it worked, but I brought my whole self, my open self, and it worked. And from that moment on, I still always still felt the same hurt when I see a body there, and I have to go, go up to a mother and say, "Ma'am, I'm, I'm Trymaine Lee and I'm with this newspaper, and I want to talk to you about your son," at the--at their most low, at the most painful moment in life. But what got me through is connecting on that emotional level. And so those early days at the Philadelphia Daily News--and that the editors were supportive, and that I, I ended up meeting a mentor of mine named Michael Days [Michael I. Days], who then was like the second in command, now he's one of the, the top editors at The Philadelphia Inquirer--a black man in a suit walking through the office, and I'm like who is--who is--who is that? And I can go to his office. And at that time I didn't know the protocol, so I'm just (makes sounds), "How you doing, Mr. Days? I'm just--I'm just in your office," (laughter), "I'm just coming to talk to you." Elmer Smith was a columnist, a great columnist. I'm going in there and knock on the door. "How you doing, sir?" I didn't know. I just knew I was trying to talk to these men and, and pick their brains, and, and nothing will stop me 'cause I didn't know what I was supposed to be doing, 'cause where else would I know? And so I was just a gunslinger writing. I was talking to people. I was so excited to be there, I would stay all night tracking down stories. I would be in the streets. I would go to communities with--everybody's afraid of, but that's my people, so I'm not scared of my people. And so it was all just like--and it was working, and I was producing stories, and I was learning; and, and they were--you know, red ink saying, "All right, you gotta get here quicker; you gotta do this; you got--," and I'm listening. And to me it was like, it was this or nothing. I didn't know what else I was gonna be doing. You know, I didn't know what else. This was--(clears throat) this is my, this is my chance, and I wasn't gonna mess it up. And so they believed in me, I believed in myself, and it all was coming together where I'm a journalist. I'm a journalist, I'm a reporter, and I'm--and I'm telling the stories that matter. I'm bringing those last moments of what--and these moments where a parent is at their--at their lowest, and as a young--a dead young man there, and it's speaking to a broader, broader issue, which I didn't have the skills to kind of connect. Now I have the skills to connect them. I can connect what happened in this moment to the broader context. But at that moment I'm doing what I can. That, that, that internship at the Philadelphia Daily News and, and meeting the great reporters, and, and Mr. Days, it changed--it changed everything. Speaker 2: So how long did the internship last (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Three months. Speaker 2: Three months. Speaker 1: Only three months, just three months (laughter). I had--I had like two or three cover stories. I mean, I was like--I, I, I was on a--on a mission (laughter). I was on a mission. Speaker 2: How could you have two or three cover stories? Isn't that the main pa- paper? Speaker 1: That's the front; and it's tabloid, so it's like one story. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: There was one story of a young man--and this is another one of those stories that was pivotal--there was a--he was--he might have been sixteen or seventeen years old. And a group of guys tried to rob him for his basketball jersey. They ended up shooting him in his neck, and he ended up being paralyzed from his neck down. I ended up getting with the family. I ended up getting in to see with--sit with him. And he, he ended up saying something to me that was so profound--not just journalistically, it was a great quote. But he said that I for- he, he, he said, "God, God is gonna see me--," something about God, and whatever your religious beliefs, that he has faith, a seventeen year old young man, a bullet in his--in his neck, severed his spine; he--he'll fr- he'll be paralyzed for the rest of his life had, had--is talking about faith, talking about he has dreams of walking. He just--it was just powerful. That young man ended up dying maybe two years ago, just two years ago. He lived for a long time after this, but that--and that was a cover story. Another one was you know, some other crazy story; but I was out there hustling. And then they believed in me, and then that still kind of just bolstered my resolve to keep going. I said you know what? I'm not bad at this. I'm not--I'm not bad at it. And it was--it was important work, and I realized that early in the game: it was important work. Story_ID: 651690 Speaker 1: And what did Mr. Days [Michael I. Days] say to you? What did he state--say to you that had impact on you even today? Speaker 2: He was always just an ear. One, he was the most like--he's very laid back, kind of soft spoken, but he--but he's strong. And you look--you can look in his--Mr. Days' eyes and see he's one of the smartest guy- he's just very smart. And it was less of what, what he said in that I could always come and talk, and we just have great conversations; and he, and he, and he saw in me potential, you know. Even later on, I ended working at the, The Trentonian. Well, first of all, from the Daily News [Philadelphia Daily News] I went to the black press, Philadelphia Tribune [The Philadelphia Tribune] for a few months, which I'll talk about that experience. It was a great experience, but--you know, it was a great experience, but I'll tell you about that in a minute. But once he, he, he lived in Trenton [New Jersey]. And so when I worked in Trenton, every once in a while on the weekend I would stop by his house. He was always there. And one thing that he told me, and I've had a number of jobs in my ten year career, he said, "Once you stop learning it's time to go." And that probably is the most important thing, because again, I've been in probably five, six different places in ten years. I've--I--(unclear) it's getting longer as I--as I'm, you know, getting to this side of my career. But I would be somewhere, get it in; and then I'd start to feel like, especially when I was younger--start to feel like what more can I do. Are the editors helping me learn? Am I--am, am I able to expand? If not, it's time to explore other options. And fortunately, especially when I was young, the options seemed to be lining themselves up for me, and it was just for me to take advantage of 'em. Story_ID: 651691 Speaker 1: So you left there and went to The Philadelphia-- Speaker 2: Tribune. Speaker 1: --Tribune? Speaker 2: Which I remember a lot of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which, which is a black paper. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's one of the, the oldest-- Speaker 1: Oldest-- Speaker 2: --continuously publishing black newspapers in the country. And for me-- Speaker 1: It's Richard Brogle [sic.]? Mr. Brogle-- Speaker 2: Mr. Bogle [HistoryMaker Robert Bogle]--Mr. Bogle, which, which is interesting. You walk in his office, and he has like a big you know, oil painting of one of the original publishers. And it's very like--it's very old school. It's very old school black, and it was a--it was a great experience. Mr. Bogle--a funny story. So, so I get--I get to The Philadelphia Tribune, and some people were saying like--you know, some of my white counterparts that I met at the Daily News [Philadelphia Daily News] who actually also took me under their wing saying, "You don't wanna go to the black press. You, you really don't wanna go to the black press. Like, trust me, it, it might ruin your career. You don't wanna do this." And for me, I didn't ha- I didn't know what, what other options exist necessarily. And I was like to write about black people in the community, like what could it be necessarily bad about that? Again, not even un- I, I can imagine what they're talking about now. At the moment I could not understand it, so I was like I've got the job. It was--it was great. I was still ambitious. I was coming off all that hunger from my Daily News internship. I can remember going, going into Mr. Bogle's office. They didn't have a police scanner, and I was saying, "Mr. Bogle, like I can--I can kill 'em; I can eat 'em alive out here if I could just get a police scanner so I can know what's happening." I couldn't imagine how the police reporters were doing their job without a police scanner. How do you know what's happening? That means you have to foll- that means you have to wait for it to come out in somebody else's newspaper, and read about it; and then do what you can. And I just couldn't understand that, because I was used to--I'm hearing the scanner, and the police saying, "There's a shooting at 52nd [Street] and, and Broad [Street]," whatever it is. He said, "Well, I'll think about, think about, think about it." And so I'm there; I'm, I'm, I'm grinding; I'm still getting out there. And it was you know, more horrible stories that end up still adding to my cache, and, and I'm learning along the way. But there were like no Internet; there was no police scanner; there was a general sense--I mean people felt a little beaten down by the place, 'cause there were people--people had been there for a long time who had been dealing with these circumstances. You know photographers--a, a, a great sister named Marissa Weekes [Marissa Weekes Mason], who's a great photographer, one of the first sisters I met there, about--probably about my age. She got sent home one day because had a, a--I think she had pants on, and they--and she had to have a skirt on. You know, you had to have a tie on, which was not--those things weren't bad, but this is the, the Negro press. This is--you're coming--you're--which is not a bad thing, but it was like, there are so--there was just so--there were so many issues there, and it, it, it was--you know, like any small newspaper, not different--not unlike any other small paper, it's almost like you're kind of writing about people that--are they newsworthy or are they friends of the publisher? 'Cause Mr. Bogle is the man. He's on everybody's board, and he's--you know, he's the publisher for a, a great newspaper. So it was, a general sense of morale was low. I had ambitious ideas for stories, really ambitious, and I was--you know, and everyone's like, "Come on, you don't wanna--you don't wanna do that," like, let's just not even rock the boat. Story_ID: 651692 Speaker 1: Anyway, so I ended up--Mike Days [Michael I. Days], his best friend--or a good friend of his was the editor at the, at The Trentonian newspaper, a tabloid, a scrappy, very scrappy, sometimes overly provocative tabloid in Trenton, New Jersey. I sat with him, talked to him, I was hired; and another great run. I mean it was a kind of newsroom that--there's a guy named Paul Mickle--I will call him by name. Paul Mickle was a city editor, a grumpy old man, at times homophobic, at times I think racist, but probably the gr- the best city editor that I've ever had. Because he'd say, you know, they--there would be a fight somewhere near a high school. He said, "There's a riot out there. Get out there, Trymaine [HistoryMaker Trymaine Lee], and go get 'em," and, and I'd go out there and I'd be like wait. But he'll get you out there. He, he knew how to craft a tabloid story, which meant get the--get the news up high, make sure the words pop, make it sing, and everybody will be eating this stuff alive; and, and, and he was right. You know, I, I learned a lot from him. Like ag- of course he was from the old school. He's an old school guy where you know he might get a lawsuit if he (laughter) was still working in some mainstream newspapers today. But he was--I honestly connected with him, and to me he was a good guy at his heart, he really was, good guy. You know, and he--and he supported me and you know, great guy. Speaker 2: And you, you went there in--did you go there in 2004? 'Cause in 2005 you're hired with, with the Times Pica- Speaker 1: Right, Times Picayune. Speaker 2: --Picayune. Speaker 1: That's a tough one. Speaker 2: Picayune. Speaker 1: Yeah, it must have been 2003, 2004. I ended up being there for about a year and a half, year and eight months when I went to New Orleans [Louisiana]. Story_ID: 651693 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why do you go to New Orleans [Louisiana]; and how, how does that job come? Speaker 2: A, a good friend of mine named-- Speaker 1: N- NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] is not playing a role yet (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, actually--I mean, NABJ--the, The Philadelphia Tribune job, a, a sister, you know, who works there put me on who I met through NABJ listserv. A good friend of mine, Simone Weichselbaum, who right now she works for the, the New York Daily News. She's a member. She's the one who--she interviewed for the job in New Orleans and said you know--she was trying to get back to New York [New York]. She's from New York. She said, "If, if they love me, they'll love you. You know, send your stuff down. Here's the, the contact lady, and you'll--," she's like "'cause whether they offer me the job or not, I, I don't necessarily wanna go down there." Sent my stuff off to, to New Orleans. Within a day or two they said, "Your clips look great, can we fly you down for an interview?" And I was like, this to me is like the big leagues, a major newspaper [Times Picayune] in a major ci- major metropolitan area in, in--you know. So I jumped at the chance, went down there, ended up getting the job, and you know, four months before Hurricane Katrina (laughter). So I had four months of running around, getting to know the city. And New Orleans has played a very special, you know, role in my life. Speaker 1: New Orleans is a different city, though, when you (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a different city. Well, New Orleans, it's, it's kind of hard to describe it. It's, it's a beautiful, ugly, gritty, wonderful, amazing, sad, tragic kind of place--as sad as you are because nothing seems to work there. You know, most of the institutions have either had some corruption or continue to be corrupt today; the poverty levels and, and the levels of violence are astounding; the loss of life--astounding; the educational system is not teaching these kids to do anything more than fold down a bed sheet. It's, it's, it's, it's not--it's not working on so many levels. On the other side, the resilience of the people of New Orleans; the resilience of the city; the beautiful--the art that emerges from this city, whether it's in food, in the music, or on a canvas somewhere; the strength of the people; the, the love of the people despite all that is ailing the city is amazing, and they embrace you. Mind you I was a police reporter, so I'm in Central City [New Orleans, Louisiana]. I'm in the toughest neighborhoods. And somebody say all the women call you baby--they say, "Hey baby, come over here, baby." You're like, "Yes, ma'am," and they wanna feed you and talk to you. And even the--even the guys--now there is a special brand of criminal in New Orleans. There's a very ignorant brand of--the, the, the violent criminals are more violent and more ignorant than you will probably find in most places. But your run of the mill person, whether they have a criminal background or, or are criminals or not, open and nice the same kind of way (laughter)--everyone despite--except for that little sliver that is off the chain seriously, that's causing most of the problems in, in New Orleans in terms of violence, everyone else--the people are so amazingly wonderful and warm and accepting. And so there are a bunch of--there was a bar I would go to called Sweet Lorraine's [Sweet Lorraine's Jazz Club, New Orleans, Louisiana], and I loved Sweet Lorraine's. And Paul [Paul Sylvester, Jr.], the owner--I would go there and Paul would be at, at the bar, and a guy called Dr. Love would be at the bar, and all the regulars would be there. And I would--you know, they knew everything about politics, and everything about the people, and culture. And I was sitting in there and I'm probably twenty-five, twenty-six [years old] at that point, having a drink with the old--older guys. And they would tell me about what's going on and help me contextualize things. You'd be in there and you'd see a politician, and you'd see the around the way guy. It was just like--and the food was amazing, you know. I ended up meeting my wife [Gabrielle Maple Lee] down there (laughter). You know, I was just--but then even journalistically--when Katrina hit, and, and kind of that, the foundation of the city dropped, and chaos ensued, and so many people died; and, and there was so much going on, so much tragedy, but so much resilience. And, and telling those stories was not only an honor and a privilege, but it really--it really took me personally, again, to another level, because I could an- I could sit back and analyze a situation because I had spent enough time there. I mean I had only been there three or four months before it happened, but I was already breathing it because it was such a curious place. And if you're a, a curious person in a curious place, I'm just--every corner I'm--the names and the, the, the class divides and that--you know, it--black people proud of these French last names; and the colonization, and the French, and the Spanish, and the Creole, and the--you know, it's just an amazing, crazy place. And so, that endears itself to you. Story_ID: 651694 Speaker 1: And so being able to tell the story, the tr- often at, at you know, tragic story of Hurricane Katrina. Speaker 2: So tell your story about, you know, that you were even told to leave by your-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I think by your publisher. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, well-- Speaker 2: Or the managing editor. Speaker 1: So, so I worked--when Katrina hit I worked a, a Sunday through Thursday shift. And so-- Speaker 2: What was your--what was your title at that point (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Police reporter--police and crime reporter. And so by, by Friday or Saturday we kind of knew a big storm was coming. And so they made arrangements for the, the office to be somewhat of a storm shelter. And so people brought their families; people hunkered down--sleeping bags, you know, duffel bags for their clothes on that Sunday. So after work, people are streaming in, hunkering down for we--we have no idea what's gonna happen, how big--how big or how bad it's gonna be, but we know it's coming. And so, you know, at some point people had the option to, to leave. And I can remember talking to an editor who had since left for the Atlanta Journal-Constitution I believe, talking to him saying you know, "I don't plan on leaving, but I don't know--I don't know if I should, like I don't know anything--I, I don't know--you know--hurricanes, how bad it's gone be." He said--he said, "Trust me," he said, "you're gonna wanna stick around." He's like, "Trust me. As a journalist you're gonna wanna stick around." I was like yeah, you know, I was like you're right. I, I, didn't have any--I, I wasn't ready, ready to run, but I just didn't know. I was like should--am I supposed to stay? I was like oh--I didn't know. And so I said you know what? I'll stay. A lot--a lot other people left, and I think, you know, rightly so. If you want--you know, a storm, hurricane's coming. And so by early Monday morning the wind--even the night before, midnight, one, the wind was starting to whip and you could hear it outside. There's a big old tree right in front--well, there was a big old tree right in front of, of the Times Picayune building--and it was just--I mean it was a huge old true, which event- eventually ended up being snapped by the winds--huge old tree right in front of the building. The water is rising. You could start to see the cars behind the Times Picayune, in the parking lot, floating off to a corner. I mean it was--it was getting--it was getting high, a foot or so--the water's coming. One of our journalists was able to, to go out to survey the situation--went out on I-10 [Interstate 10]. She came back and she said, "You can't even see the houses." At one point I-10 just stops. You can't even see--it, it--the, the roof the--all you could see is the top of the roofs. And so everyone starts figuring out what's happening. They say, "Trymaine [HistoryMaker Trymaine Lee], why don't you go down to city hall [New Orleans City Hall, New Orleans, Louisiana], stay close to the mayor [Ray Nagin], the emergen- preparedness people, the chief. Just stay down there at city hall. We'll come and get you in the morning." (Unclear) should I keep going? Speaker 2: No, keep going. Speaker 1: And so I'm going down. I had my little safe with me. Like I had money, had work with me. I had all kind of stuff ready. They gave me a bag with like a ham and cheese sandwich in it. And was like all right, we'll come back and get you in the morning. Don't worry, just you know, do your thing out there. And so I go and throughout the night they're having meetings--the fire department, the police chief [Eddie Compass], the mayor. They're all having these meetings, and I'm sitting in taking notes. I'm talking to people outside who are--who are starting to gather around downtown. It hadn't flooded much. I mean it might--there might have been a half a foot of water down there or, or maybe--or maybe a little more. And so the morning comes and mind you I'm just--the next morning I'm, I'm still outside talking to people coming from this, to and from the Superdome [Louisiana Superdome; Mercedes-Benz Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana]. It's on Poydras Street, people are coming. I'm taking my notes, taking my notes; and I'm trying to call the office. And like, I don't remember if I couldn't get an answer, if it was busy. I just couldn't connect with anyone. Like I'm hours--I'm like okay, yo, what's going on? Where is everyone? What's happened? I'm down here. I don't have a change of clothes; I don't have anything; I don't have toothbrush on me, food. I'm like, just me. And mind you, I slept on the floor overnight (laughter) on like cardboard at city hall. A friend of mine saw on the news--'cause text messaging was working--a friend of mine saw on the news, on CNN or, or some channel, that the Times Picayune had to evacuate the building because the, the flood water was rising and it was going in the basement. So they evacuate without me. And so I'm saying well, how, how'd they--how, how did they evacuate without, without me? They left; they went to Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. They hightailed it out. And so I was like, okay. So I just went outside talking to people, still reporting. So I have a notepad full of stuff 'cause I'm--I am a journalist, I am here, this is happening. Let me make sure I'm just getting as much as I can. Story_ID: 651695 Speaker 1: Later that next day, I ended up seeing a guy, Bruce Nolan, a great reporter, another guy who, you know, took me under his wing enough--religion reporter, just a great guy, really nice guy. His parents lived in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana], somewhere down there, so he went to check on his family from what I--from what I can recall. And they said, "Hey, there are group of guys that are still here, and so they would come get us in the morning. So you know, let's just--let's just do what we got to, they were come and get us in the morning." They have a truck or something. And so meanwhile city hall [New Orleans City Hall, New Orleans, Louisiana] was taking on more water in the basement, so we have to go across the street into a hotel. And the windows are all blown out from the storm, I mean the, the storm wreaked havoc on the city, even the French Quarter, which was spared a lot. I--as soon as we walk in the door I, I--the lights are flickering, it's just dark, it's musty, and I see this, this woman crying. And she embraces this rescue worker, 'cause she's hugging this rescue worker, saying, "Thank you, thank you, thank you." And he's like, "No, we're here," dah, dah, dah. And so after she's done talking, I, I--you know, go up to, to the--to the woman and I say you know, "Sister, what, what--what's going on? I heard you thanking the rescue worker. How did you get here? What happened?" She, she goes on and tell me one of the most heartbreaking stories that I've ever written, one of the most harrowing ordeals I've ever heard come from someone's mouth. Her family had had a family reunion in town over the, the course of the previous days. The storm came. They all got separated. She ended up being with a number--several other family members at the time when the, the floodwaters are rising. She's in the Lower Ninth Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], one of the first places that was inundated by this floodwater. The water's rising. She runs up the steps; they all run up. They get into their second floor apartment and they hear banging on the--on the--on the--on the floor. It is the downstairs neighbor who is a forty-one year old woman and her five year old son. She said at some point it stops and the water keeps rising. The water is rising and rising. They run into the attic, but they're enclosed; it's the attic, and the water's still rising. Some of the, the men in the group and some other women, they're banging through, banging through, end up breaking through--break- breaking a hole through the, the, the ceiling of the roof. They're waving their t-shirts, and they hear boats coming closer. So mind you, there's so much floodwater that, you know, there are boats in the streets, boats coming up to their rooftops of the houses to pick the--houses to pick people out of the--out, out of the flood. That's how high the water is. They get picked up into one boat. Another boat comes. She said that the, the water was so high and that there were actually bodies floating in the water. And she said there was one baby that she saw that was so fresh and so perfect and just so innocent floating in the water. And she's crying as she's telling me. Of course I'm--I got tears coming out my eyes. I'm writing notes and the teardrops are hitting my pad, and I'm like oh my--and I had no idea because no one at that point--no one had really been out there like that. You know, this is like the second day. So we knew it was bad, but no one knew it was this bad. And so this was like the first kind of feature that captures what is really happening out there. So I'm, I'm writing the notes, writing the notes. I end up staying the night at the hotel, sleeping on the floor somewhere. And I'm writing out this story. I'm writing out this story of this woman and this rescue, and, and incorporating--because they were having meetings still, city hall basically relocated to the hotel. So I was around officials. I was getting--wrote the whole story down in, in a notepad. I finally get picked up the next day by some of my colleagues, and we don't know where to go or what to do. We didn't have any electricity, like, so we just started heading south down towards the bayou looking for gas first. The lines were, you know, streaming out. Okay, and, and so ul- ultimately we ended up at a newspaper called the, The Houma Courier [The Courier], which is a New York Times paper [The New York Times Company]. They let us sleep on the floor, and for the next week or so we reporter back and forth from Homer. So we'd drive all the way down to Houma, Louisiana; and then drive all the way back to New Orleans [Louisiana] each day. And, and we--they had Internet, so everyone was back--the, the ba- the newspaper [Times Picayune] basically relocated to Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. So we were filing our stories from The Houma Courier, which had, you know, Internet (laughter) and power. Story_ID: 651696 Speaker 1: --Picture of you in the canoe. Speaker 2: Right (laughter), right. Speaker 1: You look very like in charge. Speaker 2: Let's go, let's go. I can swim. You know, my family--and thing about it is, is, my family was al- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What is your mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] saying? Speaker 2: She's--you know what? She didn't panic. She--I, I was able to every once in a while talk to her. So she just wanted to make sure I was safe. And, and for me I felt--I felt pretty good. I never felt in danger; and I think it was easier because all my family was in--back home in New Jersey, so it was like I didn't have any family to worry about, where other colleagues had children, and wives, and family members, and their homes had been destroyed, and--you know. So fortunately I didn't have any family down there so I was able to just--you know, and that, that canoe picture story is, is crazy actually. Speaker 1: Okay, so go on. Speaker 2: In those early days, there, there wasn't much fact to go on. There was a lot of rumor about everything: rapes, murders. There was just so much--looting, some real some false, all kinds of, of, of rumors. And I heard from a lawyer friend of mine who said out in, in New Orleans East [Eastern New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], which is 80 percent was (unclear)--you know, inundated with about--you know, they were flooded--80 percent of, of New Orleans East was covered by floodwater. He said that a bunch of people went to this school to take refuge and were trapped by the flood. So there may be a hundred or so people who were trapped in the gymnasium in this school. He's like, "Man, I, I think they're--I think they're there still," like dead. A colleague of mine, Gwen Filosa, another very intrepid young journalist--she was, she was great. She heard the same thing from one of her sources. So we said let's, let's go out there. Let's go see. So we took one of the newspaper [Times Picayune] delivery trucks and drove out there. We had a canoe in the back, pulled that canoe out, you know, halfway, halfway down the street, and we couldn't go any further, and just canoed to the school. We kicked down the window of the school, we're trudging through knee and thigh high water. It's dark, it's nasty. We're actually afraid we're gonna find what we think we're gonna find. We finally find the auditorium. We're trying our hardest to open it up. Mind you, like the well, that it--the door is sitting in is like, like three foot of water. We finally open it up, and there's nobody there (laughter), thank goodness. But on the way back, while we're trying to, to drive out, I hit something and the truck goes (makes sound) sideways. And so we're like whoa, you know, we're a little scared. We end up getting in the canoe, we end up flagging somebody down, they ended up helping us. Come to find out after the, the, the water receded, there was a like an eight foot little ravine. And we would have fell in that, we might not have gotten out. So we came that close to actually being stuck in a ravine ourselves. It was--I mean it was rough. And that's kind of what, what getting around was like. New Orleans [Louisiana] was a complete water world, I mean we're--we were getting around on canoes and trying our best to get around with these big delivery trucks. And, and there were--there were still people there. There were some--there were still some people in New Orleans hunkered down who didn't wanna leave. Story_ID: 651697 Speaker 1: What is the name of the first story of the woman? Speaker 2: That, that one was called 'Nightmare in the 9th Ward' ['Nightmare in the 9th Ward All Too Real for One Woman,' Trymaine Lee]. And it ended up being a story that changed my life, and again, the trajectory of my career. It ended up being part of the, the, the package that won a Pulitzer Prize [Pulitzer Prize for Breaking News Reporting], so--and, and this story you know-- Speaker 1: It was a nine part series, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, basically it was--it was--it was nine, nine parts--nine or ten parts; and so, you know, my story was among that, that group. Speaker 1: And so how many people contributed to that? I mean who--how many writers? Speaker 2: May- may- maybe, maybe, maybe seven. Speaker 1: Seven. Speaker 2: May- maybe seven-- Speaker 1: Okay, seven, okay. Speaker 2: --from that original group that stayed. Speaker 1: And they--so they were all there. Were you one of the youngest ones? Speaker 2: Oh, I was definitely the youngest one. I--at that time I might have been twenty-six [years old]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'd only been in the career--mind you, when this moment happens, I had been in, in journalism for maybe a year and a half. I had only been (laughter) reporting--oh no, no, maybe, maybe, maybe two--maybe two years. I was a year and a half in Trenton [at The Trentonian]; and only--yeah, maybe a year and eight, nine months. Speaker 1: Less than two years. Speaker 2: Less than two years in my career at that point. Speaker 1: And so you--so the, the paper [Times Picayune] and the team win--you know, win a Pulitzer Prize. Speaker 2: Two separate Pulitzer Prizes, one-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the team won a Pulitzer for breaking news; the paper won for public service. So all of our stories--other stories--were part of the public service award where they took stock of everything that we did. And then the team--those of us who were on the ground and wrote those, those early stories were the team that won the Pulitzer. Speaker 1: So when you win a Pulitzer, can you tell me how that all works? That--is there a ceremony; or is there a notice that is sent? Speaker 2: Yeah, you, you know what the thing about it is, well first of all every year in journalism depen- especially depending on where--what organization you're with, around April you kind of--the, the finalists are leaked; and then everyone waits for usually the, the Associated Press or one of the wires to release who wins. So at that moment everyone's kind of standing around the computer waiting. But even before then I didn't really have a full idea what the Pulitzer Prize meant. I don't ever remember hearing much about it. It, it was nothing that was part of my lexicon of thinking, right. On top of that, the fact that we were finalists for an award, but the stories were built on the back of so much heart- heartache and so much pain, and the people for me stuck on rooftops, they don't know what a Pulitzer is and don't care; and it didn't matter. And so for me, I was--I was a little--not even resentful--I don't know what the right word is. At first saying like, we're gonna celebrate? We're gone--we're gone be hap- we're gonna pat ourselves on the back. We're gonna cheer because we're telling stories of a community that was decimated, and so many lives were lost. We're gonna--we're gonna cheer for that? That was my initial thinking. Time goes by and I start to be really proud of the work that we were doing and saying like, we are telling this story. The journalism that we are producing is telling this story. Without us no one will know the depth and breadth of what's happening here. And so full--you know, months and months later we're at that moment, and now I'm actually excited with my colleagues. And they announce that we won, and kind of hugged each other, and we were--we were excited. I still didn't understand what it meant (laughter) necessarily. I knew it was a great honor. I knew that few people get 'em. I know--I know that it's the pinnacle of journal- you've created some journalism that is among the best of the year, and there's a lot of great journalism happening in America today. So it was an honor, and it was--you know, now I'm a--I'm a Pulitzer Prize winner, and that doesn't go away. Speaker 1: And so that's 2006? Speaker 2: Two thousand and six [2006]. Story_ID: 651698 Speaker 1: So can we talk about the rest--I mean, 'cause what does that lead to then? 'Cause you stay at the Ti- Times Picayune how--because New Orleans [Louisiana] is--is--takes a long time to get itself back on its feet. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, New Orleans--I mean I was--I was there for maybe almost another year after the storm [Hurricane Katrina]. Speaker 1: So where did your--when did you meet your wife [Gabrielle Maple Lee]? Speaker 2: I met her in that year after-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --through NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]. NABJ listserv called the young black journalists listserv, where a bunch of people who I'm still pretty tight with today we're all still doing our thing in the industry. You know, you write about you know where--having back and forth debates about something, the Jayson Blair situation, or whatever happens, or you know, job--there's job opportunities. And so she said that she got a job--, "Oh, I got a job at Touro hospital [Touro Infirmary] in New Orleans," and I said--and I wrote back. I said, "Hey, we should grab lunch, you know, at some point," (laughter). And lunch turned into--you know, seven years later here we are. But yeah, so I met her--yeah (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So she's a journalist also. Speaker 2: She, she was in, in public relations, so she had-- Speaker 1: So publish- (unclear)? Speaker 2: --she had been--she had been a journalist and then she switched over to public relations. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So she was doing PR for the hospital at that point. Speaker 1: Okay. So she was there though. So you both are there for how long then after? Speaker 2: I was there--I went to The New York Times in two thousand--late 2006, early 2007. And so-- Speaker 1: So you were--oh, so once you got your Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize for Breaking News Reporting], you're headed to The Times? Speaker 2: N- maybe a year after--we got--we got the Pulitzer that April-- Speaker 1: April (laughter). Speaker 2: --and you know, so--I mean-- Speaker 1: By the fall you're--? Speaker 2: They, they--I, I ended up being in contact with them not long after. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What happened was a young journalist named Maria Montoya [Ana Maria Montoya], who was a really good friend of mine there, she had been tight with Jill Abramson, who was, you know, in the masthead of The New York Times. And so she said, "Oh--," and I didn't know--I was not an industry person so I didn't know who, who these people were, what these na- Jill Abramson--now you know what that mean, it automatically--okay, Jill Abramson is the boss. And that's how much--I'm thinking she's an editor, like she's a city desk editor or something. So we meet and have lunch, and I'm talking to her like I would talk--, "Oh, how you doing, here's my (unclear)." I'm just--I'm not realizing I should be nervous, like, "Yes, Mrs. Abramson--." I'm not--I'm being of course nice, and I'm being myself, and you know, respecting her, her and her position, but I didn't realize who she was. And so she said, "You know, we're gonna take a look at all your stuff and you know, we'll get back to you. We, we think--you know, we're gonna take a look." So I didn't send them a single clip. Normally you send your, your clips off to, to a newspaper. They did all their research. I got a call saying, you know, "We'd like you to be part of the, the, the metro desk, you know, reporting the metro desk." And I was like, what--but I actually had to struggle. As excited as I was because it was The New York Times, I still wasn't sure. Like, here in New Orleans I had been part of covering this city at this very important, pivotal moment. And I was covering as it was coming together and healing. And I had made so many rela- connections in New Orleans; I, I had made so many relationships; my sources--I was on a roll. I loved the paper. I had an editor named Jed Horne, who was one of the best writers in America, but certainly one of the best editors. But we--our team, we had been through it. A good buddy of--Mike Perlstein, who was a guy who I was particularly close to, where I covered police and cops from the street angle, he covered it from the administrative angle and you know, the politics of it and everything, just a great team. And I was like, do I wanna leave for New York [New York]? You know, do I wanna leave--do I--do I wanna leave? And so I, I sat with Jim Amoss, who was the managing editor at the paper, another great guy--I, could--I couldn't say more about the team at the Times Picayune--and said, "But what do--what do you wanna do here?" He said, "We can make some things happen. We can--," and I really thought about it, and, and I decided to go because it's The New York Times, (laughter) and you can't say no necessarily. But I actually--it, it was a struggle. It was more of a struggle than people would imagine, saying goodbye to the city, especially after what it had been through and being a part of that. But I headed to New York. Story_ID: 651699 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What has been your experience here, 'cause you've been here now, what se- ? Speaker 2: Seven years. Speaker 1: Seven years. Speaker 2: Yeah. New York [New York] has been great. Speaker 1: That's the longest that you've been in, in a job? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well, I was--I was New York Times for four years; and then I've been-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, that's right. Speaker 2: --yeah, I was there for four years, which was--that was the longest. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: I mean four years is more than--on, almost half of my career. Speaker 1: So what was that experience like, Trymaine [HistoryMaker Trymaine Lee]? Speaker 2: It was--it was another one of those experiences where I almost felt like the student home again almost. The greatest of times, but it wasn't always the right fit for me. And I think coming off of the, the Times Picayune and the whirlwind, and I was on the rise--getting there, there is no one journalist above The New York Times. They--first of all, it's a magnificent, and still today is the, the greatest news gathering organization in the world with the smartest reporters, the smartest journalists; I mean, as far as editors, great--I mean it's a great paper. But there's a way they do things, there's a way you write to your audience, there's--there's a hierarchy there. Because one, you are dealing with reporters who have been great for longer than I've even been in the business (laughter). I mean you, you have reporters that's been great since 1972. You have reporters who've been great for so long. And so for me, I felt like it, it, it was like a slowdown process, and now it's time to learn. So more than anything, I produced some good work and I, I--but I grew as a journalist there leaps and bounds. And so the progression was right, but it just was never a perfect fit. It was a good (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, why was that? Speaker 2: I think I didn't--going back to not knowing how the industry works; at that time not knowing that I should have been finding my, my--as they would say, your rabbi's in the building. Not understanding the, the, the nuance of politics of a newsroom where getting buy in from certain people. I was used to running and gunning and letting my work speak for itself. I was used to--trust me, I go out there I'm bringing--I'm bringing the goods back. This was really the big leagues. If I thought I was in the big league before, this was the New York Yankees. So I don't think I just knew how to operate in that environment; and it--being one of--I was never the, the kind of person that I had lean on a black mentor, where I had find the black man in the room because I need--I need you to help me with something. But unlike before I could go to Mike Days [Michael I. Days], I didn't have anybody in this newsroom that I felt I could turn to and say, "Man, like--," talk about stresses. I was--well, there this guy named Jonathan Hicks [Jonathan P. Hicks], who was a great city, city hall reporter, he left the paper. When I looked around I was like one of the older report- black reporters, and there were only a couple of us, one of my best friends today, John Eligon, who is still at The New York Times and a great journalist--it was me, him, a guy named Anahad O'Connor, who was off in like a science section or something like that. We looked around, there was no people of color there, no s- elders, no seniors that we can go to and say how do I work in this environment? How, how do I, you know--how do I do it? And so then at that time I might have been twenty-seven, twenty-eight [years old], so John is much younger than me. I mean, John's thirty-one, so he--we're all young (laughter). So I mean overall it was a great experience. I learned a lot. I wouldn't be the journalist I am today without it. Story_ID: 651700 Speaker 1: Now you had the Harl- you had Harlem [New York, New York] as a beat? Is that (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I covered a number of beats. Speaker 1: Okay, so what were the beats you covered? Speaker 2: When I first got there, I was--I was general assignment; and then I went to the Brooklyn borough--Brooklyn bureau [of The New York Times], so I covered Brooklyn [New York] for a year or so--or, or a year and a half. Then I went to Albany [New York] to cover a session of the state legislature, which you know my luck as a journalist, I get there right as the Eliot Spitzer scandal is happening. And the Governor Paterson [HistoryMaker David A. Paterson], the first black pa- governor of New York comes in. Anoth- everywhere I go trouble happens (laughter). I go and then something ridiculous happens. Speaker 1: But that's good for reporting-- Speaker 2: It's great journalism. It's great for journalism. And then, so I--and then I end up covering Harlem, which was--which was another great experience. Speaker 1: So who was the editor--the news editor? I had Richard Berke [Richard L. Berke]. Is that wrong? Speaker 2: Wh- no. Speaker 1: That was wrong, okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I--I mean there were a number of different editors, so you had the city editors; you had all different kinds of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --editors. Speaker 1: I mean, but Eliot Spitzer was a huge story. Speaker 2: Oh, that was--that was--that was major, and that's another--and that's, that's--that was another experience, which added a--before that point I never really had an interest in covering politics at all. Getting up there, figuring out the political landscape, which senators, which assemblymen had some power, which ones you can (unclear), which--the, the underlying storylines--I learned a lot. When the Spitzer scandal happened, it ramped it up tenfold. And to see--I think I learned more by watching the reporters ha- and journalists handle that situation and pushing for more information and connecting the dots on things that you already kind of knew were happening, saying wait a second now; now we see. Then Governor Paterson comes out. He had his own issues, had it come out about using cocaine-- Speaker 1: His personal--well, his-- Speaker 2: His marital issues, some substance use issues, because every--the--it--the, the magnifying glass was--you know, was so large at that moment. And so witnessing that and being in that environment was another moment where it was like wow, this is journalism also, you know. Speaker 1: So what did you learn there, though? What do you think you learned there? And are you saying--and the--I wanna ask that; then I have some other questions to follow up on. Speaker 2: Well, one, I learned even more so that you, you really can't ever really trust what a public official says--you really can't, because they have an agenda. And when you're in, say, a legislature situation, there are dozens, dozens, and dozens of people with individual agendas--upstate agendas, rural agendas, black caucus agendas, conservative agendas. There's all kind of power plays being made; and they--they're so accustomed to the game that they'll tell you whatever they need to tell you, whether it's fully true or not. So one, I learned that you have to really be skeptical. I was never much of a skeptic really or much of a cynic, but there's a level of cynicism that you naturally adapt in those environments because you look around and say, these are the people that are running our state? These are the people, the, the one who was paying for the state troopers to do this? The ones who are embezzling money doing this? The ones who seem like they can't think their way out of a paper bag? This is who's running our state (laughter)? And they're--and, and then some of them are liars and will lie in your face? Of course there's some great people doing great work in their communities also, but in general you say you really have to keep--you, you have to (unclear) the, the thumbnails on all of them (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so did someone give you false information and you went with it without (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, I never--no, I never went with it, but I just knew what you were telling me was-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --convenient. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: I just--I, I--'cause I--you know (laughter). I'm doing my reporting and I, and I see what you're doing here. Okay, I see what's happening here. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 651701 Speaker 1: So the newsroom--what is the structure of the newsroom that you come into? Speaker 2: Where? At The New York Times? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Structure in what sense? Speaker 1: Structure like the managing editor, the--you know, you're, you're part of this you said metro desk, right? Speaker 2: So, at that time-- Speaker 1: 'Cause it--this is a time when newspapers are suffering. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. I mean basically-- Speaker 1: And there's a--you guys are a new crop coming in. There's a--and there're older people there, but The New York Ti- New York Times was really hurting at this point-- Speaker 2: When--that-- Speaker 1: --it's coming back. Speaker 2: Yeah, but what happens is I mean, right at--like around the time when I--when I left, the last year and a half, two years, very rocky, very unstable because one, newspapers were trying to figure out how do we monetize what's happening online? And until that point, even though every newspaper had a website, you--you're still not devoting your full attention to the website. The website is still kind of the, the, the stepchild because we are a newspaper, and not only that, we are The New York Times. Getting that tactile, open that thing up; it's The New York Times. And so when you go to The New York Times, most people--there are lot of people there who, who will pass on the glory there. And so the people who have been there remembered in its--the full height of its glory days. So when I got there I think there was turbulent times because they ended up having to lay off a, a bunch of people. There were round and after round of layoff. The, the morale was, was getting, you know, kind of low. The, the fact that other news organizations online were rising--and not necessarily competing with The New York Times, 'cause you can't necessarily compete in equality, but you compete for eyes. And then--so, so now we're at a, a situation where several years later, you know, some startup Internet company with a lot of money can hire top talent and produce a level of quality that is comparable in some ways, you know (laughter). And so now the competition is even greater, because you know I work for MSNBC now, great crop of journalists. Yahoo News is doing good work; even BuzzFeed and Gawker, who are not news gathering or- organizations necessarily, have produced some great news--The Huffington Post. We had a, a guy named David Wood who did a great, great series of stories on the toll that the war is having on, on veterans, the injuries, won a Pulitzer Prize [Pulitzer Prize for National Reporting]. The Huffington Post had been around for eight years; and so the landscape is changing now. And so I think there still is an internal struggle in some of the older, more influential, illustrative news organizations because what do we do? And can you continue to maintain young talent. But also internally can we afford to--what they charge for their advertising, you know, how--if we're--if we're gonna move over to online, we--you can't charge hundred thousand dollars for a, a certain page ad online, you just can't. So I think there's still that in- internal organiza- struggle. Story_ID: 651702 Speaker 1: So did you--so you're saying no mentors? I'm going to throw out--[HistoryMaker] Brent Staples, [HistoryMaker] Dana Canedy, no? Speaker 2: Brent Staples was one who wasn't a mentor to me. Again, part of this might be me--one, they're in a different world. So when you're in the newsroom of The New York Times, not only is it huge, but metro is isolated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The foreign desk is isolated; food and culture is isolated. Brent Staples, had a great conversa- couple of great conversations with him. He gave me a signed copy of his book ['Parallel Time: Growing Up in Black and White'], which was amazing, tale of growing up in Chester, Pennsylvania. It was great, but we never built a relationship there. Dana Canedy, never built a relationship there. There were never a, a whole bunch of opportunities either that I took or offered--and I will say that, that I took or were offered to build those relationships necessarily. And that's another way I think these organizations--not to say in my particular situation or not, but how do you foster better relationships with your young people of color, or your people of color period, because the universe is different in these places. You are dealing with the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yales [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]--Harvard and Yale culture, and you are dealing with mostly upper middle, wealthy--you know, a wealthy class of people. And not saying all black folks come in the newsroom come from economically depressed situations, but those cultures are foreign. When, when I--I've had conversations with folks and I can naturally adapt, but they're talking about Nantucket [Massachusetts] or something, I don't have any experience with Nantucket. I don't have a frame of reference, you know. Now I have brunch as a grown man (laughter), but who--that kind of culture clash; and how do we make it easier? And I think that the newsrooms acro- I've never been in a newsroom except for The Philadelphia Tribune that had a number of black people. The Huffington Post because we have Black Voices so our whole team was black. But any mainstream organization you go, black faces are few and far between. Story_ID: 651703 Speaker 1: So you le- you decide you're gonna get out of The Times [The New York Times] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's an opportunity; yeah, it's time. Speaker 1: Okay. And so how--what happens then? How does the opportunity--'cause Huffington Post [The Huffington Post] is really, at that point is not viewed as a news-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --news--okay. Speaker 2: Well, at that point they were still--there was a merger that happened, Huffington Post and AOL [AOL, Inc.], right? Speaker 1: Oh, you come at the time of the merger. Speaker 2: Exactly, at the time. So Huffington Post before then had been making a name for itself in the political arena, right. They were doing great work in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Arianna Huffington, who is like this magnificent force (laughter)--Arianna Huffington, if you're ever in her presence, she's a power and you can feel it. But so I got word, they were supposed to be having some--Huffington Post was supposed to be launching something called--Huffington Post and Arianna Huffington and-- Speaker 1: It was gonna be-- Speaker 2: Sheila--Sheila Smith [sic.]. Speaker 1: --Sheila Johnson [HistoryMaker Sheila C. Johnson]. Speaker 2: Sheila Johnson, Sheila Johnson. They were supposed to be doing something called--what was it called? It was a really cool name, black--black something--wasn't Black Voices, it was black--whatever it was. And so I started talking to some folks out in the industry-- Speaker 1: And this is--this is interesting because people are wondering what that is-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because you have The Root [theroot.com], you have the TheGrio-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and you have Black America Web and, and you know-- Speaker 2: And then the old Black Voices before the merger honestly was not a good--it was--it was--it was pretty horrible actually; it was pretty bad. So I would--I didn't know anything about the AOL merger yet, because it didn't happen until I was in the process of already, you know, looking into this situation. So it's supposed to be called this, this great merger where it was gone be--everything they say about sounds like it's gonna be really great and strong and have money behind it. So I'm saying if I can--like in Harlem [New York, New York], one thing I noticed with The New York Times somebody needs to convince them--sometimes a great story is a great story. But you have to posit it in a way that speaks to the readership. So sometimes in having these conversations with editors, which really helps flesh out a story, it ends up coming down to: okay, well, basically why does someone coming in from Long Island [New York] care about this? Which is basically saying, well, why do white people care about this? And I don't know if for a story I need to worry about why you care about it. You care about it because here's the situation, whatever the situation is, whatever the color is. So I get word of this new thing happening. I started having conversations with, with some of these folks. And there was a guy named--I don't know why I can't think of his name right now. I don't know, his name is slipping me now, right. So we're having these conversations, and he's saying basically whatever happens with the Black Voices situation, whatever black thing is, we're gonna hire at Huffington Post; and if, if you--we'll figure--we'll find a, a place for you. Peter Goodman [Peter S. Goodman], Peter Goodman. He said, "You know, regardless of what happens, you know, we'd like to hire you; and we can go from there." Ultimately what happens is the AOL and Huffington Post merge, right, and so now they have Black Voices--the Black Voices property. They essentially gutted for the most part, leaving a few people; reorganized, you know, I'm the first kind of, you know, name hire; hire a bunch of, you know, ed- some other folks, and Black Voices is born. Story_ID: 651704 Speaker 1: So who's on staff at Black Voices at this point besides yourself? Speaker 2: N- oh, I'm not there anymore. You know I'm at MSNBC (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, I'm saying-- Speaker 2: --oh, then--oh, I'm sorry, at that point. Speaker 1: --at that point (laughter). Speaker 2: At that point, we had Rebecca Carroll, who is an author and was part of Black America Web in the very beginning. She is hired on as business and managing editor. You had a guy named Brennan Williams, who is still there today. He's one of the last still there, who is an entertainment reporter. They hired a good friend and, and fabulous reporter named Julee Wilson, who covers fashion. You had Gene Demby, who I worked with at, at The New York Times. He came as--he launched a site called postbourgie.com, which is a very snarky--he's, he's what--sometimes we call--he's like a--a new Negro kind of thing. He--he's snarky, very astute politically, doesn't necessarily--he--I think he grapples with black identity in certain ways. He's of the ilk like, you know, I don't--why don't fraternities and black churches and religion in general--so he is a different kind of black experience, very smart guy. And the way he did PostBourgie, just amazing--the right level of comedy, snark with insight. So he's just this, this kind of different kind of, you know, brother who's really great, a good buddy of mine. So he's the front page editor, and they--and they incorporate PostBourgie kind of in some of the content. Who else is there? Speaker 1: But these are even different kind of models too-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right. Speaker 1: --in everything because to even--no other traditional journalism-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --is gonna incorporate something-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --else--essentially he has a blog is what you're saying. Speaker 2: Right, he, he had a blog. I mean yeah, he had a blog that he had been running while he was at The New York Times. But the whole idea is, one thing The Huffington Post has mastered: one, they mastered the, the, the art of getting eyeballs to the site. As they say, you, you, you come for--excuse--quote my language--you come for the booze, you stay for the Bernanke; so you come for some of the salacious headlines. Sometimes it might be something, but you, you find yourself reading about Ben Bernanke or the political fights. So they've mastered the art of just let's gather everyone here, and it works. And so in delivering your information--some of it, though, it's--and they've, they've caught flack for it, what they call aggregation. So when you're--in rewrites and, and link outs where you kind of taking information that's already out there, switching the words around a little bit, have a link here, have a link there; and if you do it in a sloppy way it's nothing short of plagiarism. But when you do it well, what aggregation is, is you're creating a brand new thing, where I take my context of what's happening say in Harlem [New York, New York] with my past of gentrification's happening, this happening. And then a new story came out in The New York Times that is citing some study that shows that the, the, the, the you know, native born population there is declining; then I take something from Yahoo New- [Yahoo News]--then you're creating this whole brand new situation, and that's what they, they do well when they do it really well. Story_ID: 651705 Speaker 1: What did you learn there [The Huffington Post]? Speaker 2: One--that was coming out of The New York Times, where, you know, where is my place? Did I lose my steam? Not necessarily questions about my talent, but I was just like what, what, what, what, what does this experience mean? Am I--figuring out how I've benefited from the situation, how I've maybe lost some steam, and I'm questioning: maybe should I've stayed in New Orleans [Louisiana]? All these things are going through my mind, making that shift; and one, being the reporter there, being the man in that situation, being a true journalist in a situation where there aren't many true, traditional journalists, right. And at that point, I already had six, seven may- probably about eight years in the game, so I was senior--I was a senior reporter then. So here's my first senior position and my title is senior reporter. I'm also national, so I'm, I'm flying to Chicago [Illinois]; I'm flying to Florida. What I learned is one, to trust my instincts. When I end up being one of the first journalists to break the, the news of Trayvon Martin's death, I trusted my instincts. And because I was not in a traditional news organization, I didn't necessarily have to go to the managing editor or one of the boss-bosses and say here's the story. We were our own thing creating our own content. We decided-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --what was important. Speaker 1: So how did you do that then? Speaker 2: I--I wrote a story about--I, I wrote a story about--I, I was--I wrote, wrote some other story awhile--maybe two months before this situation happened. And see I'm trying to keep my sources cool here. But anyway, I ended up having a source that respected my work and that I had dealt with in the past who said, "There's this thing happening in Florida, and no one's really reporting on it yet. But it's a young man who was killed with little more than Skittles and a--and a bag of ice tea. And this guy [George Zimmerman] who did it, he's, he's a--he's a neighborhood watch volunteer. It's not right at all. You need to look into this." So I was like okay, so I ended up using my sources, connected folks; and talked to the attorney, got the father [Tracy Martin] on the phone. And this is four days later--five days later. It happened on that Sunday; and then the--this ended up being like less than a week later. And so I wrote the story and, and I knew immediately that, yeah, this--something's not right here. No--there was--he was not in the commission of a crime the police say. The police say this young man didn't have any weapons on him at this time. What's the provocation, you know? It just--none of it made any sense. And I'm getting the, the police chief [Bill Lee, Jr.] on the line--he stopped talking after, after I started talking to him, you know, after I published my first articles--basically saying that, you know, the way he illustrated the, the scenario, something just didn't seem right, you know, young--you know, something didn't seem right at all about it. And so I ended up, after the first story, for the next--you know, I wrote a story a day almost for the next fifty days almost going back and forth; and the story blew up. And again, when I--when I was the first national print reporter to write about it. Now the, the local press had, had done--covered it, but they didn't cover it in a way of there may be--there's something fishy happening here. They covered it like a straight up news story, like I would have covered it if I was a local news reporter, saying, "A seventeen year old man was killed yester- ," dah, dah, dah. Once, you know, I weighed in, and then others started weighing in, and then we all started weighing in, and then the pundits started weighing in, and then Ta-Nehisi Coates weighed in, and Char- Charles Blow [HistoryMaker Charles M. Blow]; and it just came--it became Trayvon Martin, as we know now what Trayvon Martin is. And I think I learned from that experience trust your gut; you know what's important. Going back to--there was a time period, especially at The New York Times where: do the editors know better than I know? Do, do--how, how do I do this? When it's like going back to the early days of when you're in a community and you're talking to people, and you get your feeling in your gut and thi--go with your--go with your gut, go with your instincts, go with your heart; go with it. And so from that experience I went with it; and I, I think that it exposed something and, and I think it proved to be a very pivotal moment in our country. Trayvon Martin's name is now in textbooks, you know (laughter). And I feel like to be a part that, again, an honor to use my, my, my craft and my skill as a journalist to, to shine light where, where no light hadn't been shown. Story_ID: 651706 Speaker 1: Journalism is coming back. I mean, when you came--you came through a traditional program. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: So you're on, you're on several different cusps. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So you came through a traditional program. You come into the--you know, you're even into--you start in traditional jour- and you've hit a lot of things. You've hit the black press. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Right. Speaker 1: You know, so (laughter)--and you really shouldn't be hard on the black press either, because-- Speaker 2: No, I, I-- Speaker 1: --they, they--it's just resources too-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --a lot of-- Speaker 2: I love the black press. Speaker 1: --its resources. But the thing--people come into our nonprofit, say, "Why are you doing it this way?" Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 1: (Laughter) But, but no--but then the other thing is you come into The Times [The New York Times] when that news place is changing. A lot of the--I mentioned some people who are still there, but a lot of people have left; and people historically have had bad--you know, African Americans have had bad experiences. So what I--but what strikes me, and I wanna talk about--I mean because what is the difference between movement, 'cause you're an activist, and you were able to use your inside knowledge for your community in a--in a news or- well, I would call Huffington Post still-- Speaker 2: Oh, it's-- Speaker 1: --quasi--I mean it's-- Speaker 2: Well, well, no, it's, it's almost like the separation between-- Speaker 1: Churches? Speaker 2: --well, no in the newspaper you have your op-ed section, which operates--they have complete autonomy. The Huffington Post commits real acts of journalism. Huffington Post is a newsgathering organization--they won a Pulitzer Prize for their reporting [Pulitzer Prize for National Reporting]. Every day in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] they were in there reporting. I think the thing is, in going back to the Trayvon Martin situation, it's almost similar in many ways to--in New Orleans [Louisiana]. We're not an activist for the sake of being an activist. You are shining a light where no light is being shown. So in pushing your--certain stories out from a certain vantage point in itself is kind of an act of activism in some sense. But I think with Trayvon Martin it's more the freedom to not pretend that my vantage point as a black man does not at all have any sway in the stories that I'm reporting--not necessarily in the manner of which I'm reporting. The manner of which we're reporting is the journalism part. Get your facts (unclear)--correct--doub- check and double check; always--you know, if your mother tells you she loves you, check her references and double check that; check everything, facts are lined up, there's structure. But I think now we are in dangerously so sometimes when it goes wrong, but we should be comfortable enough--not should--we're becoming more comfortable in using our vantage point, whether it's your racial vantage point, your political vantage point--to use that as the plateau from which you jump into a story. Speaker 1: Well, there's also another thing maybe, and I will ask is it that these new--the new forms of media are allowing for more diverse voices maybe? To-- Speaker 2: Well, you know what? But also we have to--I think like depends on who we're talking about 'cause some are not news organi- organizations. They may, you know, wear the mask of a news organization, but if they're inserting opinion into every--if all our pieces include opinion, journalism does not include opinion. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: And I think that's the difference. Story_ID: 651707 Speaker 1: So what we're doing--the, the hybrid, though, is say for example, I work for MSNBC now, where if I go on television or I, I go on the 'Melissa Harris-Perry' show-- Speaker 2: Now why, why did you--why did you move to MSNBC? Speaker 1: The, the move to MSNBC was kind of twofold. When The Huffing- when the Trayvon Martin story was really blowing up, I was on MSNBC every night for The Huffington Post. So I'm down there at the rally. I'm down there, I had been talking to the people in the community, talking with the family; and so MSNBC was using me to you know, tell the story of what's happening down there. And I noticed a strange thing happening in which I hadn't noticed in the past. There was a lot of energy around my written story, and The Huffington Post had such a high level of engagement where you could see that thousands of comments--there will be a story and a millions views--eight hundred thousand views on a story. I mean eight hundred thousand people--the stretch was deep. But then when I would go on air, Twitter followers would start to bump. People start to spread the stories around. Peop- it was--it was a different kind of energy. And so I was happy at The Huffington Post. It was--it was a great opportunity. Again, I was the man at Huffington Post. I felt good, I felt respected; I wasn't cloistered off. One of the issues with The Huffington Post is that it is so segmented and segregated, where you have Black Voices; Latino Voices; women; gay; politics; business; environment. It's so--where everyone is kind of cloistered off. But fortunately I was in a position where my stuff was in the politics section, on the front of it and everything. But I--but I felt pretty good there. I was--I had respect and freedom and everything. But for me it was like, you know what? If I can continue to do what I'm doing, because they--MSNBC--Richard Wolffe, who was--who hired me, who is the executive director, said, "We're gonna do something big." The deal with Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] and NBC was over. We lost--they lost the URL, msnbc.com. "While we're waiting to get it back, we're gonna build our brand new website. It's gonna be progressive; it's gonna be great. You can speak to the issues that you care about, continue to do what you do the way you've been doing it; and also you're going to have the opportunity to do TV." So for me it's like well, if I can do the same thing I had been doing at a, a very brand new place--I love that new energy, that startup kind of feel. I'm continuing to--now I'm even--I'm even more confident and better as a journalist and striking there on my own and doing my thing, but I can also tell this story on you know, the Meli- 'Melissa Harris-Perry' show. Why not? It's a great opp- and nowadays because I've been on a cusp of as--as the industry is changing, you kind of need to brand yourself also. You kind of need to get your, your work, and your face, and your name out there in as many different mediums as possible. That may be different in the past. I still have buddies today--my buddy, John [John Eligon], we have this conversation all the time. He's still at The New York Times. He, he's like go on TV, he feel like it's--like they're stealing his work almost, like, "I'm not gonna go on TV and talk about this. You need to come and read it," which is--that's traditional--that's how we viewed it. But now we don't have time (laughter). If you, you really want to make, make--you mean to make your way in this industry now you gotta do it. Do it all; do as much as you can. And of course, to me at the--at the core of it, it's journalism and reporting. You can net- and that's the problem with, as the industry changes, fortunately we came up in--through traditional means. These young people now--I, I taught a semester at Long Island University [Brooklyn, New York], and I was sending them out on these different assignments. And one of the students said, "Do I actually have to go, go to their house? Can I just email them? I can actually go--?" I was like, "Wait, wait, wait, what? Do you actually, actually have to go and talk to the people that you're reporting about? Do you actually have to go out and knock on somebody's door? Can you get the information by email?" And that's--the sad part is, as we're transitioning and we see that the market in, in the industry's consumed by bloggers and everybody online is a journalist, I don't know if we're educating these kids--we're not giving these kids those hardcore journalism roots that transcend everything else. If you give them the--that, that good reporting skill and give them that--what true journalism is, you can do that online. You can have those words appear anywhere you want. But if we're--if we're not gonna educate them on those baseline skills, the five Ws, and that ethics of journalism, none of it--they're gonna get sucked up, and they're gonna--what's gonna happen is you come to MSNBC where clearly we come from a liberal point of view, or what's importance for us is civil rights, and minority rights, and LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender], and--where we care about all those things, so the stories that we tell, it's not influencing me in one sense, it's influenced the stories that I tell. I'll go to a high school in Chicago [Illinois] and talk about school closings and violence where other ones might say well, the parents need to stop letting the kids hang out there. But anywhere, that was a long story. I don't know if I got to the question about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, no--but no I think that that--I think that that's good. It's, it's an interesting thing. There's been such a paramount shift. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You're old school and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --new school at the same time (laughter). Speaker 1: And, and almost--and almost culturally or socially coming up on that tail end of the '90s [1990s] where we--when I was coming up we didn't have Internet at first. I was probably one of the last generations that didn't have Internet. We didn't have Internet until we were in like high school. So we didn't have any of that stuff. We, we didn't have cell phones. I remember getting cell phones. Like so fortunately like, we were young enough to adapt to it, but old enough to remember not having it. Same thing in this journalism where our generation there are a bunch of journalists of my age that have come through the industry with me. And we all have the benefit of being able to adapt (laughter) because you know we're a part of all this change. Story_ID: 651708 Speaker 1: So where, where are you--so right now you are a na- you're national reporter-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --right, for their digital unit? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: What, what are--what are their plans and what do they wanna do? Speaker 2: We're still--we're still building out, so we re-launched msnbc.com. So if you go to msnbc.com right now, it's a brand new look. They filled out the team, so there're like four or five other great reporters that I'm surrounded by, hiring new editors every day, figuring out how to still get our great reporting out there in a way that is, you know, easily be di- easily digestible from the--you know consumers. It's, it's a brand new day, and it's exciting. And so far we're doing good, good work because they're giving us the freedom to go to the story. You know, if you--if you cover reproductive rights, go to Alabama where they're fighting this out. If, if for me I'm (unclear) school closings in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], go to Philly and figure it out; go to Chicago [Illinois] and figure it. If you have to go to Florida, go to Florida. I just got back from Oklahoma. You gotta go do--go do it. And so it's--the, the tricky thing is you know, as a journalist--and I'm, I'm getting more comfortable with it now because my, my byline and the work I do is airtight, and you can't say that it's influenced one way or the other, but we're in an environment where there's punditry and a lot of opinion, ad even if I go on one of the shows, I've given a little more room to, to use my opinion a little bit. We're talking about the state of black men in America and gun violence. I feel comfortable saying young black men are dying every day tragically and far too often. I can say that, where writing that, some people would be like whoa, what are you--what, what, what--it's not about you, 'cause we come from the school of none of this--don't become the story. Journalists are not supposed to become the story; do not insert yourself. But now we are in a place where if I've been covering gun violence in, in--you know, in communities and I go on and talk about it, I'm gonna talk about the facts, but I'm also gonna say you know, I look into a mother's eyes and A, B, C; or this is what's happening, this is how people are feeling, and the black church is feeling like this 'cause I've talked to 'em. I can--and I can say it in a way that is, you know--that you know, is, is based on how I'm viewing the situation. But it's, it's tricky because there is social media now. We just had an editor fired because she tweeted something--but now was it that bad? Maybe not, but are you also givering--giving--ammunition to the conservative movement who wants to attack us and say the liberal media is doing A, B and C? Or are we--basically that's what it is: are we giving ammunition to the--to the opposition? Because now we actually are on the opposite side of a, a real social war, political war that's going on between conservative and tea c- Tea Party conservatives and progressives and lib- liberals. We, we really are (laughter) kind of on that side of things; and so that's tricky. So I try to stay clear of it as much as I can in certain ways and, and avoid the pitfalls. Especially with social media, be careful what you say out there because once you're kind of a limited public figure, or you're in the media, you know, it's not going anywhere. So it's, it's tricky, but if you--if you do it the right way, you can speak about issues that matter--that really matter. And, and it has a profound effect to this day, whether it's in the newspaper or whether it's on TV and online. And so it's a--it's a great place to be, but as, as you mentioned, it's, it's--we're in, other side of a cusp. It's, it's a brand new day in journalism. Story_ID: 651709 Speaker 1: So how is that gonna relate to TheGrio and things? You know, 'cause--and I mean I think I have a young person who actually works there. Speaker 2: Oh yeah? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Her name is Alicia Maule I think. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I know Alicia. Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 2: I know Alicia. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Alicia's good. Speaker 1: Yeah, no, she--'cause she was telling me all this--you know, all that's going on. Speaker 2: Yeah, there--there's a lot of changes. Especially what's interesting to me is it's almost like when we talk about the relevance of black newspapers, or HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]; or black institutions, or institutions that cater to a black audience or black people, I think we're--there's always gonna be questions of the relevance because as we know, in less mainstream--unless the mainstream can coopt it in some way, whether they can monetize it and capitalize some way, once it's not fashionable or it's not en vogue, they can kind of do away with you. And what we've seen I think with TheGrio I think is in--is in--is in a point of I'm not sure what they're gonna do. I'm not sure if will be the same Grio you see now in a year from now. I don't know if Black Voices will be the same Black Voices as, as it is now a year from now. But I think we're still trying to figure it out because unfortunately the same lack of diversity in newsrooms that same lack of diversity is everywhere. And so sometimes I see, say for TheGrio for example, is there a benefit for--to tell us to write a story about a black mother who killed her three black kids? What's the redeeming value in that? Where does that speak anything broad about our culture? So far too often these websites fall into the traps of telling a black story because there's pressure on what is a black story. You know what I'm saying? And so like Huffington Post [The Huffington Post] for example, they'll always be a fight when say, Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles] has her baby; or Whitney Houston dies. It's like a very important black story, but do we get the right to produce that or does entertainment get it? But now we definitely get the black murder. You can have the black murder. You can have the black desperate unemployment numbers. You can have the dismal black information, but that's not all of what we are. We are hurt, and ailing, and broke, and hungry; but we are beautiful, and strong, and making strides in so many ways. And can we tell that story, and can you tell that story in a mainstream organization? Will that mainstream organization allow you to do so? One of the, the, the thing--the things is you tell a story well. Do real journalism and then nobody can deny you (laughter). If you do that they can't stop you because the proof is in the pudding. But again, there, there was a time where everyone had to have a black site, 'cause The Root [theroot.com] is out there and The Washington Post is making money off of that. The, TheGrio's out there--you, you--so everybody has to do it, but do they really wanna do it? Do they really wanna put their resources behind telling the African American experience? Do they--are they really gonna hire journalists to really do the reporting; or are you gonna have somebody just cut and paste? And that's where we are, and I don't know if that will ever change until we are owning and operating our own organizations and institutions. Until then, you know--and even the black press, talking about lack of resources--that's the problem. If you have a, a, a kick butt journalist out there working for no matter what the name is on, on the masthead, you're gonna--you know you can do it. But if they can't hire people that have any--have any skill or experience, you know, and it's run like a small business--what can you do? You know, so. Story_ID: 651710 Speaker 1: What--as you sit here, where do you want your career to go? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I don't know. I think--I think I wanna be able to--I mean, I'm honestly at a point now where I wanna find a way to use my talent and skills to make enough money to where I can actually do something that really impacts the people in real, meaningful ways--whether that means feeding someone physically with a sandwich, feeding a, a child's mind with a literacy program or teaching them journalism. It's gonna take me a couple of years, but I need to find a way to either continue on the path I'm, I'm going to start really getting down to writing books like I plan on doing, to really make some money so I can ju- (laughter)--so I can say you know what? My, my attention is gonna be in getting into the prisons and getting them ready for com- something. I don't know what it is. But I have a family now also, so you know, I wanna be altruistic and go--but also I need--I need to get paid 'cause I have a young daughter [Nola Lee] who's eighteen months old now, and she needs the--you know, we need to get her where she needs to be. And so career wise, I'm, I'm gonna follow my instincts. I'm gonna follow my heart and, and let that dictate, because you know, even without the--what I think has been an awesome career. I feel good about my experiences--and, and you know great, good money and, and everything; and, and a name that I hope is starting to mean something when people hear it. I still will have been fine if--'cause I am somebody. I'm fine without it, (laughter) so, so I don't necessarily owe--I never have. My mother [Wanda Worthington Taylor] would always say from a poem she read once, there's no station in life, not when you graduate school, not when the kids are out of the house. There's no station where you're finally content. There is--there--I don't believe in it. There's no point where I've made it; it's just an evolution, right. And so I, I--you know, I hope it evolves; I hope I continue to be able to do good work; I, I hope I'm in a position where people still wanna pay for good work (laughter); I hope I'm in a position to really offer the next generation what Richard Wright and Malcolm X and so many people that came before me offered me as a sense that I see myself in them and their work, and be proud of it, and feel good about it, and attack this world because it's short. Go out there and do it, you know, and do it for the people, and do it for yourself, and do it for your family. If I can to- do that, you know, I--I'd, I'd be fine (laughter). Story_ID: 651711 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your legacy, what you want your legacy to be. And I want you to think of that in terms of your own, you know, life and career. Speaker 2: I would love it to be--I did--I did it for the people. I really bel- I really--I really believe that so much of the strength that I feel I have and I made it is because I always saw the strength and beauty in us. Because if we rely on other people and how other people view us to determine how we see ourselves, which I think we've done to a large extent, it's not gonna get us anywhere, and we'll continue to suffer. Until we start defining our own legacies and defining how the world views us, I, I think we're gonna continue to be in trouble, because self esteem matters. If you don't believe you have any possibility of becoming anything in life or supporting your family in any meaningful way--that impacts generations. And, and so I would--I would hope that a young man or woman or young journalist would say oh, [HistoryMaker] Trymaine Lee did it and he's from--he's from Chesilhurst [New Jersey]. You know they actually gave me a Chesilhur- a, a, a day--Trymaine Lee day in Chesilhurst? In one year like October whatever it was, years ago, a Trymaine Lee day, and when I went I was so humbled and so honored because people from Chesilhurst; and Sicklerville [New Jersey]; and East Berlin [Berlin, New Jersey]; and Camden [New Jersey], you know. It's hard for us out there, and so I would love for, for someone to say you know, and, "And he's still just like me, you know, and, and he's still one of us," you know. And, and I would--I would--I, I would love that to be my legacy--and that you can--by, by doing good work you'll make people recognize who you are. (Laughter) It'll make 'em recognize, and, and not for recognition's sake, but bringing light to those stories, that I could do a Trayvon Martin and do it so well that people are saying, "Whoa, what happened? Let's examine stand your ground laws, the way we view black men, stereotypes, gun laws." You, you can do that; you have that power; or in those smaller moments where I went to this community. I'm not scared to come to this community. And your son was killed, and I know he's more than just another number on the tally, and here's his story, and here's what's happening, and here's the failings of all these institutions that failed our people from the schools to the, the way we're policing. If I could be remembered as doing that and fighting hard, you know, I, I would--that's, that's, that's what I would--I would want my legacy to be--and, and for, for my daughter [Nola Lee] and any other children I have to look at my father and say, "Daddy did his thing, and he stood up and he tried hard, you know, and he overcame, and when he was knocked down he got back up," you know. And there was gone be some rain sometimes, but you push through it. I would love--I mean I--that's, that's what I'm, I'm trying to do. And we're all human so hopefully I can just keep up the energy that it takes to do that and, and the perseverance. But, but I would--I would love for that to be my legacy. Story_ID: 651712 Speaker 1: What would you want the legacy--what do you think the legacy of your generation and the black continuum is going to be? Speaker 2: I, I think--I think that's--I think that's difficult because we--we're coming--my generation, we, we are the hip hop generation, the, the, the, the real hip hop generation. We are the, the, the, the generation that came up during the crack [crack cocaine] era, with all the violence; and with our parents, and our, you know, aunts and uncles succumbing to, to abuse. But we've also been the ones to, to continue to fill up HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], and community college, and any college we can get into and become journalists, and doctors, and lawyers. When you come--especially like a place like New York [New York], when you start going through your network, there are some magnificent young people out here, awesome and doing great things. And I, I--but I also think that we've also--our generation has become complacent, because now again, I'm thirty-five years old. Now I am at home with my family. I think we, we could have been more active in, in fighting some of the injustices that were all around us, fighting for so many of our rights--because I think we, we, we were getting into these schools, and I think we, we became--we were born in the '80s [1980s], so we do have a little bit of selfishness and self centeredness about us, and I, I think we could have done more. When I look at this next generation, especially post-Trayvon Martin, look at the Dream Defenders and all these groups around the country of young people who are going out in the thousands and thousands and protesting the wrongs being done to people of color, and wom- women and gay people. That's a fight. My generation, we weren't necessarily fighting. When I was in college we were fighting for affirmative action. We went to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and we were fighting those ways, and we were reading a lot, and learning a lot, and, and we were--but--and we, we were embracing who we are; but this next generation--'cause now they're smart enough and they have access enough to all this information, and they can see it and say, oh, we can organize. I can do this on Inter- on Twitter, on Facebook. Let's get together. We, we didn't have that. So hope--I hope--I, I--you know. I don't know, you know. I, I, I have--I have faith in, in the next generation, though. I really do because they're, they're fighting, and in a way that we, you know, we, we just didn't, so, yeah. Story_ID: 651713 Speaker 1: This is the program to Latoya Lawton's funeral. She was the young lady I said, you know was, was like my best friend in, in high school. And she had passed away. She had drowned between our junior and senior year. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is me interviewing a New York City [New York, New York] councilman named Jumaane or (pronunciation) Jumaane Williams [Jumaane D. Williams]. I forgot how you pronounce his first name. Speaker 2: Year? Speaker 1: This would have been like 2011. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is--this is young me. This is me in ninth grade with that-- Speaker 1: So you're at? You're at school. Speaker 2: Milton Hershey School [Hershey, Pennsylvania]. Yeah, that's--I love that picture, 'cause that--that's who we were. That's, that's kind of it right there. That's (laughter). Speaker 1: That's cute--see? Wow you are--you look so young there, too. Speaker 2: A baby. Oh yeah, this is during Hurricane Katrina. We were--we were going out to see if some rumors were, were correct that a bunch of people had gotten trapped in a, a gymna- a school gymnasium in Eastern New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is--seen with other members of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ]. This year, 2006, I won the Emerging Journalist of the Year Award. And to my-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do it from, looking from left to right. Speaker 2: Okay. What's this guy--I forgot his name. I can actually name everybody. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, you don't have to name everybody, but--everybody but the significant ones. Speaker 2: Okay I was gonna say this is--to my--in the picture to my left in the brown dress that's Errin Haines [Errin Haines Whack]. She was my co-Emerging Journalist of the Year, so we were honored together. Speaker 1: Oh, she's adorable. No wonder that's why you say it (laughter). Speaker 2: Ah, that's my baby. Speaker 1: You're saying, "Don't touch, don't touch--!" Speaker 2: That is my baby. No, that is my, my eighteen month old daughter. That--her name is Nola [Nola Lee], after New Orleans [Louisiana]--that's N-O-L-A. Speaker 1: Oh, and this is my immediate family, so to my right in the green sweater is my sister, Erica Lee; that's my, my mother holding the baby, Wanda Taylor [Wanda Worthington Taylor]; to her--on her right is my niece, Brianna Blunt [ph.]; behind her is her father who is my brother, Oliver Lee; and you can barely see her in the back, but that's my mom's best friend, Geneva Boles [ph.]. Speaker 2: So your mother, she's been able to see your success then? Speaker 1: Um-hm, oh, she's, she's very proud of me. Speaker 2: She should be. Speaker 1: This is my, my [maternal] grandmother who is passed January of last year. It was ir- Ida Worthington Dyitt, D-Y-I-T-T. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is another of my little daughter Nola, who had some fun with a--with a bowl of grits. I normally don't like that kind of--(unclear) but I turned around and I was like, yeah, like there she is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) It's a pretty picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is my, my brother, my sister--my brother, Oliver Lee; my sister, Erica Lee; and me as a baby. Speaker 1: How do you spell Erica? Speaker 2: E-R-I-C-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is as I mentioned how my best friends went to Milton Hershey--everyone in this picture except for two went Milton Hershey. So these are my, my groomsmen at my wedding: Quincy Phillips [ph.] to the left. He actually lives in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh, he does? Speaker 2: Yeah. Bernard Adams [ph.] is next. He lives in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. I'm in the middle. The next person in the background is Ashton Maple [ph.]--that's my brother in law. The little guy is my nephew, my, my oldest--my brother's son, Oliver Lee, Jr. In between him and the guy on the far right is my best friend and the best man, Martin Ogbugawe [ph.]; and Jafar Martin [ph.] on the far right. And we went to--I went to school with all them. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who's the unnamed person behind your nephew? Speaker 2: I for- that's one of-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: --I don't know this guy. That was one of my brother in law's friends, I don't know. Speaker 1: This was, I guess, two thousand--the 2012 National Association of Black Journalists annual conference. That's the moderator, on the far left is Sunny Hostin with CNN. The next young lady is Daralene Jones, she's actually at the NBC affiliate [WCAU-TV] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. The next person is Joy-Ann Reid, who actually is--will soon have her own show on MSNBC. That's me; and then on the far right is Corey Dade, who writes for--works for--I don't know if he's a freelancing now or he's with The Root [theroot.com] and he's doing a bunch of stuff; that's Corey Dade. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Corey Dade. Speaker 1: Oh, that's, that's me as--that's when I went to Milton Hershey. That was chubby me. That was--that was me. That's me at maybe--you know, I think I might--this is might have been the day I interviewed maybe. Yeah, this is the day I interviewed. Speaker 2: Oh, the day you interviewed? Speaker 1: Yeah, because when I went up there I wouldn't have had been dressed like that. When I went I wasn't with-- Speaker 2: Interviewed for which--? Speaker 1: Milton Hershey. Speaker 2: For Mil- oh, okay. Speaker 1: I'm pretty sure that's it because the way I was dressed and the name tag. Speaker 2: (Unclear) chubby there. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah. And this, this is one of the pictures--this is me and that is a girl named Noelle Green [ph.]. But this is when, when I--when I think about the young people and I think about how we can't judge them. I look at this picture, and we all in the starter jackets and, and never smiling in pictures. We nev- I didn't start smiling in pictures until my wife [Gabrielle Maple Lee], and that's just like five years ago. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: You never--you just never smile. You always look like this. You always kind of just--you know, you don't wanna show any weakness. You just wanna be tough. Speaker 2: Oh, this is my [maternal] grandfather and my grandmother when they were-- Speaker 1: You have to give names. Speaker 2: Oh, this is my grand- my grandmother, ir- Ida Worthington at that point and--well, actually she (unclear) a Worthington, so yeah, Ida, Ida Worthington; then my grandfather, Horace Worthington. Speaker 1: And this is another picture--this is like my favorite picture of Latoya, the young lady who passed away between junior and senior year. We were on a--actually we were on a bus trip to see Coretta Scott King at Shippensburg University [Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania, Shippensburg, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Oh, you were? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So you were--oh, you--oh, you had activism in you all the time. Speaker 1: I think--I think from that, that one letter I wrote in sixth--fourth grade [at Chesilhurst Elementary School; Shirley B. Foster Elementary School, Chesilhurst, New Jersey] or whatever it was saying like, if they don't listen to us we should burn the school down. Speaker 2: This, this is--at some point in the early '70s [1970s] that's my grandfather, Horace Worthington seated; and my gra- my mother, Wanda Taylor. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a picture on graduation day. On the left is Charray Davis [ph.]; and, and the other girl is Makata Hop- Hopkins [Makata Hopkins (ph.)]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's from Hershey? Speaker 1: That's from Milton Hershey, graduation from Milton Hershey School. Speaker 2: This is another picture of me at Milton Hershey School during track season. And pe- people don't realize the, the endowment--it's the second richest high school in the world. Speaker 1: It is? Speaker 2: The endowment is in the billions. I mean it's-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is me during an awards ceremony at a National Association for Black Journalists [sic.] meeting. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and it must have been 2003--'2, 2002, 2003 there was a big march. The [U.S.] Supreme Court was hearing affirmative action versus Lee Bollinger, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] or Michigan State [sic.], one of those. And so we all went down to D.C. and, and marched in support of affirmative action. Speaker 1: This is a picture from my high school prom my twelfth grade year. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is me on the basketball team. I'm in the back row, second from the right. Speaker 2: This is--this is post-Katrina, maybe th- two or three weeks after the storm with--I forgot--the photographer's name is I think McCusker [John McCusker]. Speaker 1: Now what is this? Speaker 2: Oh, that was reporting on a game--I mean I was reporting on a story [for The New York Times]. This, this guy actually founded this youth baseball team in Harlem [New York, New York]; and so I was-- Speaker 1: Is it anyone--are you in there? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm actually--someone took a picture of me actually while I was--I'm in--I'm in the very back in between the two. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is me reporting on a story sometime probably in 2009. The guy on the right was a, a schoolteacher who started this youth baseball league to keep the kids out of trouble. Speaker 1: This is like my favorite picture of all time, and I wish it would have came, came out properly. But this is my, my mother and, and her, her parents, my grandparents; and all my uncles and aunts. Speaker 2: You have to go--can you name them, or? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: Okay, on the far left is Horace Worthington, Jr.--that's my uncle with the, with the, with the bowtie; up there is my uncle Clifford [ph.]; there's my mother with the Afro, seated; behind her is my aunt Cozette [ph.]; next to her is my uncle Clifford; next to him is my aunt Elizabeth [ph.]--my aunt Liz; to the far right is my uncle Gary [ph.]; seated is my aunt Patricia [ph.]--Aunt Pat; seated in the middle that's my, my grandfather, Horace Worthington; and seated below him is my grandmother, Ida Worthington. Speaker 2: That's my grandmother. This might have been actually the day I--you know what? This might actually have been the day I got there because-- Speaker 1: The day you got where? Speaker 2: 'Cause my grandmother's--at Milton Hershey because my grandmother just--the other picture I wasn't taking test, I was actually going because--this is a picture of me, my grandmother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause she took, she came with you-- Speaker 2: --'cause she--'cause she came with me, and I--she didn't come with me during that initial interview. Speaker 1: Right. 'Cause your mother was busy. Speaker 2: All right, this is another picture of me and Latoya. Again, no smile because that's kind of protocol for the time (laughter). Speaker 1: This is me and this woman from the Sidney Hillman Foundation [New York, New York]. I had won the, the Sidney Award [April Sidney Award] from my reporting on the Trayvon Martin case. And that would've been 2012 actually. Speaker 2: This is a more recent picture. I'm on the left, my sister Erica Lee is in the middle; and my brother, Oliver Lee is on the far right. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is an old school picture of my brother, Oliver, standing; and of me seated. Speaker 2: And this is me as a child. I'm not sure how old I would have been there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my, my sister, Erica Lee, on the right; and her daughter, Olivia Lee [ph.], on the left. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's that--that's the day my daughter was born. Speaker 1: That's your ha- that's the happy father picture. Speaker 2: That's my--that's my--that's my ba- I think people like--it's like the best job in the world. Like I would pick being a father and her father than anything else (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow. Speaker 2: I mean, she--she's learning, she's learning to like use her words, and she has a little bit-- Speaker 1: Oh, you're lovely. That's so nice. Speaker 2: I, I love--I love this baby. That little girl is--..