 Story_ID: 564461 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMaker [sic. The HistoryMakers]. Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you state your name and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: Christopher James Willie B., Leggett [HistoryMaker Dr. Christopher Leggett], L-E-G-G-E-T-T. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: Eleven, zero eight, sixty [November 8, 1960]. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an interventional cardiologist. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Nine, eleven, two thousand seven [September 11, 2007]. Story_ID: 564462 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food? What do you like to eat? Speaker 2: You know, a favorite food? I guess it would be a chocolate brownie. Speaker 1: And when you go on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess, I guess (laughter) that's the wrong answer as a doctor; maybe I should say salmon. Speaker 1: Is salmon one of your favorite foods? Speaker 2: I love salmon. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Now, what about your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year, I think, is fall. Speaker 1: Fall? And when you go on vacation, what's your favorite destination? Speaker 2: I don't know that I have a single favorite; we like a variety of locations-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and we just came back from Italy a few weeks ago, and that was wonderful. We love the beach, we love skiing, so I think it's a variety there. We love the West, anything outdoors--rafting, hiking--so--I think it's a variety of locations. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: I think I have a couple. I think the one that I like the most, or most recently, that has become a favorite, is--I heard this from a friend of mine and it goes like this. It says, "I belong everywhere I go because my best friend owns the world, who is Jesus Christ." And I think that that is an incredibly empowering statement because it, it really opens the entire planet to you, you never feel intimidated wherever you show up, and you always feel like you belong there. I think my other favorite, which I've had for a number of years, is some bible text, and it, it really says that, "If any man lacks wisdom, let him ask God, who giveth to all men freely, but let him ask in faith and nothing wavering, for he that wavereth is like the wave of the sea tossed to and fro" [James 1:5-6]. And that statement for me actually leaves me in a place where whenever I am uncertain of a direction, or whenever I feel as if I don't have all of the information to make a choice, I can always lean on the Lord for direction. But it also tells me that I have to really believe and have faith because if I don't have faith, I'll be just like a rudderless boat, just being tossed back and forth. So it, it really drives home the idea of faith and the idea that God really, under any circumstances at any time, can provide you with wisdom to make a choice. Speaker 1: Two great phrases or, or, or sayings. Story_ID: 564463 Speaker 1: Now, I would like to talk about your family-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and we'll begin on your mother's side, so tell me your mother's name and if you, if you need to spell it-- Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and if you know when she was born. Speaker 2: Yes, her name is Ethel Lee [Ethel Leggett], that's L-E-E; her maiden name was White, her married name obviously is Leggett. She was born in Mississippi and spent her childhood and adult life, the early years, in Mississippi and Louisiana, and she and my dad [Willie Leggett, Sr.] got married, I believe, when she was eighteen years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know what year she was born? Speaker 2: Sure, she was born in 1928. Speaker 1: Now, did she share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean she shared a variety of things about her life and just growing up and, you know, historically in our country in the--I guess--she was born in '28 [1928], so growing up would have her in Mississippi in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]. And, you know, she just talked a lot about, you know, just sort of life in Mississippi in terms of--she was raised on a farm, as I recall, and it was a lot of hard work, and she always wanted to be educated; she did not want to be sort of relegated to--I don't wanna call it farm life, but just a, a life of just sort of being encapsulated in that community with no possibility for educational outreach. And she and my dad got married, as I said, at a early age and, and I just recently found this out; she told me very recently that one of the reasons she chose marriage at an early age was to really get away from just sort of being relegated to working on the farm, and that she could start her own family. But she always wanted to go to college, and with her starting a family early it, it actually interrupted that process and I'm actually the tenth of eleven children, so she and my dad had eleven offspring, or children. Speaker 1: Do you know what--how much education she did have (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She went to--she finished high school. She was very bright and very energetic about the idea of education and being educated, and that was one of the lessons that we learned as children early on. Story_ID: 564464 Speaker 1: Tell me who her [Legget's mother, Ethel Leggett] parents were--your grandparents. Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother and grandfather were both from Mississippi, as far as I know. Speaker 1: Do you know their names? Speaker 2: Yeah. My grandmother's name was, was Rose [Rose White (ph.)]; we used to call, call her Grandmother Rose, or Rosie, and my grandfather's name was Willie [Willie White (ph.)], so we--as a child, would just simply called them Grandmother and Grandfather. Speaker 1: Now, they lived in Mississippi. Do you know what city in Mississippi? Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe my--well, I know my mom, when she moved from Mississippi, grew up in Slidell, Louisiana, so from the--the historical part of my life that I can date back all of my information goes black to Slidell, but they were born outside of Columbia, Mississippi in, I believe, a place called McComb [Mississippi]--right around in that area, but I'm not absolutely certain of the town. I know there're a variety of little small towns in Mississippi, but actually my mom and dad [Willie Leggett, Sr.] are really from the same location. Speaker 1: Do you know about the land in which they lived on the farm? Were they sharecroppers, or did they own their own farm? Speaker 2: You know, actually they owned it, and to this date, the land is still in our family. Speaker 1: Was there any talk about how they acquired the land, or whether either one of their parents were in slavery? Speaker 2: No, I, I have not really explored it on that level, to be honest with you. I, I, I suspect at some point that clearly they all were linked to the slave institution and, and then ownership, at some point, grew out of, out of this sort of sharecropping relationship that they had historically in our country, but the specifics of that, you know, I, I really cannot fully say. Speaker 1: All right. So, when did your mother--did she move to Slidell with your father, or did her family move there? Speaker 2: My family moved to Slidell. Speaker 1: Did she talk about, about the times in Slidell from the farm--did they move to another farm in Louisiana? Speaker 2: No, actually when I was referencing the land, the land I'm talking about is land in Louisiana. Speaker 1: Oh, it is in Louisiana (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's-- Speaker 1: So your grandparents, did they move also? Speaker 2: Yes, that's where, you know--when I date my childhood back and sort of explore kind of when I visited my grandparents, it was always in Louisiana (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Louisiana, I see. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I knew we clearly had family in Mississippi that we would also visit and spend time with but, you know, when we were, quote, going down south to visit relatives-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --our destination was Slidell, Louisiana. Story_ID: 564465 Speaker 1: Tell me about your relationship with your, your [maternal] grandmother [Rose White (ph.)] when you would go to visit. Speaker 2: Oh, our grandmother, she was great. I remember (laughter) once--I think the thing that stands out, she was just a very practical person who kept it simple and, and by that I mean if you asked her a question, you were gonna get an answer; it, it may not be fashioned in the way that you would like to hear it, but you're gonna get an answer, and it was gonna be--it was--it would be pretty direct. And I remember once (laughter) we were, we were getting dressed to go to church, and on this particular day she was not going because she wasn't feeling well and I (laughter), and I said, I said, "Granny, how does my suit look?" And she said, "Son, the Lord doesn't care anything about your clothes, all he cares about is what's in your heart." And, and I was really--we have a very religious family and, and at that time I was kind of thinking, you know, sort of, why did she have to say that? All I just wanted to know was how did my suit look. But in, in retrospect, she was really deemphasizing the exterior and emphasizing the core relationship with Christ. And, and that's just--was Granny; she, she's a no nonsense type of person. She's very loving but she was very--just always sort of--could redirect you to what was purposeful and what was relevant, and not have you lost in a lot of, you know, sort of misdirection and superfluous stuff that had no place to go. So, she--I always enjoyed her; she, she actually chewed tobacco and I--we had a--you know, she used to have this can in the house and--I probably--I guess I could've probably left this part out, but it, I remember it. And, and, you know, I mean it's just my grandmother. But she's wonderful and she was, you know, our matriarch but, but the--and then one nice thing about it is I always had balance, you know. I always saw strong women and I always saw strong men; I never--it was never one or the other, or one at the expense of the other or, you know, a grandmother sort of leading the family with some grandfather that was emasculated, you know; it wasn't that kind of deal. My grandfather [Willie White (ph.)] was very strong, he was very direct, and his presence was felt; it was loving, it was not, you know, sort of felt in this kind of bravado kind of way, but you knew a man sort of ran the home, and he was respected, and he respected my grandmother and, and that was the kind of environment. It, it had nothing to do with actual sort of degrees of, of economic solvency. I mean we actually--in Louisiana, we would go down and visit, it was one of those homes that used to sit on those four blocks where you can kind of crawl under it and play and, you know, it was one level. Probably in modern day, I don't know, maybe a thousand square feet at most, if that much--probably less, and it was--but it was a home, and it was run by two people. And I used to call my grand- my grandma made the best--she made the best biscuits. I, I used--I--you know, that's all I wanted; when I went there, I just wanted biscuits and that old thick syrup; it was called Alaga syrup I believe. I could--I loved her biscuits, I loved them; I just loved them. I mean I, I would eat as many as possible when I was down there. Speaker 1: Did your grandmother and grandfather--did your grandfather--he, he was a farmer, is that correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, but he--you know, as time went on, he actually worked--from my lifetime he worked in the--they had a farm, but he worked in the sawmill in Slidell [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Did your grandmother work outside of the home? Speaker 2: I don't believe so. I, I suspect at some point she did but, you know just kind of the domestic day jobs that were available at that time; it wasn't any professional occupation. I believe it was kind of day work, so I'm certain that, that she did some of that. Story_ID: 564466 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You talked about your family being very religious. What church did your family attend? Speaker 2: Well, you know, actually, you know, my dad's [Willie Leggett, Sr.] a minister and we were, early on, Baptist--in the Baptist religion, and so, you know, attended Baptist church, but it's just generationally, we had a very sort of solid, sort of footing in that spiritual component of our lives. I mean our up- my upbringing was pretty simple. It was you're gonna be educated and, you know, first and foremost, love God, and seek education and, you know, sort of have self-respect and respect others, and that formula will place you in a place that allows you to do anything. And-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that categorically was true. Story_ID: 564467 Speaker 1: Your mother [Ethel Leggett]--how many brothers and sisters did she have? Speaker 2: You know, Mom had one sister and one brother, and her brother actually drowned in a swimming accident in--when they were growing up. I mean he was a, he was an adult; he was a fantastic swimmer. He was out fishing with another person who was not a great swimmer, and somehow the boat turned over and he tried to save the other gentleman and, you know, the other guy just pulled him under. But he was a great swimmer; it wasn't because he couldn't save himself. And her sister still lives in Slidell [Louisiana], so it was the three of them. Story_ID: 564468 Speaker 1: Your father--tell me your father's name. Speaker 2: His name was Willie B. Leggett [Willie Leggett, Sr.]. Speaker 1: And he was also born in Mississippi? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what year was he born? Speaker 2: Twenty-eight, 1928 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twenty-eight [1928]. Okay. And tell me about your, about your father. Speaker 2: Now, my dad was, you know, he was wonderful. You know, I've just been very blessed; I've never known men who did not walk upright and who did not have a degree of self-worth and value so that when they walked out the door, they always looked you square in the eye and they had a good sense of, of internal--you know some purpose and, you know, just value that allowed them, in any circumstance, to be self-assured while not being arrogant but very comfortable. And my dad, you know, he went to the eighth grade and he, you know--back in those times you used to have to go to work and, and it's not--you know, some families have the wherewithal where, even during the early periods, where they had the option to attend college and, and be educated along those paths, but our structure was a little different. My dad, you know, sort of got a job early, and when he and my mom [Ethel Leggett] got married, he took care of, of us and he, you know, sort of later became a, a minister. Actually, it's interesting because I, I don't believe that my dad could actually read until later in life, and part of the story goes that one of my--when he would preach, one of my siblings, or my mother, would--when he was studying for his sermon, read the text of the Bible to him so that he would be knowledgeable about the subject. And then over time, he became literate with reading, but early on--that is my understanding of, of sort of that part of it. But he was--you know, I've always seen--I have great examples. My, my dad loved my mother; I mean he loved her, and she knew he loved her, and we had a home where you felt that. And, you know, my mom, you know--obviously they were young, they had a lot of children. I mean they had--my mom was seventeen, my dad was seventeen; they had--by the time she was thirty-two, I think they had--I was born when she was thirty-two; they had ten of us in, you know, Mississippi, and--but, you know, it was great, the house. I mean I, I never heard my dad disrespect--I never saw him disrespect my mother verbally, I never saw him yell at her or, or, or undermine her importance in the home or demean her or, or any of those things. We had sort of a system at our house where, you know how kids would like to play one parent off against the other, you would come to Dad, he would always say, "Well, what did your mother say?" So, it would just--you couldn't really twist it. But he, he, he loved my mother, he was very supportive of her interests, and she [sic. he] was very supportive of her in raising us, and he was a hard worker in, in the things that--you know, I was young when he died; I was eight years old, but I, I--you know, I think about the things that I got from him and the things that I hear people talk about, and they all talk about his strength of character and, and how he always, as I said earlier, never learned how to walk around apologetically, as if he did not belong where he was or to, to be, you know, sort of intimidated or shy or afraid and, you know, that's that part of him that, you know, that I remember. Story_ID: 564469 Speaker 1: And he [Leggett's father, Willie Leggett, Sr.] was, he was a disciplinarian; I remember that, too. I mean I used to get into mischief when I was younger and, you know, it was the sort of thing--all my mother [Ethel Leggett] had to do was say, you know, "Just wait 'til your dad gets home." That was paralyzing (laughter). And I remember once Dad--my dad was at--he, he was preaching in church and I, and I was probably acting a--you know, just out of line or something, and, you know, while he was in the pulpit he just said, "Son," you know, "have a seat," or something along those lines. And he was just--he was very matter of fact and was just very nice because it was now sort of--you just kind of knew what the deal was, and so--anyway, he would discipline you in a variety of ways. I remember one time I was in trouble when he--and we were--I couldn't just stay awake in church--couldn't stay awake. He said, "Fine." And we got home from church, he said, "Since, since you're sleepy and you can't stay awake," you know, "every day when you get home from school, I want you to get right into bed. So, after you do your homework, get in the bed; I don't care that it--the sun is up 'til nine o'clock. Son, by the time next Sunday gets here, you will have enough sleep." (Laughter) So, you get in bed, you hear kids outside playing (laughter), but it's like, "Buddy, it's time for you to go to sleep." So it wasn't always with some sort of, you know, sort of use of force, or a belt, or any of that, although there were times when that was necessary. Other times, it was just simply, "Okay, well, I'm gonna help you with your problem since you lack sleep; we gonna make sure you get enough this week." Story_ID: 564470 Speaker 1: What did you--your father [Willie Leggett, Sr.] do before he became a minister? Speaker 2: You know, he just worked; I mean it was--he didn't have--he didn't go to college, so he didn't have any particular skill set, he just--you know, our--in Cleveland [Ohio], when I grew up, he worked in a brewery, so in the South, I suspect--I don't know his job history but, you know, I suspect it was just, you know, either the sawmill or whatever the industry was in Louisiana, and that was available to them, that's what he did. It was, it was labor, I'm sure. Story_ID: 564471 Speaker 1: Is there a story--well, before we go to your mother [Ethel Leggett] and father [Willie Leggett, Sr.], tell me his parents--your grandparents on your father's side. Speaker 2: You know, I never met them; they died before I was born, so-- Speaker 1: Do you know their names? Speaker 2: I don't remember his, his-- Speaker 1: And, and how did your father pass away? Speaker 2: You know, he, he had never been sick, actually. In 1968, he contracted at that time what was called the Hong Kong flu, which is a viral illness and, you know, it was very abrupt. He got sick on a Friday and died Monday and, you know, as we currently understand things in the realm of cardiology, I suspect this was before CPR [cardiopulmonary resuscitation], before, you know, sort of defibrillators or any of the--that sort of stuff. My, my suspicion is, is that he got what we now call a viral myocarditis, which is a virus that kind of infects your heart muscle and causes a fatal rhythm, or arrhythmia that is not compatible with survival. And it was very--like I said, he was sick Friday and died Monday morning; he'd never been sick--he was forty years old. No--on no medications, no medical illness and--and it was--and it was actually--December 16th, 1968, so a week before Christmas, and my brother [Robert Leggett] was a freshman at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and my sister [Carol Leggett] was a freshman at San Jose State [San Jose State College; San Jose State University, San Jose, California], and they had just gone to college on academic scholarships and, and so he died, you know, that week before. Story_ID: 564472 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you if there was a story about your mother [Ethel Leggett] and father [Willie Leggett, Sr.] meeting. How did they meet and get married, and where did they marry? Speaker 2: They married in Louisiana-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and a, a number of my siblings were delivered by midwives, and we moved from Louisiana to Ohio--Cleveland, Ohio, I believe in the early to mid-'50s [1950s] because I have a sister born in '48 [1948] and one in '49 [1949], and I know they were born down south, but by 1960 when I came along, I was born in Cleveland, so the transition occurred in that--in the '50s [1950s], and I believe they moved to--up north in the early, early '50s [1950s]. But, you know, they, they--as I stated earlier, their relationship for us--we were actually able to visually see an interaction between parents that was loving, that was instructional, and that had boundaries and rules. And I--the other thing that I actually saw that I, that I understand more now as a parent is, is my mom and dad had a separate relationship; I mean they loved us, but they loved each other, and those were two different things. And, and, and frankly, I, I would have never wanted to give my dad the choice of saving me or my mother (laughter) because he was gonna get her (laughter) and, and, and you know some people will say, "Well, I would always get my kid first." And, and, and I don't think that anybody ever wants that choice, but the reality is, is, is that he--she was his life as well as we were, but they had a very separate friendship and relationship, and then they had a relationship with us, and we understood, you know, the sanctity of marriage and the sanctity of, of parental relationships with your children and, and, and neither--it didn't leave you feeling excluded or in any way less important; you just knew that, you know, my dad, you know, his primary concern was keeping my mother happy and, and you knew that if that happened, you were gonna get all the benefits anyway, (background noise) so it, it really left you in the same position. Story_ID: 564473 Speaker 1: Tell me about your, your, your, your relationship--your personal relationship with your mother [Ethel Leggett] and then your father [Willie Leggett, Sr.], and what characteristics (background noise) you think you received from either one of them, or both of them. Speaker 2: Well, you know, my dad--my relationship with him early on was, you know, the first eight years of my life, was primarily just him, you know, sort of being the, you know, leader in our home--spiritual leader. You know, my dad--you know, like I said, there were eleven of us, and every morning before we would leave home--every morning, if he--he's going to work at seven well, at a quarter to seven [o'clock], everybody's up, and we're all gonna have prayer before he leaves the house. And, and the thing I like about it, it really wasn't open for debate how you personally felt about getting up and having prayer; it was immaterial because these were--this is how he conducted his home, and it wasn't like some, you know, sort of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] or militaristic, you know--it's, you know, revelry, it's time to get up, it's just that you knew that that's what was the order of the day, so to be involved in personally debating, I don't feel like getting up; why we have to do this every day? Well, it wasn't gonna change, so you may as well just, you know, sort of get on board with, you know, kind of the style of how things were gonna happen. And his rationale for that was--is that, you know, throughout the day we were all scattered in all a variety of directions from school, to him at work, my mother doing something, and he really believed in inviting the Lord's protection into our lives before we left the home--that he would watch over us throughout the day and have us come back home at night. And my father was also the type of individual--when we were growing up as kids, you know, I wasn't gonna spend the night over other people's house, you know; at X hour at night, he wanted everybody in his family under the same roof, so this whole idea of, "Daddy, can I go spend the night--?" Well, you, you just didn't even bring that up 'cause it wasn't gonna change. And it wasn't sort of like, you know, well, why can't I do it, it's just, you know, basically, he wanted his kids at home. Well, the characteristics I, I, I think I got even in that short eight year time span is, is strength, dedication, you know--purpose; just kind of--he, he, he was accessible, you know; he was--he had a good affect; he wasn't like he'd come home in a bad mood or, you know, this kind of just work kind of father that was gruff and--, "I just gotta go to work; let me eat some food and get in the bed 'cause I gotta go to work tomorrow." No, he played with us and, you know, I, I saw the way his parish, you know, sort of respected his leadership, and so for me, I always--and I, I just always remember him as being a man who stood with his shoulders back and sort of just had self-respect, and was unafraid to walk out the front door and walk into any room and be accountable. So, that is very dear to me and, and I, I think I--you know, when I look back in that short timeframe, those are things I got from him--the spiritual format, strength, purpose, and character, and dignity; it's a pride; wasn't anything academic--I knew I had to go to school so that, you know, wasn't even debatable. And I knew I had to do well; I mean it wasn't like, you know, he was just gonna accept, you know, just sort of any kind of performance. I mean the, the worst thing was parents' night, and I just said to myself, well, you know, I'm gonna get in trouble enough on just some basic stuff that you do wrong, but I don't have to add school to that (laughter); it's no point in that. So, anyway, those are the things I got from him. Story_ID: 564474 Speaker 1: And my mother [Ethel Leggett], you know, that's an entirely different deal; I mean she was thirty-nine with eleven kids when he [Leggett's father, Willie Leggett, Sr.] died, and we were all eighteen and under, and she had always worked at home and, you know, she has so much pride and dignity that when he died, she went out and got a job. She refused to accept public assistance; she didn't stand in a welfare line or any other public assistance line. Speaker 2: So, what type of work--she had a high school diploma, so what type of work did she do? Speaker 1: She went and started serving lunch in my elementary school [Mary McLeod Bethune Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio]; that was her job. That was when the lunch program had just kind of started, so she served lunch. And clearly, the income from that, you know--I, I, I don't know how--well, I do know how, but the numbers don't add up and, you know, people often talk about--I mean we are, we are such a, a number oriented society, but the thing that people forget is that God is real, and in our life I, I know it because our numbers didn't add up. We lived in Cleveland, Ohio, I was never hungry, our lights never got turned off, the heat was always on, I always had a Easter suit, my mother didn't have a boyfriend, it wasn't some sideshow giving us money, but the Lord--it's just like the five loaves of bread, the five fish; the Lord blessed what she had, and it was sufficient to cover our needs, and I cannot recall any instance when, even going away to school, if I needed ten, fifty, or a hundred dollars, that she couldn't send it. Story_ID: 564475 Speaker 1: And I know what her income was from school when I applied to college 'cause I had to turn her stuff in, and it was a number that wasn't survivable in, in my estimation, but her, her, her fortitude and her--just her will to provide honorably for us, and to create an example to us that let us know that hard work and dedication can be rewarded, and that you don't have to, to sink to some, you know, sort of lower form of existence in order to pay bills. You don't have to, you know, sort of invite this whole other spectrum of just ignorance into your life in order to pay bills, you know. When I see that--I, I don't have any challenges that great; I have never woke up at thirty-nine with eleven mouths to feed, making three thousand a year, okay? All I had to do was study, all I had to do was just stay outta trouble, you know; that's pretty easy, compared to, to, to what she [Leggett's mother, Ethel Leggett] was confronted with. So, I, I, I, I don't even--you know, that, that task is so daunting and ominous, what it takes inside of you to, to say to yourself that I will not be consumed, or I will not fail, is enormous, and that is faith based, I believe. And I believe that it is--I've seen, you know, over the years, her relationship with the Lord that has allowed her to, you know, sort of take on any level of odds--any level, and, and, and actually be successful at that. So, you know, do I have that level of, of sort of fortitude that she has? I'd like to believe so; I've never been tested on that level yet, but that, to me--her example to me lets me know that there is no battle that I can't win. Story_ID: 564476 Speaker 1: Tell me about your brothers and sisters. Can you list them in-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's, that's easy (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) progression and tell me where you fit in. You're almost the, the last one? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm number ten out of eleven. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: There's Willie [Willie Leggett, Jr.], Carol [Carol Leggett], Robert Vernon [Robert Leggett], Marilyn [Mary Leggett], Linda [Linda Leggett], Gwen [Gwendolyn Leggett], Rosebud [Rosebud Leggett], Sandra [Sandra Leggett], Joyce [Joyce Leggett], myself and Shiree [Shiree Leggett]; I mean that's easy. And though we're all different--we're all very different. When I look at--there're a couple of siblings who, like my older sister and the sister next to me, their personalities are the closest; their phonation, the way they choose words, the way they interact with people is almost identical, and they're easily ten or twelve years apart--maybe ten. I've never, I've never heard either one of them ever raise their voice, ever, like in fifty years--never heard them raise their voice. And those two, that's Joyce and Carol; they just--it's--they just are very similar. You know, it's interesting because, you know, when my mother [Ethel Leggett] went back to work and my dad [Willie Leggett, Sr.] had died, you know, there's just this sort of part of family where older siblings play multiple roles; they actually help you with your homework at times, help you with--I had--one of my--one sister name Gwendolyn who was very artistic, so whenever I had any art related projects, or talent show, or, or--I remember running for president of the school when I was in sixth grade [at Mary McLeod Bethune Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio], oh, she helped me with my speech; I remember it to this day. My slogan was, I got the brains, I got the skills, I got the power and I got the will. Vote for me and you will see what a president really can be. And, and my sister, she was the architect of that (laughter), of that, of that slogan and, and--but she helped with all that kind of, you know, sort of liberal arts, artsy kind of stuff. Story_ID: 564477 Speaker 1: And so they all played a variety of different roles. Obviously, my brother, to me, was, was my mentor; he was exactly ten years older than I am. Speaker 2: Which brother? Speaker 1: His name's Robert [Robert Leggett]. I have one brother that I left out who actually died; he died before I was born, so I never really knew him. But he, he is largely responsible for the earlier periods of my life that shaped my--I, I would say--the word I wanna use is, you know, sort of hustle, gut, desire to not to be a quitter, you know; just tenacity taught that. He actually integrated Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] in the '60s [1960s]; he was--it was eight black students on campus when he went, out of six thousand--no women; he took me there when I was nine years old. I got to see, you know, just kind of some different stuff other than Cleveland, Ohio, and he's brilliant, he's brilliant. He, he, he, he just loved the idea of excellence for the sake of excellence; wasn't competitive, it had nothing to do with what someone else was doing, just the very idea of, of embracing excellence at its highest level was incredibly intriguing, and he pursued it and, and, and he tried to teach that to me when I was younger and I just thought--at a young age I thought, I mean this guy is nuts; what, what--you know he's just so hard, you know. He's just--why is he being that hard on me? And he was really just trying to shape me for a world that I knew nothing about. He was trying to shape my desire to not settle for anything less than the best; it had really nothing--it wasn't even about other people. He wasn't saying, be better than them, he was just saying, just be the best, just desire, you know, a higher level of existence and, and do what it takes to get there. And see, for me, you know, he really, you know, just shaped the very format of my degree of relentless just sort of pursuit of excellence. Speaker 2: Was he the first one to go away to school? Speaker 1: He and my sister [Carol Leggett] went simultaneously; they both left. They're a year apart, but they both left in '68 [1968] to go to college, and she went to San Jose State [San Jose State College; San Jose State University, San Jose, California] and he went to Princeton, and so they left at the same time and I, I just remember my brother used to try to toughen me up 'cause I was at home with like eight sisters, and (laughter), and he felt very strongly about--and he was just--he was such a, a man at eighteen, now he's got eight sisters and he, he was an engineer and he worked at General Electric in the summer, and I remember my sisters when they were dating, after my dad [Willie Leggett, Sr.] died, he had his rule, and he was pretty straightforward and he wasn't gonna debate it. He said, "You know, here's the deal, and you can--you guys can date my sisters if you like, but when the sun starts to set, I want you off my mother's [Ethel Leggett] porch 'cause we're not gonna have a bunch of people hanging around our house at nighttime; it's just not gonna happen. So, I'm not gonna really debate this with my sisters 'cause they don't agree, and I'm not gonna debate it with you, but that's what we're gonna do." So it was funny, he'd come home (laughter), or when he'd come home from work in the summer (laughter), he'd see guys standing in the street talking to my sisters on the porch because the sun had set, and he, he was just sort of like that and he wasn't, he wasn't--it wasn't about like, I'm gonna beat you up; it wasn't physical, it's just these are the rules that we're gonna live by, and these are the rules that if you want to interact with us, that you're gonna follow. And, and I'm not really interested in how you feel about it because I know what I have to do in order to help this ship sail through. Story_ID: 564478 Speaker 1: And with me I, I'll just tell you this brief story. This one game that he [Leggett's brother, Robert Leggett] used to play with us when I was young. And it was a baseball game, and he would pick me and two of my friends that were my age, and he would throw us all ten passes, and whoever caught the most out of ten would win the game. And I would routinely catch nine, and he would make the tenth pass to me impossible to catch. I would get so angry because he would make their tenth pass very catchable, and I would get so angry over that because I was just--I saw the difference; I'm like, why does my tenth one has--have to be so difficult and their tenth one is easily catchable? And he would never even discuss it; he just like, get outta here. And, and so I made up my mind one day, I said, "I don't care what I have to do. If I have to jump underneath a car, or on top of a house, I'm gonna catch this ball; I don't care where it goes." And, you know, the day I caught his tenth pass was the last day we ever played that game. And he said to me, he said, "All I wanted you to do is reach a point in your mind where you said there is no pass I can throw you that you can't catch." He said, "Once you got there," he said, "I never doubted you could catch the ball, I just wanted you to mentally get to a point where you said that there's no pass I could throw you that I can't catch," he said, "because if I can get you there, you can walk in any classroom and say that there's no math problem that you can't solve, there's no English situation that you can't." He said, "I could get you to a place where now you believe that there's nothing you can't do." And I was in high school [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: You were in high school at that time? Speaker 1: At that time. Story_ID: 564479 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you, when you think about sounds, smells, and sights of your early years, what comes to mind? Speaker 2: Sounds--I guess it would be--early years it would have to be gospel music. My father [Willie Leggett, Sr.] loved the Mighty Clouds of Joy, and you'd always hear that playing in our house, and we had a great singing family, so my sisters and I and, you know, we're pretty good singers and, you know, in church, just wonderful sort of--, "We're gonna have a A and B selection by the Leggett family," or (laughter)--and my--one of my favorite songs that my sister sang, there's this song called, 'Changed,' and I, I mean when she sang that, it just was, was phenomenal. So I, I think music for me would be gospel music, and it was so empowering; it, it really sort of made you feel that--you know, it just made you feel that God was all around you. It's just like last night; I was flying from New York [New York], the weather was bad, and I'm a skittish flyer. And I called my wife [Denise Cleveland Leggett] when I was sitting in the airport, and I was just about to call this whole thing off. I knew I had this interview today, and I was like, "Well, whatever, you know, I'm not, I'm not getting on this plane just so I can make an interview 'cause it's gonna be crazy and I hate it," so--and my wife said to me, she said, she said, "Where is your faith? I mean if you believe that the Lord can protect you, he can protect you at any time." He said--she said, "When I fly, I just envision angels all around the plane, so it doesn't matter to me what the weather is; I, I just know that there's no record of angels ever failing." So, after she just sort of attacked my level of (laughter) sort of faith like that, I said, "Well, maybe I'll try this flight out." (Laughter) But anyway, you know, music is clearly gospel. Sounds--you know--sights, you know. I just remember early on, I just remember our family being together and us, you know, just being close and having a good time and when we traveled, we'd all--we had one station wagon, we have eleven people in it; some be, you know, a variety of ways you could get in it, you know? If you're really small, you might be in that little foot well, and--while the car's driving or, yeah, just--we had the seat in the back, this seat (gesture), so you can get nine in comfortably; the other two was gonna be a little uncomfortable; when you're small, you don't think about it. And, you know, I mean smells--I guess it would be, you know, just, you know, my mother's [Ethel Leggett] cooking, or something like that. She's a great cook, just like my [maternal] grandmother [Rose White (ph.)] and, you know, we enjoyed, you know, just eating; it was, it was fun. Story_ID: 564480 Speaker 1: Tell me about where you lived in Cleveland, Ohio. What (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, from--you know when I was born, we lived in--on--off Superior Avenue in Cleveland, which is the east side of Cleveland; we lived in a house--I think my parents [Ethel Leggett and Willie Leggett, Sr.] had just bought it, and it was--I guess, had three stories, but--you include a basement; I guess that would be four, I guess--just a regular house. And, you know, when I, I'm thinking of it in my mind now, this one, two--it had three bedrooms and a attic, so the fourth story's the attic kind of--which obviously became a bedroom for us 'cause it was so many kids, and basement and then living room and kitchen; all that is on the first floor. But it was, you know, the east side of Cleveland, the city, you know, inner city of Cleveland. And, you know, it was just--it was where it was. Speaker 1: Well, well, tell me about the, the neighborhood. Who were some of your friends in the neighborhood, and what stores and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the neighborhood, it was all--at that time, I think it was--I'm pretty sure it was like 99 percent black, if not all--black in the early '60s [1960s]. (Background noise) And so, you know, you had a variety of people; I, I just think about the people kind of right on our street, then you had, you had a bus driver across the street, my dad was a minister, (background noise) most of the men-- Speaker 1: Can we stop for one second? Speaker 2: Sure. Story_ID: 564481 Speaker 1: We were talking about, about the neighborhood-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you were telling me that it was predominantly an African American community. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Were there--were the stores also--the merchants also black (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, actually, predominantly, I believe Jewish--I believe. But there was a supermarket that originally was Jewish and then was bought by some African Americans, and I actually worked there; it was a great job. I used to work there and it was actually--and it was my second job. I tried (laughter)--my first job was working at the, at the Cleveland Browns football stadium [Cleveland Municipal Stadium; FirstEnergy Stadium, Cleveland, Ohio], and I, I think I was--I don't know, eleven or something and, you know, a friend of mine down the street said, you know, "We can go down there and," you know, "you can sell some food but, you know, you just have to sign up and they'll let you sell, and you make so much for whatever you sell." And he was a little bit older so he could sell like beer and foot longs or something, that had a higher price, so he was making a lot of money and, and I can only sell like Diet Coke, and it was freezing and so nobody was buying it (laughter). I was like, I gotta get another job (laughter). So, so, anyway, I did that one time, and I started--I went to this grocery store, and I had a friend down the street, he was working there; he was a manager. And my mother [Ethel Leggett] always would say to me--his name was Ronald [ph.], and he would always--Ronald--you know, shirt and tie on, and she would just say, "Look how neat Ronald looks going to work; you need to get a job at that store" (laughter). So, I went up, and I had just gotten a scholarship to high school out in Massachusetts [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], and they gave me a job-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and so I started working there. Story_ID: 564482 Speaker 1: Well, let- let's go back a little bit before we get to high school [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts]. We--I wanna talk about elementary school. Tell me what elementary school did you attend? Speaker 2: I went to Mary McLeod Bethune Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio], and in the sixth grade I was actually president of the class. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that you remember from school? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, her name was Miss Custs, C-U-S-T-S. The principal, Miss Street [ph.]--actually--it was a white woman there, and she was our principal--very no nonsense, very--just, you know, knew what it--she expected of you, knew what she was gonna tolerate in school, and what she wasn't gonna tolerate and was just an absolutely a great principal. She just, you know, knew the level of excellence she wanted her school to be in, and whether you liked her or not, she wasn't really soliciting for how much you liked her, but she was a wonderful principal, and--so anyway, my fourth grade teacher was Miss McClain [ph.], then she got married and it was Miss Custs, and she was very--just--she was great, but she, she was kind of--then, I think it was like around 19--maybe '72 [1972]; she had a big Afro and she was very Afrocentric just in her look, but she was obviously, you know, her education was colorless. But--and what she taught us, you know, was colorless, but she really--that was the first time in school that you really got into, you know, sort of African American history in a, in a purposeful way, or she introduced us to, you know, just a variety of leaders from, you know, from Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] to Malcolm X to Crispus Attucks to, you know, just, you know, just the whole gamut. And she was very sort of instrumental in just sort of having--I won't call it black pride, but just pride, and she was no nonsense; I mean you're gonna speak correct English in her class, you're gonna do your homework, and she was gonna hold you accountable. And I--as my fourth grade teacher--and my sixth grade teacher was a gentleman name Mr. Atwood [ph.], you know; I remember him specifically. He was very--I, I just remember him being very neat, aesthetically, and he was very smart, and on the top of his board--I remember this distinctly--it, it was up there, and it said: who am I? Where am I going? Where have I been? Just written across, that stayed up there the whole year. So, it just kind of made you think all the time about kind of what you were doing. He was a excellent teacher. Speaker 1: Were your teachers both black and white? Speaker 2: Yeah, and we had this one teacher name Mr. Bragg [ph.]; he was our spelling teacher. I liked Mr. Bragg because Mr. Bragg would kind of (laughter)--I always wanted to--he didn't get (unclear), but Mr. Bragg would let you gamble a little bit, and by that I mean he'd give you a spelling word that wasn't on your list, and when I say gamble, if you got it right, you could get like a extra twenty-five points, but if you missed it, well, you know he's gonna take twenty-five away. So, you know, it's not all good, but (laughter), but he would walk around and he would say, "Who wants to (pronunciation) gamble today?" (Laughter) And, you know, when you're an aggressive student, you like the challenge--not so much the challenge of gambling, but you like the challenge of seeing if you can spell something you hadn't heard before; I would always take it. I was like, whatever, you know. Story_ID: 564483 Speaker 1: So, what type of student were you? Speaker 2: Oh, in elementary [Mary McLeod Bethune Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio], in--I was good; I mean I just got straight A's. I mean I--early on, I just said to myself, you know, it's easy enough for me to get straight A's to just like not be a headache to my mother [Ethel Leggett]; she's, you know, got eleven kids, I mean I'm in school, gotta go anyway, what's the big deal? So, you know, elementary, you know, I mean I, I did well; I mean I worked hard. Speaker 1: You were a good student, but what type of, of child were you? Speaker 2: Oh, I was mischievous. Now, I got kept off the National Junior Honor Society because, you know, I mean I had all A's, but we used to get this attitude mark from one to three, with one being good and three being the worst; I had nine, eight threes. And it wasn't because I was like bad (laughter), I just was in mischief; I'd get finish with my work and just, you, you know, just like shooting rubber bands across the room or spit balls through a straw, something--just aggravating people. So (laughter), so, I mean I, I just like--you know, at that time I, I, I mean I always got straight A's but I, I, I never--you know, when I changed is--my mom came to school for open house, and I just saw the look of just disappointment on her face when they would not let me be on the, the National Honor Society because of that three. And you know, in the eighth grade I didn't really care about it; I was like, God, I don't need to be with those students anyway; I mean I know I'm as smart as they are, so what's the big deal? I mean I don't need that little piece of paper. But you don't really see things clearly, you know. And, and when I saw the look of disappointment on her face, next grading period I had all ones. Story_ID: 564484 Speaker 1: Who were your classmates? This was a neighborhood school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, we used to walk to it. That's not--my son [Christopher Leggett, Jr.] is in eleventh grade with--and we'd drive him everywhere, and get on a bus. You know, my school was at least--probably two and a half miles from our house; I mean I was walking there when I was nine. Through the alley, across the street, just up the hill--wherever. And, you know, one of my--my daughter's [Alexandria Leggett] school was probably a mile from here; she didn't walk ever. So anyway, they look at us like, well, that was back then. But-- Speaker 1: Were there white students at your school? Speaker 2: No, not in my elementary [Mary McLeod Bethune Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Who were some of your classmates? Do you remember who your friends were? Speaker 2: I remember this guy name Kevin Bray [ph.] in my elementary; he was a great voice. We used to si- we used to love singing. I remember this woman Patricia Benz [ph.]; she, I think, was probably the smartest person in our elementary school and we, we ran against each other for president and--just to show you how sometimes the, the pathology of growing up is, now Patricia spoke perfect English in the, in the inner city--perfect, flawless, and, and she was polite, friendly, gregarious, and, and, and to the student body that was like a negative, that was a negative. And, and you know--and I didn't understand that at that time. But anyway, she--I was--I, I don't say that I was more popular 'cause I, I, I got as good a grade as--grades as Patricia; I mean, you know, but I wasn't as--I don't know what the word was, as--let's just stay sterile, for lack of a better word (laughter). So, when it came down to voting for, you know, the preliminary election for president I, I beat her, but I recognized that she had a valuable quality, so I asked her to be my campaign manager, and Patricia was fantastic; we were just too ignorant to recognize as a student body. So, she was my pan- campaign manager and my sister [Gwendolyn Leggett] was writing my speeches; I mean we just like killed 'em (laughter). Story_ID: 564485 Speaker 1: But then I remember in the junior high, a guy name Kevin Golden [ph.]; this was an all-black high--junior high in Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 2: What was the name of your junior high school? Speaker 1: Harry E. Davis [Harry E. Davis Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Harriet? Speaker 1: Harry E. Davis. Kevin Golden--we used to call him Brain. Kevin was brilliant. Now, again, I got straight A's just like Kevin but I, you know, played on the football team and, you know, could sing, so I was in a talent show, but Kevin was just an intellectual, and in like the seventh and eighth grade he, he could just--he was just an, an intellectual, and in inner cities, that is not rewarded, and it's a tragedy because Kevin is, is brilliant. And I, I was smart enough--see, I, I had a different set of rules. I knew I couldn't come home with less than straight A's, so I wasn't--there was no dilemma there. And I actually enjoyed education, so I wasn't like--it wasn't like hard for me because I actually enjoyed the idea of learning, so I didn't have that conflict of trying to be cool at the expense of education; I wanted to be cool, but I was gonna get straight A's. Kevin--cool was not even something he cared about; he just loved learning, and he was brilliant. And, and I remember he used to walk home with books in his arm; I, I distinctly remember people pushing his books out of his arm and, and I lacked the character at that time, as a young person, to--while I was not pushing them out of his arm, I didn't have enough character to tell people to stop. And, you know--and, and that is kind of what it is, but I, I remember him because in, in, in my mind he, he was the standard of, of, of, of, of brilliance in our school, you know. Story_ID: 564486 Speaker 1: Was there a friend who you just kind of paled around with? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my friend across the street, Greg Appleton [ph.]. Speaker 1: The, the, the parents that lived in your community--usually black communities, they all look out for one another (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --but you had many brothers and sisters that were also looking out for you as well. But was it the type of community where Miss Jones down the street would be on the lookout? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. I mean--yeah; I mean I was riding a bike one day downhill, sitting on the handlebars backwards. My mother [Ethel Leggett] didn't see it but by the time I got home, she knew about it, so somebody on our street let her know, who had spotted me five streets down the road just in traffic, sitting on the handlebars backwards, riding a bike downhill (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you know whether--with the friends that you hung out with, were most of them two parent homes? Speaker 2: On our particular street, I would say they all were. Now, that's not true of our--my school, but on our street--I, I, I think of maybe one family, and the remainder, yeah--two parents. Story_ID: 564487 Speaker 1: Now, you, you said that you were involved, you played football-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you continued to sing and, and when you sang in the talent shows, did you necessarily sing gospel music? Speaker 2: No. I sang Stylistics [The Stylistics], 'You Make Me Feel Brand New.' We won a talent show at that, but I was smart enough--because I, I had a pretty nice tenor voice, but my sister, she was like four years older than me; she had a great body, so I got her and her friend, who were just like really shapely, to, to dance behind me while I was singing (laughter), so I figured, now, they will get all the men in their audience, and I can sing to, to the women; I can handle that part, and so we won the talent show hands-down. But it was just funny; I mean it was, it was a good time 'cause I also played the trombone. I was the first trombone in junior high school [Harry E. Davis Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio] in the orchestra and I, I didn't--I started playing trombone in seventh grade, but I picked it up really quickly, and my band instructor, Mr. Brinson [ph.]--I wanted to play drums; he was like, "Man, you're not playing drums, you're just what, over there just, just beating some drums and don't have to learn music." He wouldn't let me play, and I was so mad at him 'cause I just wanted to play the bongos and drums, so he made me learn the trombone, and all through high school I was first seat trombone player in the orchestra and, well, even when I went to private school up in Massachusetts [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], I mean, 'cause he taught me how to read music in seventh grade. So I played trombone, I sang and, you know, I just had a, you know, a lot of extracurricular activities, but I guess--but all that aside, I mean I, I was committed to, you know, getting straight A's; I just felt like that's what I needed to do. Story_ID: 564488 Speaker 1: So, in junior high school [Harry E. Davis Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio], did you have an idea of what you would--what your career would be? Speaker 2: I did not. I, I, I knew that I was gonna be educated--I knew that; I knew I was gonna go to college. My brother [Robert Leggett] had already taken me to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], so I kind of had seen that, and I just knew that that's what my parents [Ethel Leggett and Willie Leggett, Sr.] wanted for me. I wasn't real sure on what that all meant yet, in terms of occupation or career. At that time, I just loved math, so I wanted to be--I wanted to do whatever my brother did; he was--he went to Princeton, he was an engineer, and he went to--got a M.B.A. from the Kellogg School [Graduate School of Management; Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois]; I just figured, you know, that's good, that's what I wanna do. I like math, so I said I'll be a financier, or a financial analyst, work numbers--I'm good, that's what I wanna do. Story_ID: 564489 Speaker 1: So, now, after your mother [Ethel Leggett] comes to school and you were getting straight A's, but now you're on the Honor Society [National Junior Honor Society]. Right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: So, what prepares you to go to high school? Do you go to a high school in your, in your neighborhood? Speaker 2: I do not. Actually, what happened was, there's this gentleman at church, his name is Elder Brown [ph.], he'd heard of this program called, the Better Chance program [A Better Chance]; it's an academic program nationally that looks--identifies talent--minority students--in traditionally inner cities, and they have to take a, a, a placement exam, and if you do well on it, then they actually will shop your credentials to the leading private schools in the country for high school and, and if you can get in, based on academics, through their routine normal admission process, then the school actually will pay for you to go free. So, I applied to this program, The Better Chance program, because this elder at church told me about it. I, you know, took the exam and got accepted as a Better Chance student, then they shopped my application, and I ended up at Phillips Academy [Phillips Academy Andover] which is--was the number one--is the number one prep school in the country, in Andover, Massachusetts, and so that's where my high school years started--in the tenth grade. Speaker 1: Now, had they talked to you about the school? Did you know about the school before you got there? Speaker 2: I knew zero. In, in fact, when I got in, and I heard it was in Massachusetts, I didn't even want to go; I said it's too cold, I'm just not doing it. And I tell my mother, you know, basically, I'm not going, I don't want to go. I'll just stay here and go to school here, locally. And you know what she told me? She said, "Okay, that's good, but get your suitcase." So, you know, she just made an executive decision; she said, "I accept your input, but let me tell you how this is gonna go down. You're going, pretty much whether you like it or not." And it wasn't like some major negative interaction, it's just that she recognized that I was incapable of making a good choice at that point in my life, and her responsibility as a parent, under those circumstances, is to make it for me, and not accept the advice of some twelve year old who had seen the world for twelve years. So, she just said, "Fine," you know, "I prayed about it, the Lord has sent us this opportunity, so here goes." She put me on a plane when I was thirteen years old; I left Cleveland [Ohio] and went to Andover. Speaker 1: Had you ever been away from home before (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Never. Story_ID: 564490 Speaker 1: How much interaction had you had with, with Caucasians? Speaker 2: At that point, none educationally. I mean I--my schools were always all-black, so at that point, my educational experience had, had always been one way, you know. Our community was predominantly black, so our church was black, so, you know, it was very limited. But, you know, I--we were always taught just kind of, just--self-respect, and that, to me, left you always feeling good about yourself, so I, I, I, I never had an, an internal conflict about somebody else being better. And the other thing that I think at home--that I find remarkable now, looking back, is my parents [Ethel Leggett and Willie Leggett, Sr.] grew up in Mississippi, as I told you earlier and, and, and as you know historically, things were not good for, you know, people of color in the South. But I never heard hatred in my house, and it's not because, you know, you know, some people like have this attitude: well, you know, I, I, I don't, I don't see color, or I don't see, you know, you know, the division of races, or segregation, and everything's fair because I'm doing good; no, it wasn't that--don't get me wrong. You know, my parents clearly understood and lived in the Jim Crow system in the South, clearly understood the division and the segregatory nature of things. They just didn't internalize hatred, and they didn't allow it to impact the way they dealt with people and/or pass it down to us so that it impaired our ability to interact with the world. So when I went to Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], there were ten black students out of twelve hundred, and I ended up rooming with John Kennedy, Jr. [John F. Kennedy, Jr.]. Story_ID: 564491 Speaker 1: So, you were telling me about your arrival in Massachusetts (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I--it's something I'd just like to say about that, and one thing I love so much about parenting, and my parents [Ethel Leggett and Willie Leggett, Sr.], is, is that they un- they understood their role, and their role was not only to raise us but to make decisions for us and, and I think a lot of parents now are, are so interested in their kids liking them and being their--I don't wanna say their friend, because my parents were my friend; their primary responsibility was to mold me into a responsible human being that was God fearing and that was, you know, responsible to this planet. And so the choice--my mother has often told me about how heart wrenching it was for her to put me on the plane, at thirteen, to leave Cleveland [Ohio] to come to Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] at that time, but she had enough, you know, just courage to know that this was an opportunity for me that she had prayed for, and she had enough faith that the Lord would protect me, and I, you know I, I just thank her for that because see, people--my society is so, so, so weighted towards thinking that, you know, sort of economic attainments are the way you measure people and, and the measurement of, of, of, of integrity and character has nothing to do with how much you have, and her ability to deemphasize her life and deemphasize self for our good, meaning me and my siblings, that is the ultimate price that you can pay for someone. So, anyway, I, I went to Andover at thirteen, and it was like an educational--you know, I was smart, but I had never met people who had had, you know, sort of like superior training their whole life. It's sort of like being a great athlete and then you meet an athlete, who's been training in like a, a high intensity combine camp for years, with equipment that you've never seen, and your athletic skills are the same except that their trajectory is just better. Story_ID: 564492 Speaker 1: You said that John Kennedy, Jr. [John F. Kennedy, Jr.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --was your roommate [at Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Well, my first year I, I lived in this dorm called Nathan Hale [Nathan Hale House], and John is a year younger than I, so he wasn't there yet--so my tenth grade year. In my eleven and twelfth grade year, we moved over to a different dorm called Stearns [Alfred E. Stearns House], and that's when John came, and I had a roommate, Greg Moten, and John and his roommate, another guy name John Pachillo [ph.], we were all in kind of the same pod in this dorm, and so, you know, we became very, very close--I mean very close. I mean I called him the day he died, actually; I was in New York [New York] 'cause that's how close we were. He met my mother [Ethel Leggett], I, I knew his mother [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis], we visited each other, I mean, so it was--and, and it was one of those situations where, you know, basically, we were all young, and it was just sort of the things that my parents had taught me about self-worth that allowed you to feel at home with anybody. And I'll never forget once John wanted me to meet his mom and I kind of, you know, was just--I don't know, not really--just sort of--I don't wanna say interested, but I just kind of avoided it. And I told my mother that story and my mother said to me, "You know," she said, "he, he didn't choose to be born the son of a president; he had nothing to do with that." She said, "If he's your friend and he wants you to meet his mother, you meet his mother because he's your friend, not because of who she is. It's just like when you wanted him to meet me; it's the same difference." So, my mother always just had the ability to see things clear like that, so I couldn't wait to get back to school. (Unclear), "I gotta meet your mom, man, 'cause I feel guilty now." But anyway-- Speaker 1: Did you ever meet her? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah; I mean she met my mother. I mean, I mean we were--John and I were very close, I mean just--I mean it wasn't like--anyway. Story_ID: 564493 Speaker 1: So, now you had to step up your, your game. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. I mean the educational culture at Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] is a whole different league; it's like, you know, you being a star in this little tiny basketball league in your city, and now you playing against all the best players in the country, and that's basically what this is, is you got the best minds in the country all, you know, in, in a similar location. And many of these kids just enjoy, you know, just certain knowledge, and yeah, you got some don't, but for the most part--I mean we had classes there that if you were the only kid in the class, a professor would show up teaching, because if you were that smart and you wanted to take it, somebody would show up to teach you, and, and I went from a class size of forty in Cleveland [Ohio] down to ten in Andover [Massachusetts]. And the, the academic workload was obviously heavier, the intensity was higher, the volume of knowledge was great, and as I stated earlier, it was just like an educational candy store--as much as you can eat, there will be somebody there to teach it to you. So, you know, my brother [Robert Leggett], he was always the pragmatist; he, he came--he would say to me, he said, "Look, man, I mean I know you like football and basketball and all that stuff, but you don't have time." He said, "If they can get away with spending four hours studying a night and getting A's, you might have to spend six or seven because you gotta make up all this lost ground that they've had the benefit of, so when you make that ground up, then you go back to playing basketball and football, but until that time, you need to spend all your extra hours in the library." And I was just like, this guy is just unreasonable, but he's absolutely right--he was absolutely right and, and it proved to be right. So, anyway, you right; you had to step your game up, and the challenge. Story_ID: 564494 Speaker 1: But I had some great friends. Some of my best friends to this very day-- Speaker 2: Are, are who (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to this very day, are from Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Who are some of your friends? Speaker 1: John Barres; he's a, he's a priest now. I went to Andover with John, went to college with John, John was in my wedding; he's Catholic, white, from Larchmont, New York. We were just in Italy; John used to work at the Vatican [Vatican City], got us a private meeting with the pope [Saint Pope John Paul II], we saw excavations underneath the Vatican. This is from high school. Greg Moten was one of my roommates--great friend; he's a architect, African American gentleman, living in Princeton [New Jersey]. We sent a--our daughter [Alexandria Leggett] just got into Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and we put her on a plane from Miami [Florida] to go to Princeton last week. It was heart wrenching for us because we were gonna be up there the following weekend, so she was going to this community action program. I called Greg up--Greg went to Andover and Princeton with me. I said, "Buddy, you gotta meet her at the airport." I hadn't talked to Greg in two years or something, you know. Not only did he meet her at the airport, took her to the dorm, got all her boxes from Federal Express [FedEx], took about four flights of stairs, put them in her room, you know--great guy, brilliant guy, I mean brilliant, you know. Dave Gutzke, another guy, from Minnesota, you know. I mean it's just--it's a ton of people from, you know. So Ando- we had a great basketball team; we won--we went to the state final our senior year--our junior year. We had great team--great. And, and--I mean but it's just a ton of people from--you know, Shelly Guyer who lives out in California--Greenwich, Connecticut. Josh McCall. Josh is a great friend of mine, grew up in Greenwich. I--you know, he'd never met a black person his--in his life. Josh's Company [Jack Morton Worldwide] just did the opening ceremony for the Olympics in, in Athens [2004 Summer Olympics, Athens, Greece], and Josh and I, we were in Seville [Spain] skiing last year, hadn't seen each other in, I don't know, five years. I skied down to a point, and I look over, the guy standing next to me, I say, "That looks like Jo- ," and it's him--he had his whole family out. I'm just saying the, the--and these are real, you know, friendships; they're not just like--these are people who're part of the fabric of who you are now. And we all met like when we were thirteen. And, and Josh--I'll never forget, Josh did our, our twentieth reunion at Andover and he was the chair of it, or whatever, and he got up to speak, and somebody asked him, "What was the thing that you got most out of your experience at Andover?" And he grew up in Greenwich. He said, "Well, the thing that I got the most out of this experience was I got a chance to meet Chris Leggett [HistoryMaker Dr. Christopher Leggett]." And it wasn't like Chris Leggett, Chris Leggett, it was like, you know, "Here I am in Greenwich, he's from Cleveland [Ohio], we come here at the same time, we develop wonderful friendship, I get to meet someone completely different from me, and yeah, the academics and all that stuff was fantastic, but what I learned most was the power of humanity." And that's what he's saying in front of the entire class. And I'm just saying Andover was great; it was hard, but it was great. Story_ID: 564495 Speaker 1: What were some of the courses that you took there that you know that you probably would not have been exposed to in Ohio (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, a lot of English, math. I, I think for me, the thing that--and it wasn't all positive; don't get me wrong. I mean I had this one teacher who was a jerk; she told me I had to stop writing black English--whatever that was, and I said, "Okay, I'm not sure what that is, but if you can help me understand what it is, I'll be happy to try and modify it." But the one--the mainstay for me that let me know I belonged was, was math is objective. Whether you liked me or not, there was one answer. You couldn't read my essay and give me a C because you just felt like, I'm not giving this African American student an A because this just, you know, because I don't like the way it sounds. But if you got the answer right in math--so, when I initially went there, my grades initially fell in like subjects like English and biology because it's more subjective, (unclear) written it. But math let me know that I belong, because it was objective and I always got great grades in math, and I just--and it always let me know that I was smart, so that I, I said to myself, I, I'll get this other stuff together, and I'll figure out what I gotta do to raise that up. But it was kind of the mainstay for me educationally because it was, it was non-subjective, it was objective, and it was scientific and, and so it helped me through that first semester not get depressed about going from always being a straight A student to having, you know, some different grades. And then, you know, by eleventh grade and twelfth grade years [at Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], they were back up to what I was used to. But, you know, you, you have these challenges and you gotta meet them and you gotta have something inside you to meet them with. And those are the lessons, like I told you, about my brother [Robert Leggett], and watching my mother [Ethel Leggett] and father [Willie Leggett, Sr.]; that's--those are the lessons they give you, the sort of undergirding, that when you're swimming upstream, that you just don't quit. Story_ID: 564496 Speaker 1: What other things culturally did you learn while you were there? Speaker 2: Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] was--now it's pretty European; I mean it's--culturally--I mean I--what I learned at Andover, I think was, it was my first exposure to the global universe, and simply, you know, just being able to live outside the confines of my community, and realize that people are people and, and if, and if you interact with them on a basic fundamental level of self-respect and dignity, that all relationships work; you just gotta be unintimidated, and you gotta be confident. Speaker 1: Well, I, I mean--maybe--let's take music. Here you were doing talent shows, singing The Stylistics. Did you learn anything about opera at Andover, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I wasn't interested. I mean I-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --you know, I'm gonna just be honest with you. I, I mean I took like Chopin [Frederic Chopin] and, and a lot of those sort of artists because it was a course that we had to take, but after that course was over, I mean I didn't take any more 'cause it--I just wasn't interested. But our orchestra at Andover, I was the first seat trombone player because--and we played everything, you know. I don't remember all the spectrum of music, but we played every kind of operatic or whatever the music was, and that was great because I was, I was the lead player in the top orchestra with all these other kids who'd been playing cello, violin and all this other stuff for their whole life, so it didn't--you know, the cross cultural experience from the music, I don't know that I internalized it, I just--I just--I felt like, you know, it's just--okay; you know, I like the trombone, so whatever we have to play, we have to play. But, you know, we (laughter), we had talent shows in Andover, too, and we won a talent show singing a song by The Dramatics. Now, these (laughter)--it's funny because the white students had never heard The Dramatics before (laughter), but--and we sang 'Easy' by The Commodores, man we tore the place up, so--but, you know, there was art there, and all different kinds of music and, you know, I woke up every morning; I'd never heard of, of, of--who am I thinking of? The group that sings 'Welcome to Hotel California,' [sic. 'Hotel California'] the--it'll come to me in a second. But my neighbor--every morning, every day--woke up with that song. So I knew the entire history of that group [The Eagles] by the end of my tenth grade year 'cause that was his favorite group. It was a huge group; I, I just--man--I can't-- Speaker 1: I can hear the song, but I, I guess that's what I was asking you. You brought something there that they had never heard, and I was trying to see what it was that, that you got from that experience in the same token. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. I, I learned about a variety of artists that I had never heard of; some I liked, some I didn't like, but this one particular group--after a while--I mean--and it was the first year of that really nice Pioneer elite stereo system and, you know, a lot of my friends there--I mean money was no issue--they had all the best gear and equipment; I mean it was a great sound. So--but I mean, I, I mean J.D. Salinger's son, Matt [Matt Salinger], for instance, was a very close friend of mine. He was a author, and so I--you know, you just--exposure to a variety of different--whether it was literature, music, or whatever it was, was just very, you know, very different. I had a great friend from Malibu, California, and I, I never heard of Malibu, really, in all honesty. And, you know, he's an Academy Award winning writer now. But we--but our friendships were pure; they were uninfected by, you know, sort of our collective backgrounds. We just either liked each other or we didn't; you gravitated toward some students and not others, and it just kind of grew from there and, and the beauty of it was is we set such a foundation that even though we don't see each other in years, the basic history of our youth is there that it's formidable enough that it leaves us with something to grow from. Story_ID: 564497 Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers that were there? Speaker 2: You know, the teachers there--now, I, I don't really have that many memorable teachers from Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], to be honest with you; I just don't. Speaker 1: Was there a president of the school, or a principal (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Ted Sizer, headmaster. Speaker 1: Headmaster, okay. What was the name, sir? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ted Sizer. Oh, I do--now, one thing I do remember is, his wife [Nancy Faust Sizer] was my English teacher, and actually--very disappointed in this. I--in the eleventh or twelfth grade, I can't remember, we could all pick a subject to talk about and write about, and I actually picked--I was--it was American history, she's American history teacher, and I actually picked some component of the Civil Rights Movement; whether it was the boycott or the busing, I can't remember which one it was, and I talked about it in my project. And I was told that that subject was too divisive, and just not appropriate in general for this particular history course, so I, I did not get a very good grade on that. And I just said to myself--and this is American history. And we--it's not like we're studying specifically the [President] Andrew Jackson area of American history, of which I had a great Andrew Jackson--this guy was so good I thought he was like part of Andrew Jackson's regiment when he was teaching (laughter). He was just a fantastic teacher and he--and all he taught about was Andrew Jackson. And so it wasn't like a compartmentalized component of American history; we were just talking about it in broad terms. But I just realized that that was at--that was one of those other points where you just had to say to yourself, you know, just don't internalize it, you know. I mean they're just not embracing where you're coming from here. Just, you know, I don't wanna say she's irrelevant, but just--you can't allow that to sort of take the steam out of what you're trying to do because this is just an early form of many times you're gonna see this over the course of your life, so you may as well get used to it; you may as well decide what it's gonna mean to you in the context of what you're trying to do, and so that you just keep going. But I mean I--we had very good teachers; the math teachers were great. All the areas that I was interested in, you know, I had a--you know, I, I did have--I had a great art teacher there; I can't remember her name, but she was fantastic-- Story_ID: 564498 Speaker 1: One of my best friends there, this guy name Sean Callahan--I spent my first Thanksgiving away from home; he was Irish Catholic, his dad--his mother was--his mother was either Jewish and his father was Irish Catholic, so the combination--spiritual combination (laughter) at home was very different. But he and his brother Cokey Callahan [ph.]--I learned how to drive in Sean's car; he was a day student. 'Course it was illegal to be driving his car, but I learned how to drive in his car, and Sean was in my wedding; I mean--and my wife went to law school in Boston [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts]. She forgot all the bridesmaids' shoes because she was planning it from out of town; Sean went to Boston and picked them up and brought them to the wedding for her. I mean I had great friends. Steve Panagiotakos [Steven C. Panagiotakos], this Greek lawyer, who's now head of Ways and Means Committee [Massachusetts Senate Ways and Means Committee], was the captain of our basketball team and I, I ate many a meal at Steve's house in Lowell, Massachusetts when I was a student in Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts]. He had never even met Denise [Denise Cleveland Leggett]. One night she got stuck in Boston's Logan Airport [General Edward Lawrence Logan International Airport, Boston, Massachusetts] two and a half hours from his house; he went and picked her up, took her home, and brought her back to the airport the next morning 'cause I didn't want her to get in a cab at midnight. So, I mean friendships were great and--but the teachers, I--you know; I mean I guess if I thought hard enough, I could pick a few of 'em out, but. Story_ID: 564499 Speaker 1: So, now, is there a time in high school where you decide where your career is going--where it's going, or what you would like your career to be? Not yet (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was still in high school thinking economics, math--I wanted to major in math, or something like that. I--medicine had not even crossed my mind in high school, I just--I knew I wanted to go to a good college, and since my brother [Robert Leggett] went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], I knew that's where I wanted to go. And I, I hadn't even really evaluated a bunch of schools, I just wanted to do what he did. Speaker 1: So you just knew Princeton was where you would go. Speaker 2: Yeah. I didn't know that, you know, things would work out necessarily. I mean it's a lot of hard work, and you gotta get evaluated by people you don't know, and they gotta decide whether they think your application is competitive, and all the stuff that goes into that. But it--I'd just always known about it because my brother did it and, and it was always gonna be on my list, and it was gonna be at the top. I didn't even apply to the other Ivy League schools; I got recruited by a basketball team at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]--I, I didn't wanna go there. And it's not that it's good or bad, I just wasn't interested, so I applied at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], a bunch of other schools; only Ivy League school I applied to was Princeton, just--that's what my brother did; otherwise, I would just be back in the Midwest. Speaker 1: Okay. So, who helped you prepare to, to get ready to go to college, wherever you would go? Was there a counselor? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we had counselors at school, but our counselors were--you know, there always comes a point in life when you gotta have an independent idea of what's good for you, and you gotta have people in your life whose opinions matter, and then there are other people who has opinions about what they think is good for you, and you just have to simply discard it. We had counselors who would look at your package, and they would come up with a list of schools that they thought you were appropriate for, based on your numbers, or whatever. But, you know, there's this intangible part of human nature that is not measurable by, you know, the routine sort of measuring tools that we use, and you gotta know yourself and you gotta know kind of where you're going, to some extent, so that when you hear someone's opinion who might not be supportive of, of what you think you wanna do, you just gotta let it flow in and outta your head as almost as if it--you never even heard it. And then you gotta balance that by being in touch with somebody who you trust, who will tell you the truth and say to you, "Well, you know--." It's like my brother, when I was in college, came to one of my basketball games when I was playing for Princeton and he said, you know, "Okay, what are you gonna do with the rest of your life?" I said, "Well, what do you mean?" He said, "Well, I see your game is good, but it's not that good; you're not gonna be playing the NBA [National Basketball Association], so you, you need a career." Now, he's right. His opinion matters, I didn't like to hear it and didn't wanna hear it but he was truthful, so I took it to heart. But our counselors at Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts]--I mean they were good counselors, but they--I see a lot of very talented students, our class is very competitive, so they try and match the students who--most talented with what they think are the best schools, and that's how they do their thing; I don't really know that they individualize it that much, so I--and my counselors I don't even remember. I, I, I don't even know that I really listened to 'em, to be honest with you. Speaker 1: So, you graduated from Andover in-- Speaker 2: Seventy-eight, 1978 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) nineteen seventy-eight [1978]. Story_ID: 564500 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you please state your name, and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Dr. Christopher Leggett. That's Christopher, C-H-R-I-S-T-O-P-H-E-R, James, J-A-M-E-S, Willie, W-I-L-L-I-E, B period, Leggett, L-E-G-G-E-T-T. Speaker 1: Your date of birth? Speaker 2: Eleven, zero eight, sixty [November 8, 1960]. Speaker 1: Your place of birth? Speaker 2: Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am an interventional cardiologist. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: Duluth, Georgia. Speaker 1: And let's begin by saying that this is a continuation of an interview started in September, 2007. Story_ID: 564501 Speaker 1: Let's go back to your high school in Andover, Massachusetts. Give me a little more information about the school, who you met there, and some of the teachers. Speaker 2: You know, the school is a secondary school; it's, it's the most prominent secondary school in the country, actually and, you know, the educational content of what they have to offer is tremendous. There is no ceiling, so to speak, to what's available for you to learn, which was a very different environment from my environment in Cleveland, Ohio, where there was actual content limitations, and at Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], there were no limitations to the boundaries of knowledge, which was frankly, you know, sort of a new way of looking at being educated for me, and it really highlighted the differences in what's available to, I guess, the haves versus the have nots, educationally, that is. So, in that regard, I thought it was an educational candy store--as much as you can eat, they were willing to feed you. You know, I had, you know, a variety of, of, of teachers there; there are a number of different disciplines and, and don't--I can't recall a specific teacher that, you know, particularly stands out; there were so many excellent teachers available to us. I, I guess if I had to, I just--it's thirty-five years ago--trying to remember a specific teacher is a little challenging. But, you know, it was, it was a different environment. I mean I think, you know, when you sort of look at it, when I look back on it, you know, standard things were standard, you know; science and math were objective. English, literature, your ability to interpret or write it were a little more subjective, so I, I did find that in grading opportunities, that when those more literary subjects were graded, that they were, in my view, less objective and more subjective and, and there was a sense, I, I think, on my part, that the exposure of teachers to African American or minority students, and I guess our exposure to them, was frankly somewhat new. While we didn't represent the first class of, of African American students at the school, the density of our representation was obviously extremely low; I think there were a total of ten of us out of maybe eleven hundred students so, you know, some of the cultural sensitivity issues, I think, had to be explored in that sort of student teacher relationship, certainly in the subjective areas of writing. I thought in, again, the more scientific and math related subjects, you know, the answer was what it was--two plus two always equals four, so it's not much debate about that. Story_ID: 564502 Speaker 1: You talked about a, a project that you turned in about African American history, and you didn't think that you got a very good grade, or you should have gotten a higher grade, is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, actually I, I, I do recall that. I think I was a senior [at Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], and we had to pick a subject, any subject that we wanted to, and we had to write about it and actually do an oral presentation about it and, you know, I chose a subject regarding the civil rights era in American history. One thing that was striking in this American history class, that was really not, you know, sort of touched upon very much in the spectrum of history, which I found a bit, you know, sort of surprising and unsettling, so I decided that I was gonna spend some time educating my class and teachers about this area that was important to me. And I, I think that what happens at times in these environments, the introduction of new material, while it is not in its origin new, but the introduction of, of material such as civil rights and, and the quest for equality in the sort of ethnic and racial tensions that surrounded that in our country, when I introduced that into this sort of pristine environment, I felt the students were quite receptive; I thought it struck a chord with the teacher because in, in my view, I thought the teacher was less sensitive to the issue and somewhat--I think offended may be a strong word, but somewhat--it's almost as if she would have preferred that I had not brought it up. Speaker 1: What subject--what did you talk about? Do you remember (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can't recall; I think it was more just sort of, you know--it certainly wasn't anything like the Black Panther Party. I wrote about that in college [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], but at that time it was sort of just, you know--I, I think it was about the--you know, the Montgomery Bus Boycott and, you know, the desire to, you know, sort of, you know, the sit-ins and things of that nature. I, I, I think that was more my subject, and just the, you know, sort of energy surrounding the, you know, desire for, you know, desegregation and racial equality and those sorts of things. And I was really just trying to--I found that the absence of that in American history was unacceptable, and even at that young stage of my life, I just--I've always sort of been willing to challenge the educational marketplace, and I, I felt that those students would probably--I don't wanna say never hear the subject, but the best opportunity for them to learn about it, I thought, would be from one of their peers because I think that when you're in an environment and you have peers and you have relationships, the ability to discuss a sort of difficult subject matter is, is, is, is sort of muted by the existence of your friendship, which allows you to discuss any subject without feeling as if anyone is being personally attacked. Speaker 1: But you did feel that the teacher was put out about, about your topic. Speaker 2: Yeah, I felt that she just was--I think the word I wanna use was uncomfortable with it herself, and felt that it was a bit too aggressive for the classroom environment from a subject matter standpoint, and that she would just simply rather that we talked about, you know, [President] Andrew Jackson or, or something of that nature that was less specific and less sort of, you know, sort of tension building for the sake of, of, of the classroom. Speaker 1: Were there other papers or oral presentations that, that you had better grades on? Speaker 2: I had great grades on, you know, a variety of subjects, you know, in, you know, literature and English, you know; I can't remember what we wrote about, but we wrote about a number of things, just depends on the class and, you know, there's American literature, there's--I took a course on Andrew Jackson, and I thought the professor in that class was hard but I thought he was great, and he, he, he, he almost made you feel like he lived during that period of time because he loved the subject so much. Story_ID: 564503 Speaker 1: Were you tested to even be able to come to this school? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had to take--and I was part of what's called the Better Chance program [A Better Chance], where they kind of seek, you know, sort of talent in African American students, and I think we took the routine entrance examination, PSAT [Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude Test], I think, is the name of it, that all the other students took, and the one thing about Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] and its, you know, sort of applicants, is we had to get accepted on the basis of the same criteria as all the other students, so your PSAT scores had to be, you know, sort of comparable to any of the other students, and your academic grades as well, so when they looked at you or your on paper credentials, they had to match the pool of any Andover student that was selected out of the pool of applicants, and if you were able to quote, be accepted, based on your academic performance, then the relationship between the school and the Better Chance program--the Better Chance program was simply sort of a search firm or a search engine for talented students and would present them, or try and match them with schools that they felt fit their academic sort of preparation and, and if you're able to be sifted out of the applicant pool and accepted, then the relationship between the Better Chance program in Andover, or any secondary school that was part of this program, would be that they would then come in and finance your education, so the, the admission process outside of just funding was exactly the same for any other student attending the school. And that was important because I--and I think it's important to, to highlight that because the idea is not to match a student in an environment where they won't succeed, and so Andover was a very difficult school, but typically, the students who got matched there were students who they felt would be successful because they were equipped to be successful, and that's why they compared you to everybody else in the admission process. And I think sometimes, you know, these programs are wonderful in their ability to create exposure, and I think sometimes they get misinterpreted by the outside community as being some sort of, you know, experimental program where, you know, the students are not truly capable; it's almost like they're just giving you an opportunity that you don't really deserve, and the reality about opportunity is, is a lot of times you don't have opportunity because you're not exposed to it, and frankly don't even know that certain things exist, so once the playing field gets broadened, and your knowledge of opportunity increases, then you can expose yourself at any level. And, and I'll say Andover--I have fantastic friends to this day, from Andover, that are, are some of my closest friends right now. Story_ID: 564504 Speaker 1: Tell me some stories about the time when you first met some of your friends there at Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], and some of the things that you did together. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'll say this, that I had never been in a predominantly white academic environment up until that point, and most of my classmates, if not all of them, at Andover, had never been in school with, you know, an African American student. So, I, I, I think our initial sort of, you know, sort of, you know, induction into the environment was new for everybody. Of course they represented the dominant culture in numbers, and we were, you know, sort of the minorities but the, the humanitarian interaction was new, and it was new on both sides. And my freshman year, I lived in a dorm called Nathan Hale [Nathan Hale House]; we had--and that's actually where my best friends were born; we had a great time. I mean we really had no--we were all about thirteen or fourteen years old, so we really interacted with each other on the basis of that age group more than any ethnic or--divide, frankly, and so, you know, our ability to mesh was really based on the things that we liked in common that most kids in that age group are attracted to, and we all did a requisite amount of homework and studying, but our free time--I remember my tenth grade year; me and a few other friends we--they had a bunch of apple trees on campus and-- Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends? Speaker 2: Well, in, in that dorm was Ken MacKenzie [Kenneth MacKenzie], Josh McCall; those were probably my closest in that dorm, you know. Steve Panagiotakos [Steven C. Panagiotakos] was a Greek guy; he was a basketball player, I was a basketball player, you know; there's John Barres who's one of my closest friends to this day, saw him last week, who's a, a Catholic priest now, and he was a basketball player with me in high school and in college at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]. There just ton of individuals, but--and we've stayed extremely close. I mean--Dave Gutzke is another, and there's Greg Moten who was my roommate, who was one of my closest friends, you know? Dexter [ph.], you know, Shelly [Shelly Guyer]--I mean I can name 'em all. Story_ID: 564505 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were telling me the story about the apples. Speaker 2: Oh, we just--you know, I was mischievous; there was a bunch of apple trees on campus [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], so we decided one night, Scott [ph.], Ken [Kenneth MacKenzie] and I, well, let's just spice up going to dinner, so we just hid in the cemetery and start throwing apples at students as they would walk past, and it just became a pastime; instead of doing it once, we did it literally every day. It frankly became the most exciting part about going to dinner, was how quick could we hide and just start picking students off as they walked past. Unfortunately, we hit one of the--either the headmaster or one of the house counselors in the head, and we had to, we had to pretty much run because, you know, that wasn't a good thing. And, fortunately, he couldn't catch us so he never could specifically identify us because he couldn't catch us, but he had a good idea, but in the absence of, of, you know, actual documentation we, we survived (laughter), you know, probably getting put out of school, but-- Speaker 1: Who was the headmaster at the time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at that time, it was Ted Sizer; he was the headmaster. But I think the person we hit was this gentleman name Mr. Crumpy [ph.]. That was his name. Story_ID: 564506 Speaker 1: Describe the campus to me. Speaker 2: Ah, it's beautiful; it's like a college, it's--we had a two hundred acre bird sanctuary on campus; I mean dorms were all over the campus, different quad, and they had different sections of campus that was different names, you know. We had, you know, wonderful athletic facilities; we had indoor track and batting cage, you know, I mean state of the art; this is in '78 [1978], outdoor soccer, football, baseball fields--I mean it was beautiful. And I, I--to this day, I contribute to Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] financially; one, because I wanna preserve the opportunity for students of color to attend who are academically gifted, and they have recently established a, a need blind admission program so that if you're capable of academically attending, the, the cost won't be an inhibiter and, and I think that's incredibly important for parity in our country educationally. But the campus is phenomenal, the experience was phenomenal. I don't, I, I don't have any negatives about it; I think, you know, part of just working through the newness of human interaction is what it is. I think there were some teachers that were less comfortable with us as students, and that's, you know, that is what it is, and the fortunate thing about being raised probably with, you know, a sense of self-value and worth, is that you don't allow, allow any individual to--you sort of live inside your intellectual space where you start to doubt, you know, sort of your capabilities. Story_ID: 564507 Speaker 1: Oh, I forgot Sean Callahan was a great friend. He was Irish Catholic. I spent my first Thanksgiving away from home, and I think I told you before that John Kennedy [John F. Kennedy, Jr.] was, you know, another very close friend of mine, so-- Speaker 2: Are there any stories about you and John Kennedy? Speaker 1: Oh, we used to do everything together. We watched 'Roots' together and, and that was, I don't know, '75 [1975], '76 [1976], but that was a big thing. I mean we watched--I mean the whole dorm watched the show; I was probably the only black student, but we watched it. It was very intense, and I think it was part of their historical exposure to that whole situation, and they were very respectful about it and very contrite about some of the things that were going on, and I think, probably had never even really knew or heard, or had any exposure but, yeah, I guess one of my favorite--John and I used to do everything. We used to, you know, skateboard, you know. I got one picture in my house here with John and I on it, we both got gold chains around our neck with big Afros and (laughter), and I used to go to Boston [Massachusetts] to get my hair cut because there was no black barber in Andover [Massachusetts], so I had to go to Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], which is all-black. John would be the only white person in Roxbury in this barbershop waiting while I get my hair cut, and, and we used to do things like that, and I remember one time he asked me to buy him a sub sandwich, and I'm sitting there thinking, now, John is, is it a $100 million that you have in your, in your, in your, in your (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Trust fund (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in your trust fund, or what, what exactly is that number? Yeah, I got five dollars if you need it, but. But that's just the nature of friends and interaction; we just kind of shared everything. And he was, he was a fantastic person--very humble, very--his mother [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] did a, a wonderful job raising him and his sister [Caroline Kennedy], and allowing them to be normalized and not feel inhibited in the way they interacted with people and, and I remember when I met his mom, and his mom and my mom [Ethel Leggett] met during parents weekend, and we used to go to New York [New York] and just do a bunch of stuff. Story_ID: 564508 Speaker 1: You also spoke about playing basketball in Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Were you good? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was excellent. We had a great team; my eleventh grade year we went to the state finals. I think we lost 'cause they--we played, I think, in Worcester, Mass [Worcester, Massachusetts], and they had this one guy on this other team who basically shut down our best scorer. He was--they just--he was a great player and our, our best scorer was averaging maybe thirty-five points a game and he, he just completely locked him up, locked him down, scored less than ten points and we lost 'cause we were--we had become so accustomed to him hitting thirty-five, forty points that in the finals when he got shut down, you know, we just kind of just lost, but our team was great, and we had a great team in the twelfth grade, and we had great friends, I mean--on that team. You know, Greg Moten, my roommate, Steve Panagiotakos [Steven C. Panagiotakos], who's now a, a state senator, Jimmy Demetroulakos [James Demetroulakos], who's now an ENT [ear, nose and throat] surgeon, you know; John Barres, who's a priest. Our team was fantastic, and we--that core of friendships on that team is still extremely tight today. I mean Dave Gutzke is another guy; I mean, we'll do anything for each other--to this day. Well, I'll give you a story about Steve Panagiotakos. I mean--now, he had never met my wife Denise [Denise Cleveland Leggett], and she was in law school in Boston [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] and he was in law school in Boston, and one evening, she was just coming home from, from vacation, and missed her flight and got stuck at the airport in Logan [General Edward Lawrence Logan International Airport, Boston, Massachusetts] at midnight. Steve lived in Lowell, Massachusetts, which is two hours away. I had not seen Steve in five years or more, but I did not want her in a cab; I called him up, he drove two hours in the winter, picked her up at the airport, took her home, and brought her back to the airport the next day. Didn't--just told her, you know, "Tell her--Legs [HistoryMaker Dr. Christopher Leggett], I'll be there. Just have her wait; tell her don't move." I hadn't, hadn't seen him in over five years. But he's just, he's just, he's a great guy. Story_ID: 564509 Speaker 1: So, while you're in the twelfth grade [at Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], you begin to think about college, and you only applied to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], is that right? Speaker 2: No, that's not--I applied to probably ten schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ten or eleven. I applied at Princeton because my brother [Robert Leggett] had attended and he was always the person who, in my life, was my role model outside my parents [Ethel Leggett and Willie Leggett, Sr.]. I always looked to him for guidance, and, you know, I just felt like he was a wonderful representative of, of goodness, and he was dedicated, he loved, you know, the idea of excellence for the sake of excellence. He was always well prepared, he worked hard, and he was never intimidated by his environment, and so I applied to Princeton because of him, frankly. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What other schools did you apply to? Speaker 2: Well, Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]; he went to Northwestern business school [Graduate School of Management; Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois], so I applied to Northwestern because he went there. I think--I got recruited by Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] to play basketball. I'm trying to remember if I applied there; I didn't like Yale very much but, you know, then there was Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and, and a bunch of other kind of schools in middle America (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you settle on Princeton? Speaker 2: 'Cause my brother went there. It just--he had taken me there when I was eight years old, and I, I, I didn't quite remember much about it, but I just felt like if it was good enough for him, it was good enough for me and, and it was a excellent school, so I just--when I got my acceptances, you know, Princeton gave me a great financial package, and I just said, you know, here I come. Speaker 1: So you--did you get a full scholarship? Speaker 2: Pretty much, yeah. Speaker 1: So, once again, you're, you're showing your academic--on--you're on top of the academic tree here. Speaker 2: Absolutely. I think that--you know, at that time, you know, '78 [1978], you know, scout-- Story_ID: 564510 Speaker 1: The last question was about your scholarship to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], so that was an academic scholarship. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And tell me about your transition from Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] to Princeton. Speaker 2: Well, I, I'll tell you, the preparation that I received from Andover was fantastic academically because Princeton was not nearly as intimidating intellectually as it was, I suspect, to some students who did not have the preparation that I had from attending Andover, you know. The exam periods were very similar, the course level difficulty, obviously, was graded up in college, but you had already developed study habits that would allow you to tackle subject matter so that you weren't intimidated by it, and the volume of work is very comparable such that you just had to categorizes and organize your time allocation and, and--to the extent that you could do that, and you had good study habits, you could, you could get through the information, so the academic preparation I was ready for. And, you know, the other thing that Andover did in being a part of simply the way I was raised, which you can't underscore, is just, you know, sort of the, the comfortable ease of interacting with people, you know. Our differences did not make me uncomfortable and, and I, I was not in awe of, of, of human beings; I mean I, I think we all bring what we bring to the table, and we explore whether or not that's relevant to each of us, and decide if we wanna go forward with the interaction, but I think what's important is that you do not, in any way feel diminished when you meet another human being, and I, I think that, for me a, a, a, a very huge part of that is just simply the way I was raised, but another part is having had some exposure to it in high school. It wasn't the first time that I was in sort of a--an environment that was, you know, by sheer numbers, not to my advantage. Story_ID: 564511 Speaker 1: Before we go further about Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], in the summers, when you were at Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], did you--what did you do during the summertime? Speaker 2: You know, my summers at Andover I went back home. I mean I loved home; I loved my new friends, but I loved my old friends, and I enjoyed--I looked forward to going home, I looked forward to being around my brothers and sisters, I looked forward to seeing my mom [Ethel Leggett] and, and just spending time decompressing with them. Speaker 1: Did you have a summer job? Speaker 2: I'm sure I did. I mean I worked every summer in high school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are some of the things that you did? Speaker 2: I used to, I used to work in this community grocery store, as I recall; it was literally right up the street from my house [in Cleveland, Ohio]. It wasn't anything particularly complicated. It was a good job, it helped me buy school clothes, it was up the street, my mother made me wear a shirt and a tie every day and, you know, I, I ran the cash register or I was a produce manager. Of course, I didn't know what I was doing but, you know, we had to present ourselves in a, you know, sort of responsible fashion, you had to interact with customers and you had to treat them with respect, and you had to explain what you had available to them, and it paid well. I mean I think I was making four dollars, in 1975, an hour, and I was in the tenth grade; to me, that was luck. So, I, I did that--I think I did that every summer while I was away at Andover; it was the best job, and the manager was great. Anytime I was at home, announced or unannounced, I could always get hours--I could always come to work. So, that's what I did. Story_ID: 564512 Speaker 1: At Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] there's a different climate as far as religion, and I know that your family is very religious. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How was that--how did that play out for you as far as religion at Andover--different from at home? Speaker 2: You know, I, I've never been intimidated by what I believe, and afraid to exhibit it. I mean, you know, I'm not ashamed of, or afraid of, of, or embarrassed by my relationship with the Lord; I mean I think that, you know, God has afforded me the life that I now live and enjoy, and He has also watched over my family. Speaker 1: What was the, the experience for you the first time you went to church in Andover? What type of church was it? Speaker 2: I don't think--I mean we just had on campus a chapel; I mean I--you weren't gonna find some Baptist church in the town of Andover [Massachusetts], I mean, so I--you know, frankly, on the weekends I wasn't in--you know, we didn't have that kind of freedom you, you just drive to wherever you wanted to go, to go to service, so we pretty much spent most of our time on campus. You had to get a campus leave every time you left, so I didn't--you know, in high school I, I did not go to some community church in town, or any of that; I mean I wasn't-- Speaker 1: Did you go to church on campus (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to, you know, chapel, basically, and chapel is chapel. I mean it's whoever's minister; it's, it's definitely different from, you know, there's no gospel singing going on in chapel, and the messages are what they are; they are presented in a very different fashion. But, you know, I, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, this was the first time you were experiencing that, so I, I was just wanting to know what that experience was like. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was probably bored to death, you know. Based on what I had been used to, I mean I, I'm sure I wasn't waking up on Sundays in high school saying, "Man, I can't wait to get to church" (laughter). I mean I can guarantee you that. So, I, I actually spent a lot of time reading the Bible and just trying to have worship, you know, myself, and to try and sustain my faith. And then there were other students on campus; we would try and get together and create, you know, a, a--I remember we had this one guy; I can't remember his name, but he would organize service on campus, and he was kind of like a--he wanted to be a preacher so we, you know, we let him preach, and it was (laughter), it was okay; it was better than chapel, actually. But, you know, that's--well, that was, for the most part, church in high school. Story_ID: 564513 Speaker 1: Okay, so now we're on to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], and you feel that you're prepared because of your experiences at Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] for Princeton. And what is your major in at, at school? Speaker 2: I majored in sociology. Speaker 1: And why was that your choice? Speaker 2: That's a good question. You know, I was pre-med, and I think I was just interested in--I did not want to (unclear) spend all my time in college narrowly defined in pre-medical courses, specifically, all science. I thought college was a place where, you know, you can explore a, a wholesome liberal arts education that would expose you to a variety of subjects that you otherwise would have no exposure to. Sociology, for me, you know, was a good opportunity to understand, you know, social dynamics of human behavior and, you know, sort of population mobilization behind social political causes, all of which were an important part of me, and my ability to, to really understand that, I thought, would enhance my, you know, some interaction with other cultures and other people and, you know, have a, a good feeling for, you know, just mass mobilization of thought and individuals behind a, a particular cause. And so it, it also allowed me--I took a lot of religion, I took philosophy as part of that, I took public speaking; I mean it, it had--gave me an opportunity to really enjoy some, what I consider to be interesting, challenging areas that otherwise if I had concentrated specifically in biology or chemistry, I'd have been inundated with, with just that. Story_ID: 564514 Speaker 1: When did you decide that you wanted to become a physician? Speaker 2: That was the end of my second year in college. At first, I was interested in being an economist; I wanted to do pretty much everything my brother [Robert Leggett] did. He was a brilliant--he was an electrical engineer when he was at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]; he loved science, math, physics, and so up until I was in college, anytime anyone asked me what I wanted to be, I wanted to be whatever he was, and he was--he went on to business school [Graduate School of Management; Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois]; he was a fantastic, you know, sort of a businessperson--that, you know, engineer and, and just understood the intricacies of, of just a variety of technical subjects, so I figured that's what I wanna do. And I loved math, always did, and loved, you know, things like physics and chemistry, and so I spent college my first two years just because I liked it, and I figured I'd get good grades in it just because I liked it. It was objective, I didn't have to deal with someone's opinion of what they thought I wrote, and all that sort of stuff, so I, I, I took it, and so when it came down to, to shifting towards pre-med, I had a lot of the science requirements out of the way just because I, you know, generally liked it. And so, you know, I, I transitioned into pre-med the end of my sophomore year 'cause I took organic chemistry the summer between my sophomore and junior year, I believe, 'cause that's when I kind of decided I'd, yeah, maybe I want to do medicine. And you know, and frankly, at that time, you know, being, you know, African American in our country I, I, I simply thought, you know, so, what are the professions available to me that will minimize the amount of ignorance that I have to deal with on a daily basis from human culture, that would help me navigate this minefield a lot easier? Because I, I just--I thought--I felt at that time that there were certain professions that would afford you a certain level of respect and dignity that would, in my view, sort of decrease the amount of just superfluous--you know, sort of, you know, meaningless, ignorant stuff that you would have to encounter, and it would help you sort of navigate to point--from point A to point B a lot quicker. And I also thought it would give you a platform to--you would have a certain level of public respect, that it would give you a platform to sort of, you know, have some dialogue about other sort of more fundamental social political issues that might be of importance to you, that would help move mankind along in a positive sort of fashion. So, I, I, I think, to me at that time, it was purely a, a positioning, you know, choice for the future, and it was not until later in my life that I realized that, you know, it was really a path that was ordained by God for me. Story_ID: 564515 Speaker 1: Now, with all of these very heavy classes that you're taking--courses that you're taking, you also have time to play basketball. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tell me about your basketball team at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Now, we had a great team; I mean, you know, Ivy League is what it is; it's not, you know, UNLV [University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] or, you know, anything like that; I mean it's very methodical, it's very sort of let's take advantage of the talent that we have, and this is how we're gonna do that, and, and we had a coach that basically taught fundamentals in, you know, very specific ways that he wanted us so play, and-- Speaker 1: Who was your coach? Speaker 2: Well, the head coach was Pete Carril, and I--we had assistant coach; I think it was Tony Relvas, R-E-L-V-A-S. So, they taught us very specific ways to play, and--but basketball--I mean college sports took a lot of time, and we probably were together, including travel, maybe forty hours a week, but we were very organized. I mean, you know, you coming from class, maybe practice from 3:00 to 7:00--6:00 or 7:00. By the time you eat dinner, it's, you know, 7:30, get to the library, it's about 8:00, but--so you'd have about four or five hours of athletic stuff in the afternoon but, you know, most of us would--after we ate dinner, we would just--we would go to the library and study as--not as a team, but we would all go to the library and, you know, just kind of get our work done. So, that environment was very good in that, you know, not only was the team--it was very close; I mean I have some-- Speaker 1: Who were some of your teammates? Speaker 2: Well, you know, there was John Rogers [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.] who's actually in Chicago [Illinois] now, at Ariel [Ariel Investments]; he was the captain of, of one of our teams while I was in college; there's John Barres, my high school friend [from Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts]; there's Chipmunk [ph.] who--boy, this is another good friend of mine who was on our team, and there was--and there's David Duchovny from 'The X-Files'; he was one of our teammates. Speaker 1: Have Rich Simkus [Richard Simkus]? Speaker 2: Yeah, Rich Simkus played at Princeton. Speaker 1: And Craig Robinson. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. And, and Craig Robinson--is that Michelle Obama's brother? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's now the head coach at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] as well. Speaker 1: And so--let me see, we said Billy Ryan [Bill Ryan], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Steve Mills, Randy Melville; those guys were all on the team. Speaker 1: So, there were quite a few that made it to the pros--the NBA [National Basketball Association]. Speaker 2: No, I mean none of those guys you named made it to the NBA; they were all good college players, but they all have, you know, professional careers that are, you know, in a variety of areas, but none of them, or us, have made it to the NBA; in fact, my brother [Robert Leggett]--I think that's probably why I became pre-med is my brother came to one of my games and he asked me, he said, in only the way that he could say it, basically, "So what are you gonna do with your life?" And I'm like I'm asking, "Well, what do you mean?" He said, "Well, I see your game, and you are not gonna be going to the NBA, so you need to figure out pretty much kind of what your next occupation is gonna be" (laughter). So, I've always appreciated his pragmatic approach, and he was very--he was a realist, and he was right, so, it helped me sort of focus and make a decision about another career opportunity. Speaker 1: Who was the, the president of Princeton while you were there? Speaker 2: Gosh. Oh, Bowen, B-O-W-A--E-N, President Bowen [William G. Bowen]. Story_ID: 564516 Speaker 1: So, now that you decide to, to go pre-med, and you graduate from Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] in '82 [1982]? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: You know, I go to medical school. Speaker 1: Well, tell me the, the process of what medical schools you apply to, and what goes on before you decide what school you go to (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean I--and, you know, somewhere around, I guess, junior or during senior year, you take your MCATs and you get a list of school and you know, we had these pre-medical advisors on campus that would sort of write our, you know, cover letters, and then you send your applications out, and then you, you know, you just had to pick a school, based on whichever school and geography, that works for you. And for me, I wanted--I'd been away from home, so I wanted to come back to Ohio to, to medical school 'cause I had a good feeling that after med school I probably would never live in Ohio again. Speaker 1: Why, why was that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I just never saw myself settling there, but I, I just felt like I'd been away for now eight years, and I wanted to come home and spend some time at home, kind of while I was getting, you know, my medical school degree, and so I was at Case Western Reserve [Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine] and--which is in Cleveland [Ohio], and it's ten minutes from my mom's [Ethel Leggett] house so, it, it--you know, it just felt right for me, and so that's what I did and, and it was the right choice. I got a chance to be back home, you know, be in a great school, see my family, see my mom and, you know, have a great church environment, and it, it was, it was great. Story_ID: 564517 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about Chase Western Reserve School of Medicine [sic. Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio]. Tell me about the school. Speaker 2: You know, it's--I mean it's just--you know, it's a good medical school; I mean it's a lot of history, I mean it, it, it, for me, was--you know, medical school is a little different. I, I, I don't specifically remember friends from med school; it's more like you're preparing for life, and everybody kind of is in their own compartment. 'Course I remember a lot of classmates but, you know, more of--most of my friends from med school were my friends from college who were at other med schools, like Michael Tryser [ph.], who was at Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], Valerie Ford [ph.], who were at Harvard and, you know, people who were close to me in college who were pursuing the same path at other institutions that we kind of kept very close together 'cause, you know, we just--you know, it was just kind of a team; we wanted to make sure that we all got through and that we sort of pursued areas that allowed us to be socially responsible as well as academically prepared. And at Case specifically, you know, I was, I was married my second year, or third year of med school so, you know, most of my time was spent, when you had free time, you know, with my wife [Denise Cleveland Leggett], and/or, you know, you know, with my family in Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: From Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts] to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], you felt you were prepared-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --academically. Did you feel the same way from Princeton to Case Western Reserve (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To med school? Sure. Yeah, med school was--I mean it's all work, and you just gotta compartmentalize it and decide, you know, sort of what--how to allocate your time towards each specific area. Med school, to me, in terms of level of difficulty, was not as difficult as, as college. I mean it just--I mean you had different classes, and they were specific classes for a specific period of time; you had a little subject, once you got through that class, you did another class, and I mean you didn't sort of redo it; it just was chunks of material that you had to learn, and then you go into your clinical areas and, and in the third and fourth years where you're now on the, on the wards interacting with patients and learning how to take care of patients and that sort of thing, and that's, that's when you really, I think, blossom in your interaction. Story_ID: 564518 Speaker 1: And I had a great--I was fortunate, I've been incredibly fortunate through, through my educational pathway to not only have great instructors, but to have African American sort of role models in, in that instructive position, and Dr. Edgar Jackson [Edgar B. Jackson, Jr.] at Case Western Reserve [Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio], was an attending in internal medicine who had a profound impact on me in my third and fourth years of medical school because he was, he was just simply outstanding, he had the respect of his peers, he had the respect of the medical student body, he was a community based physician, but he was excellent and, and he allowed me to really sort of see myself in the future, which I think is important. So, at Case Western in that regard, for me it was good because, you know, I had good material, I had great, you know, interactions. I remember Dick Olds [G. Richard Olds] was one of my advisors, and Dr. Mahmood [ph.] was another one, and these were heads of the department. Charles Carpenter was the head of our Department of Medicine; I'd gone to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] with his son, and he was--Dr. Carpenter was, he was just a, a, an incredibly--just talented person, who also was extremely sensitive, and he was--he just ca- he was just a dignified human being. He walked, you know, in a way that demanded respect, and he had the respect of his colleagues; he trained at Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland]. He's just--he was wonderful. He was wonderful for me because I could get sound advice that was unadulterated, and from someone who I respected, and so I--and you know, I had a, a wonderful blend of, of, of, of, of advisors and people I respected and, you know, while Dr. Jackson was African American, Dr. Carpenter, Olds, and Mahmood were, you know, white, and they were--we had great sort of interactions that were very beneficial to me. Story_ID: 564519 Speaker 1: Before we go forward, let's step back and talk about when you left Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]. We said that you went to medical school, but actually, you went to medical school at the University of Cincinnati [University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio], is that correct? Speaker 2: The first two years, correct. Speaker 1: The first two years? And tell me how you decided to go there. Speaker 2: You know, I don't--you know, you look at schools, you look at their curriculums; a lot of them are different in the first two years; their style of teaching is different. Speaker 1: Was this also close to your home? Is this-- Speaker 2: Cincinnati [Ohio] is--you know, I live--I grew up in Cleveland [Ohio]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so Cincinnati is, I don't know, three hours--three and a half hours from Cleveland but, you know, it's different, you know, teaching styles in the first two years; some of them were structured, others were less structured, and you just--you kind of look and see where you think you have the best fit for the information, and one thing I can say is, at every point along the way, every decision retrospectively that was made, has been the right one, because at the University of Cincinnati, I again had the benefit of being mentored by some, some of the world's most fantastic African American physicians I--one in specific is Alvin Crawford who was the chairman of the Department of Pediatric Surgery at the University of Cincinnati; he was one of mentors, and he is the leading expert worldwide in pediatric orthopedic surgery and, and through him--rotating with him, I had the privilege of, of, of meeting Dr. Augustus White [HistoryMaker Dr. Augustus A. White, III], who was the chairman of orthopedic surgery at Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], and I met him because Dr. Crawford had invited him down to give a lecture; I attended the lecture, Dr. White took a liking to me and, and while I was a, a first and second year student at the University of Cincinnati, my wife [Denise Cleveland Leggett] was in law school in Boston [Massachusetts]. When I would go to Boston, Dr. White would bring me over to Harvard, put a white jacket on me, take me on rounds with him, take me to the operating room with him so that I can see what it felt like to be a physician and, and, and, and the beautiful thing about him was that I never had to give him any notice. If I got in town today, I could call him up and go by and, and he was always willing to be there for mentorship. So, you know, those two relationships in, in medical school, for me, from the mentorship professorial level were incredibly valued. Dr. Crawford wrote my--when I decided to transfer to Case Western [Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio] after I got married, Dr. Crawford wrote my letter of recommendation. When I decided to apply to Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland] aft- from Case, after I graduated, Dr. Crawford, Dr. White, and some of my professors from Case wrote my letters of reference. So, at every point along the way--and at--and, and in Cincinnati, I met two of my, you know, one of my best friends that, you know--a lifelong friend, Dr. McLeod--Kyle McLeod, and speak to him like three or four times a week now, and had I not gone there, I would not have had, you know, that relationship. Dr. Ogletree [Carl Ogletree] is another person I met there; he was a urologist. So--and I, you know, met one of my lifelong friends there, Dr.--Mr. Cecil [Cecil Coles (ph.)] and his wife Dorothy Coles [ph.]; there was a family I stayed with in town that is literally part of my family now, so the Lord has intricately navigated my path for me, and at every point along the way He has sent a blessing in my life that my life would not be nearly as full without, without them. Story_ID: 564520 Speaker 1: You were saying (audio disturbance) in medical school you meet your wife? Speaker 2: That's right. Well, no, I met her--I met her my senior year in college [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], and that's--this is a whole tape unto itself because her influence on my life is nothing short of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, can you just tell us how you met her? Speaker 2: I met her in church. I was studying, you know, organic chemistry for the summer, and her dad, Harold Cleveland, was the president of the--what's called the Allegheny West Conference of Seventh-day Adventists, and he was in town speaking at our church, Glenville Seventh-day Adventist Church [Glenville Present Truth Seventh-Day Adventist Church, Cleveland, Ohio], and he had recent--he had years earlier baptized my mother [Ethel Leggett] aft- my dad [Willie Leggett, Sr.] was a Baptist minister, and after he died, you know, my mother joined the Adventist church through what was called then a tent effort, where evangelism was occurring, and it was my wife's father who baptized her. So, she wanted me to meet him and I went in church, and not only did I meet him, I met his daughter Denise [Denise Cleveland Leggett], who's my wife of twenty-five years now, and it, it, it, it, it has been the absolute best thing that has ever happened to me in my lifetime. And we dated for four years before we got married in 1984, and it was all four years apart; she was in school in Alabama, I was at Princeton, and she was in law school in Boston [Massachusetts] at Boston University [Boston University School of Law], and I was at--in medical school in Ohio [University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio] and, you know, it's, it's just remarkable the impact she's had on my life. I've always felt like I was pretty, you know, sort of talented and smart, but she really taught me how to truly access the power of God, and it was all through her example and her relationship with the Lord that--I had never met anyone who, who had that sort of true friendship with God as a young person and, and it transformed my life really. I mean it--I, I just remember--she was young, she was nineteen or twenty. She was applying to, to law school, and since she was an Adventist, she didn't take exams on Sabbath, which was Saturday, and the only day they offered the LSAT was on Saturday. And she always wanted to be a lawyer, but she had decided that if they didn't give an alternate date to take it, that she just wouldn't go to law school, and that was remarkable to me. She told me that if the Lord didn't work it out, he had something better for her. And I, on the other hand, thought, well, okay, that, that may be true but, you know, if it were me, I'd probably just take the test and ask God to forgive me later. She didn't do that, and lo and behold, before the test was offered, they offered a Sunday testing date for her at, at the very time she needed it to happen, and the beautiful thing about her was she, she never stopped studying for the exam, so that when the day came up, you know, literally, two weeks before the exam--it was a hundred miles from where she lived, one of the testing sites. She was prepared because she, she knew the Lord was gonna deliver. She got into ten law schools and, and that level of faith changed my whole perspective, changed my life and, and I have her to thank for that. And throughout my lifetime since, she has always been the barometer of goodness and reason and, and there is absolutely no question that my trajectory for life would not have been what it has been without her in my life. I, I don't even--I, I don't hassle over that issue, and so she's the best thing that fundamentally ever happened to me. So we got married in 1984, her second year--my second year of med school, and she had just graduated from law school. Speaker 1: So, where do you live when you get married? You-- Speaker 2: We live in Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 1: In Cleveland? Speaker 2: Yes. We got a, you know, a condominium sort of on the shores of Lake Erie, on the west side. Story_ID: 564521 Speaker 1: So now, you transfer from the University of Cincinnati [University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio] to Case [Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio], and you finish there in '84 [1984]. Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986]. Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986]. And what happens in '86 [1986]? Speaker 2: Well, by that time I got into Johns Hopkins Hospital [The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] residency training program and, you know, it's always been the most prestigious, and touted as the most difficult training program in the country. And that's in Baltimore, Maryland so, you know, we moved from Cleveland [Ohio] to Baltimore, and true to its name, I mean it's rigorous; training was rigorous, it's intense, but it's also--when you finish, you feel capable of anything. Speaker 1: Tell me how you felt going through, through the process there. Speaker 2: You know, I, I had--at that point--you know, and there comes a point in your life where you, you reach a level of--I don't wanna say comfort, but you reach a level of certainty about your ability to negotiate any upcoming challenge, so it is no longer about the unknown; the only issue is, is how are you gonna address it? So, I knew that Hopkins was, you know, challenging and rigorous and all of the above, and there was this Osler mentality, which is the name of the program that, that just, you know, sort of extracted the nth degree out of you, but I--at the same time, I also was never intimidated by that because I, I couldn't imagine any, any new hurdle that could be before me that I had not sort of successfully gotten over in some form before. Story_ID: 564522 Speaker 1: Prepared with that, you know, state of mind, tell me about some of the challenges that you had to go through as an intern there [Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 2: Well, it's just work. I mean it's not, it's not--I mean it's just work. I mean it's, it's being trained, it's trying to learn how to be an excellent diagnostician, trying to learn how to demonstrate the, the proper sort of physician patient interaction that yields you not only the information, but builds a sense of trust between you and the person that you're taking care of and, and maintaining a level of compassion that, that also is, is intuitive in the relationship that allows a person to buy into you caring for them, and that you also buy into your responsibility to care so that it is not mechanical, so--but most of internship is really about--yeah, you got all this information to learn, all this work to do, but it is the sheer hours of the physical, you know, sort of nature of it--it's an endurance race. And, and for us, our call schedule, which is every night we stayed in the hospital, was, you know, it was the toughest in the country--every--we stayed--we were on call our internship every third night, so we slept in the hospital every three nights. And during two months outta the year, you were on call every other night. So, literally, you were away from home one third of the year; the other third that you were home after you'd been on call, you were--we were called, you know, cerebrally incompetent because you'd be so tired you couldn't interact with anybody, so you were literally only awake one third of the year when you could have some functional interaction with people. But that's--that is just part of it, so that--the internship, that was just the hardest part--was the endurance, and to spend that time also acquiring knowledge that you can use as a building block for the next year so you just can't be--stay up a bunch of hours and not learn any information, so that now when you're a resident and you have to teach what you know to the interns behind you, you, you want to have acquired, you know, a level of, of undergirding that allows you to now then be an instructor and a teacher, as well as a caretaker, so that was the hardest part of internship. And then residency just became more a refinement of that initial process, because each year was an added responsibility of educating the class behind you and building on your own knowledge because after third year, you were literally free to go out into the world and take care of some patients or, you know, get further training in a subspecialized discipline. Story_ID: 564523 Speaker 1: So, you know, Hopkins [Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] was great. And, and again, I was incredibly fortunate in my three years; I had great residents who I respected, you know. There were two black residents out of three years of residents, which was about 110 of us and, and the, the thing about it, we had the responsibility of educating medical students who were in med school there and, and, and like I said, I was fortunate; some--two of my--another best friend of mine came from a medical school class that I was--you know, he was one of the med school students, and he's now a cardiologist in Dallas [Texas]; his name is Mark Jenkins [G. Mark Jenkins]. There's a wonderful cardiologist in Texas, Eric Taylor, who was another medical student of mine at Hopkins. But I, personally, again, was privileged to have great mentors. I had two African American attendings. Speaker 2: Who were they? Speaker 1: Dr. Benjamin Carson [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.]; he's a neurosurgeon. He wasn't in my specific area, but he was in the hospital, and I just felt like I needed to be exposed to him, and I went and met him, and from that day to this day, he has been an important mentor in my life, not only educationally, but spiritually; he's my children's godfather. And then there's, you know, [HistoryMaker] Dr. Levi Watkins, who was the professor of cardiothoracic surgery, who is--these, these men, their contributions to science are, you know, irrefutable and enormous. And not only that, they allowed me to see myself in the future. Again, I could see what I would look like, if I just worked hard, ten years from now; this is what I could look like, and that's an important component. And they were also accessible; they weren't some ivory towered individuals who were so indulged or wrapped up in their own success that they were not available to you to draw upon to help you negotiate through the initial phases of this process. And I think at the end of the day, a lot of this--and maybe that's what HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] is all about to me, really, is providing stories that not only inspire people, but serve as a template for you to be able to see what you, yourself can do in your own life. And, and for me having these--the Lord has just been fantastic to me 'cause He has sent these mentors. I don't believe this is some random set of events; I mean I got into Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts]. I could've ended up in Boston [Massachusetts] for residency and I, I wouldn't've had Levi and Ben, maybe; I'm sure He would've sent someone else, I, I do believe that. But I'm just saying every choice that I made, every path that I've been on I, I've never been alone. I've had incredible mentors that have been a part of that, that has made that experience worthwhile; they've turned out to be lifelong friends, I've learned a tremendous amount from 'em, there're a host of residents that I had at Hopkins who were also great, but my experience was, was, was great. Story_ID: 564524 Speaker 1: Do you have any stories to share about being an intern or a resident [at Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] during that time--something that might stick in your mind? Speaker 2: Well, you know, my friends kid me a lot about when I was an intern, you know (laughter), this one is pretty, you know, trivial, but it's non-intellectual, but I had--I was married, my wife's [Denise Cleveland Leggett] a lawyer, she's working in town, and I--we had bought like this Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz], right? And, you know, students and--you know, one thing I've learned is, is your superiors can be kind of, kind of use non-intellectual material to play into their evaluation of you and, and so what I would do--we had one car because I had wrecked the other one 'cause I fell asleep driving home from work one day, and so it was wrecked. So, my wife would drive me to work in her Mercedes, but instead of pulling up to the hospital, I would have her let me off like a mile away from the hospital and I would walk the rest of the way. And one day (laughter), one of my buddies saw me getting--let off out of the car and, and he, he, you know, he basically never let me forget it, but the, the moral to that story was, the reason I was getting let off a, a mile away is because I didn't want this car to become the subject of discussion inside the hospital, and have my superiors or residents start interpreting, you know, where they thought I was, you know, economically or in my life, and allow that information to start influencing how they interacted with me, because it will influence human behavior, you know; I mean people are just shallow that way. And it's just, and it's just a car; it's nothing, you know, you know, important-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but, you know, they think--they might think that's what I sh- they should have, and why do I have it at this point in my life and not five years later like them. So I just said, "Forget it, just let me off; I'll just walk the other mile, and I--and when you pick me up, I'll just walk a mile down the road and, and just make it simple." And (laughter), and it worked out, but-- Story_ID: 564525 Speaker 1: What medical school did your wife [Denise Cleveland Leggett] attend? Speaker 2: Well, she's a lawyer. Speaker 1: I'm, I'm sorry; I meant law school (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's fine. She went to Boston University [Boston University School of Law] in Boston [Massachusetts], and-- Speaker 1: And what firm was she working for then? Speaker 2: She was--she actually worked in, in Maryland for what's called the Maryland General Assembly which--and it was a great job for her because she got to write the bond bill manual for the State of Maryland when she was there and, and when she left--you know, obviously, when we left there and moved to Atlanta [Georgia], she joined several--one of the prestigious firms here in town, in Atlanta. But, you know, we've--we always--you know, we, we made a commitment that we were never gonna live apart so that, you know, we were gonna make it work, and--from a employment standpoint--so when, when I moved to Baltimore [Maryland], she left a great job in Cleveland [Ohio]; she was one of the city prosecutors in Cleveland, and she had worked in the U.S. Attorney's Office in Cleveland [U.S. Attorney's Office for the Northern District of Ohio], so she had a very, you know, prominent role in that city, but she moved to Baltimore with me and, and that's just the decision that we had always made. Story_ID: 564526 Speaker 1: Another story--the, the story you told me about the car is great, but I want a story about in the hospital [Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland]. Maybe a patient or a case that you might have worked on. Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: Anything memorable during your internship or your residency? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there--yeah--I mean-- Speaker 1: You say that Ben Cos- Carson [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.]--you--he became your mentor. Is there a story you can share about a time that you spent with him? Speaker 2: Oh, I spent a lot of time with him. I, I think--you know, I, I, I used to sit in his office so many times--just sit down and talk to him about any subject, and I remember one occasion I was just sitting there, we were talking about a chapter that he had to write in a book and, you know, and he said to me, "There comes a point in your life when you realize that you know more about this subject than anyone and, and what you have to do is you don't really need to research it anymore, you just need to sit down and write it." And, and the impact that that had on me, frankly, was he wasn't saying that in some egotistical way, he was just saying that in a way that had represented the body of his work and the amount of time that he had put into that body of work that had now left him at this point where he was the world's authority on a specific subject. And, and for me, as a young person training, what that translated in--for me, was that basically, if I just work hard, and dedicate myself to the process of being educated, that there's no reason that when I see myself in the future and looking at myself through him, that I can't be sitting down doing a very similar thing. And, and what it takes would be just keep your nose clean, work hard, invest in your relationship with the Lord, rely on that fundamental friendship that He will deliver you through any of this madness that you have to go through and, and, and, and that He will bless your career. Story_ID: 564527 Speaker 1: And I have a very similar story from Levi Watkins [HistoryMaker Dr. Levi Watkins]. I was sitting in his office one day and, and I was always, through training, a, a very aggressive advocate for just bright--meaning that basically, I was not gonna allow anyone to disrespect me just because of their title; I just felt like that, that's just not a part of the way I was raised. I think you can respect a person and it doesn't matter what your station is, but you're just not gonna talk to me any kind of way; I, I just don't have to put up with that. And I also felt that I had to be a very strong advocate for medical students who were coming through, and who were being impacted--sometimes, you're just impacted by social dynamics that particularly are not, you know, in your best interest, and a lot of times, it's just that, you know, you know, your exposure and your ability to get through is limited because people don't want you to get through; I mean it's not anything more sophisticated than that. And so I always felt like as an older person, I had to be there to help them navigate this minefield that was designed for, in some ways, for their failure. And I was sitting in Levi's office one time and he said, he said, "You know, Chris [HistoryMaker Dr. Christopher Leggett], you know, right now," you know, "let me put my neck out for you and the rest of the students and the rest of the residents," 'cause I was always very, you know, upfront, you know, "I'll, I'll do it." And he said, "Because right now, if you put your neck out and they cut it off, you'll never get finished, okay?" He said, "But what you can do for me is after you get through, then you put your neck out for the next group," he said, "but right now, let me have my neck on the line." Story_ID: 564528 Speaker 1: You were gonna tell me a story about one of the patients during your residency [at Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well--you know, there, there are--I, I, I can think of two quick ones. I was on rounds one night with the other medical students--or one morning, and we had one African American dean, and he had admitted a patient and, on the rounds the next morning, just to give you a sense of kind of, you know, what students were used to, the students--well, the student who had worked this patient up--a medical student sent on rounds, he had given his presentation, then he said, you know, "Yeah, there was this, you know, there's this black guy sitting there by the patient's bed," and I said, "Well," I said, "did you ask him about his name yet?" He said, "Yeah, he said his name was Dr. Smoot [Roland T. Smoot]." I said, "Well, Dr. Smoot actually is the dean of this medical school." And the student then said, he said, "Well, he doesn't look like a dean." And I said to him, I said, "Well, what does a dean look like?" And, and, and, and, and basically, what he was saying is he had never seen a black dean, so all deans were white; it wasn't--he had a suit on, he looked intelligent, you know; it was his patient, but he just didn't look like a dean. And, and I, I just felt like I needed to take that opportunity to let him know that, "Frankly, you know, you know, you need to broaden your definition of what deans look like because this is a dean. He's the dean of this medical school and, and you, you should know that, being a medical student. But going forward, you know, you really need to guard yourself from comments that are fairly uninformed like this, so that you don't look so--just absolutely unintelligent when you say it." So, anyway, I mean I, I just felt like you gotta take opportunities. This is all about education because that same attitude can pervade another interaction with a patient and, and you just have to take opportunities to help people, you know, sort of be educated. But then there was another personal one that I had that I was taking care of this guy who was on a trach collar, which means he was on a respirator, an African American patient who had throat cancer, couldn't even talk, and I was going in to evaluate him 'cause I was--had to work him up, and he was gonna be on my service, and I kept, kept hearing him trying to mouth something through the respirator and, and I just leaned down and I got real close to him and he was mouthing out, in his words, "You--you ain't qualified," that's what he was saying. And, and I think, you know, what he was struggling with, which is an internal cultural pathology at times, is that, you know: I'm used to a white doctor taking care of me and, you know, I can't conceptually get my mind around having a black doctor take care of me, so--in other words, I want the qualified white guy. And, and it is funny, because I had just taken care of a Jewish individual earlier that day in the intensive care unit who had said the exact opposite; he said, "Dr. Leggett [HistoryMaker Dr. Christopher Leggett], I want you to take care of me," and I said, "Why?" He said, "Because if you're here, that means you're probably three times as qualified as some of the other doctors walking around, since the numbers are so low--it's only two of you." He said, "No, that--I want you to take care of me." So, you would have these social dynamic paradigms in, in care that would exist quite often and, and you'd have to have a very strong sense of self, and the resolve within yourself of, of who you are and what you represented intellectually so that you would not allow yourself to become angry or intimidated one way or the other. But there were sort of variety of experiences that, that you'd experience and, and quite frankly, people--you know, you would walk in rooms in, in that institution; they just did not--it is not commonplace, at that time, for them to interact with the--a physician of color; they, they would think that you're just a, a, you know, a transporter with a, you know, a doctor's coat on; I mean something--they just couldn't, couldn't grasp it, so--anyway, you just, you know, sort of work through that, kind of. Story_ID: 564529 Speaker 1: Can you tell me of a time--I'm sure there were many, but do you have one in your mind of, of a time that you were able to stick your neck out for your interns behind you? Speaker 2: Yeah, I--like I said, I, I, I just always believed that the pathway to where you're going is not one you can walk by yourself and, you know, a lot of times, sticking your neck out was nothing more than trying to support somebody who was struggling, and it's not--and, and you have to be able to visualize yourself. It's not like every situation for you is always gonna be perfect; there gonna be times, if you live long enough on this planet, that you're gonna need the assistance of some other person to either say a good word about you, or to provide you with some sort of support in--that can be nothing more than a rejuvenation of your confidence, to help you believe that, you know, you are at the right place and at the right time to, to be successful. So, you know, I was president of the Student National Medical Association when I was in, in medical school and, and, you know, when I was a resident [at Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland], I would always just sort of, you know, just try and help keep the retention numbers of as many students as possible and, and I was a--I was very verbal. Story_ID: 564530 Speaker 1: But my wife [Denise Cleveland Leggett] is just--she taught me a very important lesson when I was a resident [at Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland], that I think has--that has held true today 'cause I, I, I wasn't, you know, confrontational but I was not gonna be insulted and I just, I just--I, I couldn't digest that. And, and she told me because I would find myself in these sort of scraps with residents who were above me, because they, they just wanted to force me to adopt their opinion, even when I did not believe it. And she told me something very crucial; she said, "You know, really, in turn, you really have to learn the art of really engaging your superior to the extent that, to the extent that you make them feel that what they have to say is important," she said, "because all they wanna feel is that what they're telling you is important, and that you're actually following their instruction," she said, "so, let him or her have her opinion; you don't have to attack it, just let them have it. Let them say what they wanna say and, and then what you have to do is you have to resolve in your mind what it is that you're gonna do as it relates to that opinion." And she said, "As long as they think that you have listened to what they have to say, they're good; then you can go ahead and do whatever you want, because you have enough confidence that your approach is correct, but the minute you tell them how, you know, poor their opinion is, then they're gonna defend it, and then neither one of you are gonna get anywhere because you'll be grappling all the time." Story_ID: 564531 Speaker 1: When did you decide what specialty you would pursue? Speaker 2: Somewhere around my second or third year of residency. Speaker 1: And what was that? Speaker 2: It was cardiology. I just felt like--I got interested in it, it seemed like an exciting field, it, it seemed--it provided you with an opportunity to really help someone in their greatest time of need, it was satisfying how you could impact survival, it provided you with an opportunity to correct a problem technically, or fix it, utilize your hands and match your sort of mechanical skillset with your intellectual skillset, and I, I just felt like it was evolving, the evolution of where it was going was exciting, the potential subset of, of, of, of technical options that you would have to treat a problem were emerging, and it, it drew me into it because I felt that it would allow me to sort of evolve with this new sort of spectrum of opportunity to treat cardiovascular disease. And, and I can say to you that that has been categorically true; I have never had a day that I have not liked my job in terms of the intellectual satisfaction that it provides, and the truly sort of lifesaving, for lack of a better word, opportunities that it has that allows you to interface with people. Speaker 1: What was your first experience, or your first exposure, to heart surgery? Speaker 2: You know, I think it was Doc- you know, Dr. Watkins [HistoryMaker Dr. Levi Watkins] in, in Hopkins [Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland] was my first real exposure to it, and patients that he cared for, and just some of the sort of new things that he had done in the field of cardiothoracic surgery. Speaker 1: What were some of those things? Speaker 2: Well, he, for example, implanted the first--you know, these--they have these devices called defibrillators that shock patients, like in the airport; well, we, we now have them where it's like the size of a pacemaker that you put inside, and it'll shock you internally. Well, he put the first one in a human being, and that was, you know, thirty years ago; it's bigger, but he put the first one in, and he did the original research with that on a dog, and just, you know, the stimulation of, of, of ideas like that were, were critical, and it just seemed like an exciting profession. Story_ID: 564532 Speaker 1: Where did you do your training as--you know, for your specialty? Speaker 2: Right. Well, you know, after your residency at Hopkins [Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland], you know, you, you apply for cardiology fellowships, and, you know, I decided to come to Georgia--Emory University [Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia], and part of the reason was, you know, my wife [Denise Cleveland Leggett] had--is from Georgia, and she wanted to move back to Atlanta [Georgia], and she had, up until that point, moved with me three times, taken three different bar exams, so I, I just--I understand unit happiness, and I just always felt that, as God has done in the past, that He would bless our family in whatever situation we were in, so I just felt like it was, it was important to me to create an opportunity for her to have professional happiness as well, and she had just joined a firm here in Atlanta, and so, you know, I applied for the fellowship here at Emory, and I had applied several other places but--and I decided to accept it. Speaker 1: And tell me about the experience; tell me about the, the move here. Speaker 2: Now, Emory's an interesting place, you know, and it, it, it had a fantastic reputation; it had one of the leaders in cardiology, Dr. Hurst [J. Willis Hurst]; he was one of the fathers of cardiology, and cardiology textbook ['Hurst's The Heart']. At that time, the area of interventional cardiology, which is what I specialize in now, Emory--Dr. Gruentzig [Andreas Gruentzig] was the father of interventional cardiology; it was born, literally, in some respects, at Emory--in the U.S. So, it had a lot of history, it had a lot of excellence, it had a lot of opportunity for growth in my development, and it also provided my wife with the opportunity to be back in the city that she had grown up with, and have professional satisfaction. So, that, that was the basis for our decision. Story_ID: 564533 Speaker 1: Interventional cardiology--tell me what that is. Speaker 2: You know, that's the application of what we call interventional techniques to fix open arteries. I mean patients who present with heart attack, for example, typically have arteries that have blockages in them that are restricting flow to their heart muscle, and what interventional cardiologists do is they, through entering an artery in your leg, we can access the arteries that set on top of your heart, and we can actually open these blockages with a variety of techniques to restore blood supply to the area of muscle that has been affected. You could either do that with, you know, what's called an angioplasty with a balloon, or putting what's called a coronary stent, and there has also been--in, in the past, we've used radiation to--or laser technologies, to treat these blockages. So, an interventional cardiologist is one who is an expert in the area of treating what we call endovascular disease, or vascular blockages--whether it be in your neck, your kidney, your heart, your leg--and restoring blood supply to those restricted areas via a variety of, of, of techniques. And we also--obviously, we're the ones who are first called when someone presents to the hospital emergently with a heart attack because we're the ones who are charged with the responsibility of, of restoring blood supply to that area of muscle where the heart attack has blocked instantly blood supply. Story_ID: 564534 Speaker 1: Tell me what actually happens when a person is having a heart attack? Speaker 2: You know, what happens is most people have plaque inside their artery, which is a result of either, you know, hypertension, diabetes, smoking, you know, cholesterol buildup, you know, or a family history of coronary disease. And, and what happens is that plaque becomes what we call unstable; it cracks or ruptures for a variety of reasons, and when it ruptures, your body says, "Okay, let's--something has happened; we need to go heal it and repair it," and when it goes to heal it, it heals it by trying to form a clot on the, on, on, on the fracture or the rupture, and the healing is so aggressive that a big clot forms, and the clot blocks the artery off, so it blocks flow, and when it blocks flow, you basically have no blood flow to an area of muscle, and when you get no blood flow to that area of muscle, the muscle lets you know by you having severe pain in your chest, and so when you get to the hospital, what we normally find when we do what's called a catheterization procedure, is we'll go in and, and we'll look for the area of flow on your heart that has been obstructed or blocked, and that typically will localize the area where you're having a heart attack, so what we do is try and get rid of the clot, and then restore blood supply; that typically will relieve symptoms and allow the muscle to heal, but obviously, this is all about time, and there's a certain survival time that you have between when this happens, and whether the muscle is something that can be restored back to its normal functioning capacity, or it's dead forever and sort of like--I often explain it to patients like it's sort of like having a field of corn where you cut irrigation off to it, and if I'm able to restore that irrigation some other way before the crop dies, you can save the crop. If I cut it off and the entire crop dies, well, you know, I can come in and put some new irrigation in, but that's not gonna bring that crop back to life. So, we try and restore blood supply before muscle death occurs. Story_ID: 564535 Speaker 1: And how has this procedure developed, or evolved over the years? Speaker 2: Oh, the evolution of it has been fantastic; I mean initially, it--you know, in the early days, before interventionalist or interventional cardiology emerged as an occupation, these people simply would just have heart attacks and you would just treat them with medication; if they survived afterwards, then they'd have a dead muscle. Now--initially, it was just with a balloon. Dr. Gruentzig [Andreas Gruentzig], which I mentioned earlier, was the first person who inflated a balloon to open that blocked area up and restore blood supply. Well, after the balloon, you know, became this idea of putting what's called a stent, or stainless steel coil, on top of the balloon so that when we inflate the balloon now, the coil acts like a scaffold inside the artery, it holds the artery open, or props it open--that was an evolution. Story_ID: 564536 Speaker 1: And when I left Emory [Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia], I actually went to the University of Alabama at Birmingham [University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama], and trained with Dr. Roubin [Gary Roubin], who was the first person to invent the first stent to put on top of a balloon to be placed inside of a coronary artery and, and again for me, that's another example of how God has blessed my life. I've always been trained by the, the world's best people, and so I went to UAB and was trained. At that time, in 1991, it was the leading center in the world because he had invented the stent, and all docs from across the world were coming there to be trained on how to do this procedure around the country and around the world, so when I came back to Atlanta [Georgia], I had as much, if not more experience than anybody in town at, at, at what's called coronary stenting, because I'd been trained by the pioneer. Story_ID: 564537 Speaker 1: But from, from, from that has evolved--because there's Achilles heel to anything--stents, block up--why do they block? It's a variety of reasons, but now we have stents with what's called drug coatings on them that inhibits scar tissue or blockage--re-blockage--from forming inside the stents. You know, we had stents that had scar tissue and that you had to go inside and treat with radiation or--that could be on a wire, and then there are different varieties of cutting balloons that have these little, you know, blades on them that can cut through plaque, so the evolution of interventional cardiology has continued to be enormous. And now, we are getting into the area of bioabsorbable stents, where these coils, we can put them in and they will bioabsorb into your body over a period of time. So, this area is--that's one of the things that keeps me excited, is that it continues to evolve, and I've fortunately, been able to be involved in this evolutionary process so that you can be not only a designer of, of the technology and where it's going, and you can participate in the evolution of, of, of--because we best understand what the limitations are so when you have these, you know, medical technology companies trying to figure out where they should go, well, if I can explain to them what's limiting my ability to achieve what I wanna achieve, it helps them and their engineers and young scientists design technologies that will help relieve that--or address that problem. So, having the ability to be involved in the solution, as well as the evolution of technology and the development of technologies, is very satisfying and exciting. Story_ID: 564538 Speaker 1: Step back and tell us a little bit more about being under the tutelage of Dr. Roubin [Gary Roubin]. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was fantastic. He's Australian, he's very aggressive, he, he, he's a man that--I like to describe him as--he can take you right to the very edge of the world's existing body of knowledge and never fall off the cliff, but he's gonna push it to the edge because he's always trying to provide the best solution for what the issues are. And he was also a, a mentor who was not intimidated by the people he trained; he was not intimidated to the point where he would limit what he taught you because he thought one day you might be better than him. He had--and there are plenty of people like that out there who, who won't say it, but they actually are--their ability to lead is often blunted by their desire to remain unique so that they don't really teach those behind them all that they should know because they never want them to exceed where they are. But he was not like that; he, he basically taught you everything and he, he--and he also--the--one important thing I think about my profession and in general is, is he taught you to anticipate the downside, so what that does is that it permits you to make decisions that keep you out of trouble, so if you can anticipate a negative outcome three or four steps down the road, you'll make choices that keep you out of that cascade of negative events, and that's critical when you're taking care of patients like what I care for, because oftentimes, you get one choice, and just because of time, if you make the wrong choice, you may not have time to recover and make a different choice, so I'm very grateful for that exposure as well. Story_ID: 564539 Speaker 1: I just wanna go back and, and make sure we have correct dates. What year did you come to Emory [Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989]. Speaker 1: And the Veterans Administration [sic. Atlanta Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Decatur, Georgia]--you worked there; oh, that's part of the Emory school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's part of Emory, yes. Speaker 1: --and that was in '92 [1992]. And so in '93 [1993] is when you go to University of Alabama [University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama]? Speaker 2: I was at Emory '89 [1989], '90 [1990], '90 [1990], '91 [1991], '91 [1991], '92 [1992], yeah, so '93 [1993] is when I went to Alabama. Speaker 1: A couple of names. John C. Norman; do you know who he is? Speaker 2: John Norman? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: How about--should I know that name? Speaker 1: It was just a name someone gave to me, and I just wondered if you knew who they were--another--a cardiologist. All right, so in 1994, you become the director of cardiology at the Medical Associates of North Georgia [Canton, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about that. Speaker 2: Well, I came back to Atlanta [Georgia] and I looked at the available sort of opportunities in the city and, and it's important at the, you know, sort of, I guess, outset of your career, you know. I've had all this wonderful training and I feel very comfortable with it, and the nice thing about training is that it's been so dense that it has left me with the feeling that I can go right out and engage myself into my profession. And, and I, I think the opposite of that is, is if you don't feel that way, then you have to make a choice where you have all these other people around you that can still provide sort of a buffer zone for you to help you grow. I, I felt that that was not necessarily what I needed; I felt very secure in my training and background, that I could be very independent, so when I looked at my spectrum of opportunities, I simply looked at the opportunity that would provide me the best internal and professional growth. Story_ID: 564540 Speaker 1: So, tell me what happens after 1994 in your practice. Speaker 2: Like I was saying earlier, for me, I think you have to kind of just know where you are, you know, sort of intellectually, and what kind of person you are, and then you also have to try and pick an environment that allows you to have, you know, maximum growth without sort of inhibition. And make no mistake about it, you know, not everybody's interested in your growth when you are trained and when you are well trained, and you, just by your very existence and background, become intimidating to other people because of, of their sense and need to remain important. So, I had to pray that simply God would help me choose the right situation that was not a collision course with some egocentric, you know, constrictive individual. And for me, you know, this opportunity with Medical Associates of North Georgia [Canton, Georgia] provided me with a tremendous volume of pathology and work and, and exposure to it at the earliest point in my development post-training, so that in the first year or two, I can get significant exposure, practice my craft a lot, so that I can become incredibly comfortable with any, you know, scenario soon, so that I would not be intimidated by any situation that I saw as time went on. And so that's what the job provided me; I had a high, a high volume of work, I got to practice my interventional skills early on until I became extremely comfortable with what I was able to provide and, and, and, and surgery and operating and intervention was really about--it's about repetition, it's about seeing, you know, all the scenarios--the good and the bad, and so that you have a way of reacting to those scenarios when they present themselves. So, it, it really provided me with phenomenal exposure early, a, a lot of, of interventional work early, so that my confidence soared very early, and it reinforced that I had been trained the right way, and that I could handle any situation that presented itself, and so that's how I made my choice of which sort of cardiovascular outfit to go with professionally and, and it was the right choice for me. I quickly became one of the top, you know, interventional cardiologists in the city and the country and, and, you know--and that's directly related to just, you know, sort of having very complex cases and being able to be successful with that. Story_ID: 564541 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you want to talk about one of your cases? Speaker 2: You know, one case that, that stands out really is, I was in church one Sabbath, and I got a call. I was actually in Alabama, I was in the pulpit. I got a call that there was a, a, a thirty year old woman who was six months pregnant who was having a heart attack and, and so they were transferring her--life flighting her to Saint Joseph's Hospital [Emory Saint Joseph's Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia]. So, as I was going over to the hospital from church, it dawned on me that number one, I'd never taken care of a pregnant woman having a heart attack; I mean six months pregnant, so this issue of what to do about the baby was very new to me, so I, I phoned a pediatrician, Dr. Runette Flowers, who is incredible; she takes care of our children--and she advised that I probably would want to have a neonatologist present, so I called a neonatologist en route, and I called an anesthesiologist because we--I had made the decision we were gonna need to set the room up for an emergency delivery in case the mother just didn't make it. So, by the time I got to the hospital, I had a pediatrician, neonatologist, anesthesiologist present, and we had the room set up for emergency delivery, and then there was myself. And when the mother arrived, she was in what we call cardiogenic shock, meaning it's the worst situation you could be in. Her blood pressure was low, she was having poor oxygenation, so we had to put her on a ventilator. And so I went out and I told the family, I said, "These are the possibilities," I said, you know, "and this is the order I think is most likely." I said, you know, "Either the mother will survive and the baby won't, or the baby will survive and the mother won't. I think that the likelihood of them both surviving is pretty low, and I think that the likelihood of them both dying is very high." So, I said, you know, "I need to, to go ahead and get started." So I went in, did catheterization, and I found the affected artery; of course it was clotted off, that--and that was the artery responsible for the heart attack. And they had just invented this new medication called ReoPro that had never been used in pregnancy; I knew it would get rid of the clot and save the mother, but I didn't know if, in giving it--it, it's a blood thinner of sorts--that it would cross the placenta and kill the baby. So--and it--and we're in Saint Joseph's Hospital that really is not equipped for pregnancy anyway, so everybody's a little tense that we got this pregnant woman with a baby here and we don't have a neonatal unit or any of that. So, I just stepped back from table, said a quiet prayer, and then I just asked the pharmacist to go get the ReoPro. I said, "You know, I'm--." At that point, I was willing to accept whatever the outcome was, meaning that if I elected to save the mother and the baby didn't make it and I, I could live with that, but I had to make a decision, so I gave the drug--against the advice of pharmacists and all the hospital, because they were just worried about being sued, obviously, if the baby didn't survive and, and that's the world they live in, but I live in a world of, of taking care of people. So I gave her ReoPro, it, it resolved the clot, I was able to put a stent in the mother's artery, open the artery up, and immediately she started getting better, so we took 'em out to the intensive care unit and monitored the mother and the baby over the weekend and, and, and after the mother was stable, we transferred her to Northside [Northside Hospital Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] and, and six weeks later she delivered a healthy baby, and it was the first case anywhere in the world where ReoPro had been given in pregnancy, and because it was the first documented case where we demonstrated--and we weren't trying to, but we demonstrated that this drug would not cross the placenta and kill the child if a mother presented pregnancy. So, I got all these phone calls from all over the world about, "How did you have the guts to do it?" And kind of that sort of dialogue and, and I just simply told them, I just prayed and asked God to help me make the right choice, and He delivered me, and I have never had a situation where He has not provided me, you know, in the time of need with the right answer. And so-- Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: This--I don't know, this was, this was fairly early in my training--I mean in my career, so I would say probably mid to--mid-'90s [1990s], you know, maybe '97 [1997], or '8 [1998], or something--somewhere around there, 'cause the baby's now ten years old, so it's probably right around that time. So that, that's probably one of the more memorable situations that I had. Story_ID: 564542 Speaker 1: When did you begin working at Saint Joseph's [Saint Joseph's Hospital; Emory Saint Joseph's Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Kind of around that same time, '97 [1997], '98 [1998]; I'd been on staff at Piedmont [Piedmont Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] for a number of years, which is another hospital in that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did you go to Piedmont? You went to Piedmont first? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on staff at Piedmont since '89 [1989], and I was on staff at Piedmont and Emory [Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia] at the same time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The same time? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, somewhere around '97 [1997], '98 [1998], you know, I went to Saint Joe and, you know, I've been there ever since. Story_ID: 564543 Speaker 1: And what else has happened in your career since that time? Speaker 2: Gosh, the number--just--ton. You know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your appointment to the U.S.--by the U.S. secretary of the [U.S.] Department of Health and Human Services--tell me about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a, a five year appointment and by then, you know, the Bush [President George Walker Bush] administration; Tommy Thompson was the head of the--he was secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services, and it, it really was a, an oversight panel--oversight commission comprised of physicians that really looked at the workings of the Medicare and Medicaid system in the United States, and, and, and it was our job to try and make decisions and sort of regulatory choices that would help not only benefit that system, but also benefit physicians that's involved in caring for patients on a daily basis. So it was a--it, it was an eye opener for me as to how policy is formed in Washington [D.C.] and how, basically, after it's formed, I mean, you know, it's, it's just handed down, and you're gonna follow it whether you like it or not. Story_ID: 564544 Speaker 1: So, by then--there've been a, a number, you know, of, of wonderful, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was in 2002. What were some of the other ones? Speaker 1: You know, I, I did a lot of work early on with the American Heart Association. I was president of the southeastern region of the American Heart Association for--it's a, a--you know, it's a three year term; it's vice president, then you're president, and then there's a past president year. I sat on the national board of the American Heart Association board of directors for several years, the national Professional Education Committee for the American Heart--and that's the largest cardiovascular organization in the world and, you know, it's a lot of educational things of that nature, and this past year, 2007, I was the, the youngest and first African American honoree for the Atlanta Heart Ball, which is the largest heart ball in the country, for the American Heart Association where they choose one physician a year as physician of the year to acknowledge, and I was that individual last year in 2007. But, you know, there are just a host of other, you know, sort of wonderful opportunities that I've had and been a part of and, and I don't, I don't have my, you know, CV [curriculum vitae] in front of me. Story_ID: 564545 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about other activities. Do you golf, do you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I love golf. Speaker 1: --still love music? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Tell me about (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, golfing I, I like, you know; I play it quite a bit and I'm pretty good at it. You know, my twelve year old [Christopher Leggett, Jr.] is actually--you know, I'm better, but he'll be better in probably a year just 'cause he, he, he completely understands the mechanics of the swing, he understands what he's doing, and he can always pick out exactly what went wrong with my swing when I don't hit the ball correctly. Exactly. Story_ID: 564546 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many children do you have? Speaker 2: Two. I have--we have a daughter at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]; she's a freshman, so she's third generation now, and-- Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Alexandria [Alexandria Leggett]. And she's fantastic. She is a, a linguist; that's what she would like to be. She's fluent in French and Spanish now, and she's studying Mandarin and Japanese in college now, and she wants to work in the international marketplace, and she actually wants to work in China this summer. And the wonderful thing about Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts], I got two friends from Andover, one of which who has a business and been in China thirty years--Shanghai [China]; and the other [Josh McCall] has gotten the opening and closing ceremonies for the Olympic contract [for the 2008 Summer Olympics, Beijing, China], who has offered her the opportunity; and a third, this guy Ken MacKenzie [Kenneth MacKenzie], who used to work with Citigroup [Citigroup Inc.], and Citigroup has a big office, so all three of these guys from Andover basically have told me, you know, "We can get Alex an opportunity in Andover--." I mean, in China. And our son, C.J. [Christopher Leggett, Jr.], he's, he's a great kid. I mean he's, he's a fantastic athlete; he can do anything, I mean play any sport, and he's, he's great, and I mean he's, he's the star all the time. And--but he's--he--and one thing I can say about our children is they, they are humble and they are not--they're well adjusted, they are not materialistic, and we've tried to provide them with spiritual footing to live by, and we're very proud of them. Story_ID: 564547 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there anything that you would have done differently? Speaker 2: You know, I, I--the answer to that is no. And the reason is because at every point along the way, I've actually benefitted from being navigated by people who had more knowledge about where I was going than I did, and I just had enough wherewithal and respect for their authority to listen, and I always, you know, would like a better relationship with the Lord. I mean if I could--you asked me if there's something I would do differently, you know; I mean I would spend more time in the Word because I think that ultimately, you know, our salvation and our relationship with Him is, is the single most important thing that, that we can spend our time on, and I think what happens is in the course of life, in the course of, you know, professional involvement, that you become--I don't wanna say distracted, but you become engaged in all these professional pursuits and, and, you know, accumulation of X, Y and Z, and it takes your time away from that primary, you know, mission which is, which is eternal life. And so I don't, I don't look at any decision that I made educationally, academically, or--and say I wish I had done--I've always had the fortune of being presented with the best options to choose from and, and as a result of that, I--you know, I chose, you know, sort of what I chose and, and I'm okay with that. Story_ID: 564548 Speaker 1: Because you were very close to your mother [Ethel Leggett], do you think that she would be very proud? Speaker 2: You know, I, I think the answer to that is--you know, what makes my mom, you know, most proud is that, that, that we love God and I'm, and, and I'm being very serious; she's never required anything of us other than, you know, sort of respect for your fellow man, self-respect, a commitment to education, and having a, a relationship with the Lord that would provide you with salvation and--you know, my mom just died last month and, and, you know, I asked her, you know, when she was dying, I said, "Mom, do you know how much I love you?" And, and she said, she said, "Baby, I can't quantitate love." She said, "All I know is, is, is that I know that I feel that you love me and, and that our love is everlasting." And she told me, you know, she said, you know, her last piece of advice to me was, "In all thy ways acknowledge the Lord, and he will direct thy path." And what that really means to me is if, you know, she's basically saying, if there's one piece of advice I can give you, is just keep your hand in God's hand and, and, and you'll be fine. And her example of tenacity and dedication and strength, and to have eleven children at, at age thirty-nine and have my dad [Willie Leggett, Sr.] die unexpectedly and never go on welfare, never stand in a public assistance line, go out and get a job serving lunch in a public school system to support us, and then at the same time have enough dignity, pride, and self-respect to keep her head up, you know. There's no challenge that I can have that would be ever that great, and I'm just grateful that I have come from the womb of a woman who taught me the free fundamentals of life that don't have any economic tag associated with them and, and, and that's just how to be dedicated, how to love God, and just how to respect yourself and, and, and that you--and be educated. Story_ID: 564549 Speaker 1: Dr. Leggett [HistoryMaker Dr. Christopher Leggett], how do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know, it's--you know, in order of importance, I guess, I, I'd like to be remembered as a spiritual person who had a relationship with the Lord. I'd like to be remembered as an honorable man who devoted his life to loving his wife [Denise Cleveland Leggett] and his family, and being respectful and nurturing of, of, of his wife, and always holding her up in the highest of esteem publicly, privately, and in front of my children [Alexandria Leggett and Christopher Leggett, Jr.]. I'd like to be remembered as--by my children as someone who loved their mother, who treated her with dignity and respect and who, at the same time, was a man that walked outside and had his back straight, looked people in the eye and was not intimidated by this planet, and that was a father that loved them dearly and provided for them. You know, I think that, you know, when we weigh in the end of the balance, for me, those are the most critical things to me, you know. You, you can talk about your professional career and those such things and, you know, I know that the Lord has blessed me, I know that what I provide to patients is excellent; I don't really require other people to agree with that or, or to ratify that because I have the supreme, you know, evaluator that I listen to, and so for me, you know, being dignified and, and being--having the strength of character are the things that I think are, are, are most important for me. Story_ID: 564550 Speaker 1: What about your legacy? What would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: You know, that's a--you know, that's a--you know, that's a--you know, that's a pretty complicated question. I, I think--you know, legacy embodies a lot; legacy embodies, you know, kind of what kind of person you are, it embodies what your body of work was, it embodies what you have left to this planet, it embodies kind of, you know, what it is that people remember most about you going forward--that you inspire someone, that you serve as a template of, of excellence that--can someone look at you, look at your life, and derive strength that inspires them to have some sort of goals in their lives? So, you know, you know, I haven't fully, at this point, sort of characterized, you know, what that entire legacy comprises, but I know that when someone thinks of me, I would like for them, as I stated before, to think of me as a, as a person of character and honor, who led a dignified life that was respected, that was spiritual, and that can serve as an example to someone else that anything's possible, you know. Live at the top, desire the top, you know; work hard, keep your nose clean and, and the Lord'll bless you. And I, I, I remember Dr. Carson [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.] telling me one thing once, and it's kind of, it's kind of become my sort of mantra, and that is, you know, sort of, "I belong everywhere I go because my best friend owns the world." And I think if you adopt that attitude, that there's no ceiling to which will confine you, and there's no boundaries for your life. Story_ID: 564551 Speaker 1: And I think the other important thing for me is I cannot underscore the absolute critical importance that my wife [Denise Cleveland Leggett] has played in my life. She is, she's been with me since I was nineteen, so she's been with me for the balance of my life, and she has largely helped me define who I am. And it's been her goodness, her sense of decency, her character, and her spiritual fortitude that has helped me sort of refine myself into a human being that I think is worthy of, of respect and, and I think that having her in my life has clearly made me the person who I am today and, and I'm grateful that, like my mother [Ethel Leggett] in many respects, she has voluntarily decided to give her life for me because I'm only here today as a result of, of, of my mother giving her life for me, and allowing me the, the soil to develop on and, and my wife, you know, providing an environment for me at home in the spiritual network, and the source of strength to allow me to walk out this door every day and tackle this world and, and, and it's really her self-sacrifice that allows me to sit in front of you today. I'm, I'm under no illusion that I'm sitting here just on my own merit. Speaker 2: Dr. Leggett [HistoryMaker Dr. Christopher Leggett], I want to thank you for taking the time to share your story; it will be a inspiration for many, for many years to come. Thank you (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thank you. Story_ID: 564552 Speaker 1: This is my mom and dad when they were forty years old. So- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tell me their names. Speaker 1: It's Willie [Willie Leggett, Sr.] and Ethel Leggett-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --so that would be 1968. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. All right, ready. Speaker 1: This is my wife's mom and dad, Harold [Harold Cleveland] and Elizabeth Cleveland [Elizabeth Carter Cleveland], when they were forty years old, 1968. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is John Kennedy, Jr. [John F. Kennedy, Jr.] and myself when we were seventeen, so that's 1977. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is my wife and I, just a few months ago, at a party. It's Denise Leggett [Denise Cleveland Leggett] and myself. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: These are our children, Alexandria [Alexandria Leggett] and Christopher [Christopher Leggett, Jr.]. Speaker 1: If you pull that one up, you'll be able to see me when I was in the ninth grade. That's me right there. This is back in Cleveland [Ohio] before Andover [Phillips Academy Andover, Andover, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: What number, twenty-five (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm twenty-five. Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's my ninth grade football team in Cleveland, Ohio; I'm number twenty-five. Can you pull--can you lower it so you can see how big those guys are in the background? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, I'm ready. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Dr. Benjamin Carson [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.] and my son Christopher and myself. Speaker 1: What year, about? Speaker 2: That's probably about four years ago. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's on a--that's our family on a ski trip last Christmas, and that would be Denise, Alexandria, C.J. and myself. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's just a Christmas photograph. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's my wife and daughter, and my wife was pregnant with our son; you can't see him, but--I love that picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 2: That's my twenty-fifth reunion at Andover. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you know who's in the picture? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Starting left. Speaker 2: Oh, what's his name? I can't remember his first name, the kid--his last name is Lapolla, and the father, in the pink shirt, is Mark Lapolla, then there's Steve Panagiotakos [Steven C. Panagiotakos], and that's my son C.J., and then on the right of me is Father John Barres. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: This is a--that's Dave Winfield on the left, Samuel Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson], and [HistoryMaker] Kenny Leon, and myself. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, what was the occasion? Speaker 2: It was a fundraiser for Kenny Leon that we had at our home. Speaker 1: At your home? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and? Speaker 2: Same fundraiser; this has the addition of Dave Chapman to the left, and my wife Denise in the center. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next? Speaker 2: This is the president of Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey], and myself. I was introducing her at a luncheon at the Waldorf in New York [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, sir; ready? Speaker 2: Now, this is a picture of my mom, Ethel Leggett. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And when was that taken? Speaker 2: I don't know, maybe 1970. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And, next. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother and my brother and I at my brother's wedding. Speaker 1: What--what's your brother's name? Speaker 2: Robert Vernon Leggett [Robert Leggett]. Speaker 1: Do you know what year this was? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was 1982. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, who are these folks? Speaker 2: That's my grandmother and grandfather; those are my mom's parents. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Oh, Len [Willie White (ph.)] and Rosie [Rose White (ph.)]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Leggett? Speaker 2: No; you said your mother's parents, didn't you? Speaker 1: Yeah, that would be White. Speaker 2: White? Speaker 1: Can we slide this over, and then that'll be all of my family--all my brothers and sisters. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And this is a picture of all the children. Speaker 2: The Leggett children. Speaker 1: All the Leggett children. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: All right, Robert in the lower left, Mary [Mary Leggett] above, Carol [Carol Leggett], Sandra [Sandra Leggett], Joyce [Joyce Leggett], Rosebud [Rosebud Leggett], Gwen [Gwendolyn Leggett], Shiree [Shiree Leggett], and to the left of my mother is Linda [Linda Leggett], and then there's my mom, Ethel, and my dad to her right, Willie. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's an updated version of Alexandria and Christopher, and that's at the Atlanta Heart Ball, where I was being honored. Speaker 2: In what year? Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great! Thank you very much. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: A picture of Christopher, Jr. to the left, Alexandria to the right, and my wife Denise in the center...