 Story_ID: 69538 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm the Interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our Videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Sure, it's Marion, M-A-R-I-O-N, Mildred, M-I-L-D-R-E-D, Majors, M-A-J-O-R-S, McElroy, M-C-E-L-R-O-Y. Speaker 1: And what, what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: Three sixteen twenty-two [03/16/1922, March 16, 1922]. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: Minneapolis, Minnesota, 621 Mendel Place. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm retired. A retired, very busy volunteer. Speaker 1: Okay. Could you give us today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August 10th, 2002. Speaker 1: And please tell us where we are at the present time. Speaker 2: You're in my home at 5157 15th Avenue South, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Story_ID: 69539 Speaker 1: All right now before we go into depth, there are five "People" Magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: I guess what I have on, like turquoise, bluish-green, aqua. Speaker 1: Okay, do, do you have a, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Not really. I like winter, spring, summer, fall. Speaker 1: Okay and do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like to get to Las Vegas [Nevada] at least once year, and California. I have a friend in California that I like to visit. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I can't think of what it is. I'm trying to think of what people would say that I always say. Not that I can think of. Story_ID: 69540 Speaker 1: Okay. Let's talk about your, your family background. Can you give us the, the names of your parents and, and spell them for us? Speaker 2: My mother was Ruth Albertine Jordan and Majors [sic, Jordan-Majors]. And my father Andrew Raymond Majors. Speaker 1: Okay and what year was your mother born and where? Speaker 2: My born was born in 1890 in Memphis, Tennessee. My father in 1877 in Natchez, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, now did either of them have stories passed down to them from other relatives about slavery or Reconstruction or, or the origin of the, the family? Speaker 2: The only mention that we can remember--I discussed it with my sister. And my mother told u that my grandfather had ran away and I just have to assume that it was from slavery, and was going to sign up for the Army. And he heard men saying Lieutenant so-and-so could help so-and-so, so-and-so, Sergeant so-and-so. So when he, he got up to the top of the line, he heard Major, so he just put an "S" on it and became Majors, Henry Majors. I, I think that would have been--no, that probably wasn't--well yeah that probably would have been his name, Henry Majors. Cause my brother was named after both grandfathers. Speaker 1: And this would have been in, in- Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay. So your father was born in Natchez [Mississippi], right? Speaker 2: Natchez [Mississippi], and he was born in '77, 1877. So I'm sure that he would have been probably a runaway slave. We go back. I haven't tried to figure out and can't trace because of that-the way he, you know, got his name. Speaker 1: You never talked--nobody knows- Speaker 2: No, no, no. Very little--my mother and my dad separated when my younger sister was seven months old. And he wasn't allowed to come around us very much; my mother didn't trust him or whatever. And so I know little about him. I've talked to you probably longer than I ever had a lengthy conversation with him. He lived right around St. Paul [Minnesota], but I didn't know that much about him. So I know very little about the backgrounds of either. Story_ID: 69541 Speaker 1: Okay and your mo--your mother didn't have any stories that she- Speaker 2: Other than her father having been--I guess you would call an itinerant minister who traveled around and built a number of churches in and around Oklahoma, Enid, Oklahoma. She was reared in Langston [Oklahoma]. I have a number of cousins that you know graduated from Langston University [Oklahoma] and, and--but she for the time, traveled a lot. She'd been in Kansas City [Missouri] and St. Louis [Missouri] and, and Omaha [Nebraska]. And came here to visit a sister in I suppose around 1918. But she had been--traveled for that time we thought and I know that she played the piano and maybe entertained or something. We could get little, little snatches of things like that. But nothing concrete, really. She was a very attractive little lady. I don't think she ever weighed over one hundred two or three. And very smart, very sharp, very protective of us. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now your grandfather, her father was an AME [African Methodist Episcopalian] minister. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you know, Langston [Oklahoma]'s an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] town. Langston University is a--I think associated with AME. Speaker 2: Is it? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm not sure, it could be. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I know Payne [Theological Seminary, Wilberforce, Ohio]--I don't know where Payne is, but- Speaker 1: That's in Wilberforce [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. But yeah that, that sounds like--yeah it does sound like an AME [African Methodist Episcopal]. Speaker 2: I don't know if he was ordained or anything, but he, he was probably itinerant minister that just- Speaker 1: Probably-AME [African Methodist Episcopal] is very organized. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He prob--if he was in Langston [Oklahoma], he more than likely was ordained. Speaker 2: He was in and around there. And she remembers him. He would build a church and, and you know and then they'd move him onto another area to, to work in and build another church up. So those are the stories I heard. I know little, very little about--there were nine in her family. Nine brothers and sisters. Three boys I guess and six girls. I only--I can vaguely remember having met one sister when I was quite young. Then in 1940, must have been about 1945, I had married and was out in San Francisco [California] area, and I looked up Aunt Mary who was--I guess it was her last living sister, and met her and her children, first cousins, Sena [ph.] and Ferd [ph.]. But I know very little about the other brothers and sisters. Speaker 1: Now your grandfather who we discussed earlier and we looked at a photo, he, he seemed to have been a, been a cobbler, you know, made shoes. Speaker 2: Yes he was, yes. In addition to having been a minister I guess to supplement his income, he had a shoe shop and made shoes and boots. Boots were a big thing in those days. So that was interesting. I think that's where I got my entrepreneurial spirit. Speaker 1: There, they were early black residents of Oklahoma who were entrepreneurs. They would go there to, you know- Speaker 2: I can believe that. Speaker 1: Truly free. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 69542 Speaker 1: Can you think back now and tell us about--and you were born in, in Minnesota. Speaker 2: Minneapolis [Minnesota]. Speaker 1: Minneapolis [Minnesota]. How did the--what was the story--yeah, what, what's your mother's story of how she came to Minneapolis? Speaker 2: Well seems as though--well she had a sister here. And a sister and brother-in-law. And I remember her saying that she had rheumatism and there was a doctor here, Dr. Brown, and incidentally there were about three generations of those doctors, and he was noted to be able to if not cure, to help people with rheumatism. That was one of the reasons she came here. Speaker 1: She had rheumatism, but she was fairly young. Speaker 2: Yes. But my mother--I don't know if I ever remember my mother saying that she felt good. But she lived to be eighty or eighty-one. But you would call her, say "Mom, how are you feeling today?" "I don't feel so good." But let somebody threaten one of us, she was hopping at it. She had strength from somewhere. But the--I think the--might have been a little lameness in the one leg and possibly from the, the rheumatism. Speaker 1: Did, did she ever talk about what may have caused that, or- Speaker 2: No. But she did tell us and she had a, like a bald spot in her head that was quite large. And she said that she had been bitten--she was deathly afraid of cats. Because one had bitten her and it turned into blood poisoning. I remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she talk about what the bald spot was caused from? Speaker 2: From, from that blood poisoning. And I don't know whether she had to have surgery up there, but it was very, very different looking. We would always, you know--when we combed her hair, we always you know, questioned that. It was as though it had been--like might have been some serious surgery, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Did--do you know if your father--how--if he had a story about how he came to Minneapolis [Minnesota]? Speaker 2: No, never, never talked to him about his, his past or--but I do know that he worked for the railroad. And I think he could have been a little heavy on the sauce. And it was one of the reasons I think they separated because I remember him--he would come and you know, wanna come in. And if my mother let him in, then he would want us to--all to suck from a--he called it a loving cup. And it would be a toddy, a whiskey toddy. I mean we were kids, you know. So those are my memories of him. So I think he might have been a little heavy on the drinking. Speaker 1: It's possible he might have come up in association with, you know- Speaker 2: A waiter and on the railroad. Very, very--now he was--had probably a third grade education. But you would have thought he was a college graduate. And that was listening to the people that he served and my mother said--well she didn't say calculator or computer, but she said that he could count faster than, you know, somebody could on a, on a adding machine. That was counting those tips. So- Speaker 1: He was very bright, apparently. Speaker 2: He was. Very intelligent, very outgoing and kind of a good old guy, you know, cause he's always had this entourage of, of fellas with him and they'd come and serenade my mother when he was trying you know, make up with her I guess. I remember those things. I probably couldn't have been three or four years old. Speaker 1: So you think he really loved her (unclear). Speaker 2: I think so. I really do. He tried until he died to, to get back with my mother. And he was seventy-something when he passed. But she just--whatever happened, he was unforgiven. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did he--did he continue to work on the railroad basically? Speaker 2: Well I think his habits probably caused him to lose those jobs and--but he probably did that type of work wherever--janitor, waiter. And my sister was saying and I didn't remember that during World War II that he worked out at--Twin City, Twin City [Ordinance Plant] Federal--was it Twin--I mean was it Twin City--anyway it was Federal Cartridge, Federal Cartridge where they made bullets. I worked out there during World War II making thirty [30-] and fifty [50-] caliber bullets. But he was--might have been a janitor out there during World War II. I didn't remember that. Story_ID: 69543 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now tell us--think back and like--and tell us about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up on the north side of Minneapolis [Minnesota]. Speaker 2: Near North Side. Bad part of town. We never thought that. I mean I couldn't have had a, a happier childhood. But it was the poor section of town, just about where I would say a lot of our neighbors and friends were on relief, welfare. My mother had no choice. I mean there was no job that she could have gotten in those days to, to take care of five children. So she was at home. And neighbors and friends and organizations and what not were so good to her. I never knew what it was to miss a meal or, or be without clothing. The Executive Director [and founder] of Phyllis Wheatley Community Center, W. Gertrude Brown, just took a liking to my mother. And when the department stores would send clothes, you know to the [Phyllis Wheatley] Community Center, she always let my mother know and she'd have like I think first pick. And so we always were, were sharp. And if it wasn't that, she would be cutting down items that people gave her, making them over for us. And we were always I think pretty well dressed. Because Ms. [W. Gertrude] Brown would always call her if she was going to a church or to an organization to raise money for Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center]. She always called on little Miss Majors, you know to get her kids ready to go. And my brother and I were, were--had a little song we sang. Let's see--the north--[singing] "When wind blow and we shall have snow, and what will the poor birdies do. They'll sit in a bind to keep themselves warm and tuck their heads under their wings, poor things." I remember that. I was probably four or five years old. And we would go and sing that song. And after her presentation about Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center] and its needs and importance in the community, well after that she would pass the hat and that's how we raised money to help with the building of Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center]. Story_ID: 69544 Speaker 1: Okay, now Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center is very important in your life. Speaker 2: Very important. Speaker 1: Can you tell--you know--well where did it come from? Who started Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center? Speaker 2: Well as I understand it, it was a women's Christian organization. A group of white women who had determined that there was a need for a facility to house black, young black girls that came to Minneapolis [Minnesota] as domestics to do housework and all. They had nowhere to stay. And so that was at--I almost remember the, the address. But it was on Bassett, 620 Bassett or something like the Bassett Street. And it was--had been a, a Jewish center I believe. Probably the [unclear] or whatever. And I remember going there. I remember her coming to our house and inviting my mother. I always make a joke of it. My last name was Majors and I'd say if you invite Little Miss Majors and her minors to come over to Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center] to take advantage of the activities over there. And they had basketball, you know basketball and we learned to tap dance. We learned whatever, you know, recreational things that were going on there. And 1924--well in 1929 we raised enough money to go into a new building that was absolutely fabulous. I mean why they ever tore it down, we just--we cringe when we meet and talk about that. Speaker 1: So it's gone now. Speaker 2: Yeah, they tore it down supposedly to come through there with freeway [interstate 94], freeway or something. But it never was done. So the building was torn down. Speaker 1: This in the '60's [1960's] or '70's [1970's]? Speaker 2: In the '60's [1960's] [sic, 1969] I believe it was torn down. Speaker 1: Urban-- Speaker 2: Yes, urban renewal. Just wiped out what was something we would probably never be able to afford anymore. We had an auditorium where there was a stage, where we had drama classes, you know and plays and what not. And we had a Friday night dance, a Friday night basketball game and dance, and that's where we--and our--an orchestra started there. Percy Hughes, who was a known musician in Minneapolis [Minnesota], started there. My mother--not my mother--my sister used to sing with, with, with the band when they started. And Ms. Dorsey who was the Music Director at Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center], started them out. And he--you know that's been his vocation. And he played all over Minneapolis [Minnesota] and still plays. And there was a boy's side and a girl's side. Club rooms for the boys on one side, club rooms for the girls on the other side. Showers on each side. And then we had the largest gymnasium in town. So other settlement houses would send their children there, you know for different activities. So it was, it was a must. And then we were exposed to fantastic people. Because entertainers, [black] students that came to go to the U[niversity of Minnesota], could not stay on campus or stay in hotels downtown. They--there was housing there. I think they must have had around sixteen rooms upstairs. And that's where they housed people like [HM] Marion Anderson, Paul Robeson, Roland Hayes I think his name was. What was the name, [Bill] Bojangles Robinson. People like that, we met and then they would see--we would get tickets to see their performances. And so that exposure was wonderful because those people took a special interest in us and they were available to talk to us. So then we were exposed and realized that there were professionals, you know, in other states. Cause they were usually out of the South. And they had to come there and take classes during the summer to get accreditation so that they could go back South and teach. Story_ID: 69545 Speaker 1: So that was--just [unclear] college students and really kind of--it was exciting. Speaker 2: It was. We remember the names of those people. I can see some of those people, you know. You know that's very, very--it was very important to us and our background and growing up. I think it encouraged you know a lot of people to strive to go to college and to become, you know, important, to give back to the community. Speaker 1: So this was the Phyllis Wheatley Settlement House. Speaker 2: Yes. They were settlement houses in those days, now they're community centers. And there were others in other neighborhoods. Wells Memorial [Settlement House] was one that had a camp on Big Lake, Minnesota. And in August after their children had all gone to camp, then Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center] was allowed to either--maybe they were given the time, but there would be two weeks where we could go to that camp. The boys would go for a week and the girls would go for a week. We can remember that like it was yesterday. Speaker 1: So you didn't go together. Speaker 2: No, the boys and girls. I think later on we might have gone to this at the same time, but at Big Lake we--the girls went one week and the boys went one week. And we had bonfires and learned to sing, you know camp songs, and some of which we still know, think about. Speaker 1: Was that every year pretty much? Speaker 2: Every year. And I think there was probably stipend asked, you know, for our attending. But those were all donated. I mean the money was donated by the--I don't know maybe corporations or organizations. We never knew, you know. Story_ID: 69546 Speaker 1: Okay, well Phyllis Wheatley Center [unclear] you know probably come up again in the conversation. But can you tell us about school? Now where did you go to school and how far away did you have to go and what were the conditions that you went to school under? Speaker 2: Okay. The first school that I attended was Grant Elementary School, North Minneapolis [Minnesota]. I believe it was on Humboldt and 11th. And I only attended kindergarten there. And then we moved a lot because either the houses would be too cold in the winter or whatever. But we fin--we wound up moving to a house at seven, 719 Bryant [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. And I transferred then to Sumner Elementary School, which was elementary and junior high, on what was called Sixth Avenue North then, it's now Olsen Highway. And they had grades from kindergarten through ninth grade, if you can imagine. So we were there for a long time. So the teachers all knew my family cause we had--each grade. And my mother was known to be very protective. And you did not do anything to her children. She would march on the schools. And so the teachers would look out and say, "I wonder, I wonder what little Ms. Majors is coming up here after now?" Cause she would come to the school if we (laughs) complain. And I referred to her as one of the first militants. I distinctly remember a movie, it was during PT [parent teacher] and student meeting. And they had a movie. And it depicted a mine explosion. And they hooked this black man up to a wagon, and he was carrying the miners out of the, the mine. My mother stopped the show. "How dare you, you know, have something like this showing," you know. I can remember that like it was yesterday. That's the way she was. And all the teachers like I say, knew little Ms. Majors. Speaker 1: Okay. So how did you like school and- Speaker 2: Loved it. I loved school. The teachers that--we just cherished. I remember seventh grade teacher who said, "I'm not concerned much about what you become, you know. What area or vocation you go into, but be the best that you can be." You know I, I remember that. And there were teachers that would save their old clothes and give to my mother, you know, cause they knew she was this--she always referred to herself as, as a widow. I said "Mother, you're not a widow. Your husband lives right over in St. Paul." She said "Well he's dead to me." She referred to herself as a widow. But they would give her these old clothes and she would make them over for us. But people were very, very good to us, neighbors and friends. Story_ID: 69547 Speaker 1: Okay. In, in school now this was like an integrated school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you were one of the few blacks in school. Speaker 2: Well, my junior high school graduation in 1937, I was counting. And there were nine blacks--well it's over there, I'll show it to you. I think there were--there was a great difference. I don't remember if it's half and half, but it was pretty mixed. Speaker 1: Okay, so it may have been--say it was close to fifty-fifty. Speaker 2: Maybe seventy-five - twenty-five. Speaker 1: Now did you have any black instructors? Speaker 2: None. Not in all of--in all of my education, I mean twelve grades, there was never a black teacher. Nor did they even in high school, encourage you to go to college. I mean the counselors would say such things as well, unless you're interested in physical education or home economics, there wouldn't be much more for you. So you know there was not much encouragement to go to college. And of course I didn't know how I would go anyway. There wasn't any money available. Speaker 1: Okay. This would be a good time to change tape. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We change every half hour. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 68924 Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION] --what do they call them--the Oxford Cleric? Speaker 2: And I remember in--it was junior high, probably seventh grade, reading the 'Odyssey' and the 'Iliad'. And we had to, to write a diary as though we were Odysseus. And I, I loved that. Speaker 1: We, we're rolling again, so- Speaker 2: You are. Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds as though North High [School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] was, was really- Speaker 2: Top, top, the top school. It was-- Speaker 1: You studied Chaucer. Speaker 2: Chaucer. Speaker 1: And English is your favorite subject? Speaker 2: But English was my favorite subject, literature. You'd think I'd have been an avid reader, but I got so busy with other things until I'm not, you know. I, I love to read but I, I just seem to fill my time with other things. Speaker 1: Um- Story_ID: 68925 Speaker 1: Tell me now you described off camera some of the conditions you had to face going to school. I think you were some distance away from school and the winters could get pretty- Speaker 2: Thirty three below I mean and we walked, we lived in the projects when I was in high school [North High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], 989 Aldrich, just down the block from Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center], which was 809 Aldrich, very convenient. And what we would do, we would walk along and probably pick up, you know students along the way. We were probably the farthest away on Aldrich. And then we'd go to Brandt and pick up some. And by the time we got up to Freemont, this is in alphabetical order, then we'd have quite a, quite a group. And we're talking walking thirteen, fourteen, fifteen blocks in thirty below zero cause no one rode a bus or anyone, any parent had a car. So--and my mother would have us so bundled up. I was telling you, you could hardly, you know walk. We would have been a lot better off with fewer clothes on so we could walk faster. But the scarf around, you know, scarf around your, your nose, so your conversation is sort of muffled. But we made it. And I doubt very much if I missed five or six days of, of school in high school; you just didn't. I coordinate a scholarship program for North High [School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] now, a friend talked me into it. And it's a scholarship program where there's a millionaire family, the Wallins, who donated, donated like ten million dollars to the area high schools. And it wasn't going too well at North High School. A friend talked me into becoming the coordinator, which entails getting mentors for, for seniors. And it's a, it's a different ballgame. I go into that school, I can't believe, you know. First of all like I told you when I came out of North High [School] in 1940, of a class of six hundred, there were eight blacks. Now it's probably--that school is probably sixty-five, seventy-five percent black. That's how the, the neighborhoods have changed and, and all. And the old North High [School] has been torn down and they have--it looks like a college campus now. And I'm thinking boy if we had a school that looked like this and had all these things, we would have been just thrilled. Story_ID: 68926 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me now who were some of the teachers and/or administrators that were mentors for you? Did you have any one that took a particular interest in you and, and, and tried to help you develop? Speaker 2: Not really, not really, not in high school. I think in, in, in ele--in elementary and junior high school they were, they were you know, kind of devoted. The teachers were, were committed in those days and if you showed potential, they really would encourage you. But when I got to high school, it was a different ballgame. My mother had I think gone to ninth grade. So that was the cutoff for her. I mean she didn't stay as involved, you know as she did in our elementary and in junior high school. And it was, it was tough. I, I took geometry cause I though well you know I just might get to go to college. And that was hard for me to get through cause I was never mathematically astute; wasn't my, wasn't my thing. But I've managed to--here I am. Still managing to pay the rent. I bought this house in '69 [1969]. I been here thirty-three years in this house. Was very important to me to always have a roof over my head, have a home. Story_ID: 68927 Speaker 1: Okay, so in--what was social life like in high school? Speaker 2: Our social life was Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center]. I didn't get involved in any of the activities at North High [School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], you weren't encouraged to. And I just didn't. I mean there were organizations, some kind of triangle something or other and other sports activities and whatnot, but I--maybe other blacks in, in, in high school would get involved; I never did and I can't remember any that, that did. I don't think you were encouraged to. Speaker 1: Okay. Well what were the highlights of the social activities at Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center] when you were- Speaker 2: Anything that you wanted to do, like I said. We had drama classes, every, every weekend there was a basketball game and dances. And Hallie Q. Brown [Community Center] was a settlement house in St. Paul [Minnesota]. So they would come over and play our guys. You couldn't hardly stay in the gymnasium, you could cut the--the air was a little, you know, strong (laughing). And we had--I mean the fellas were so terrific. We had balconies even where we could sit, you know and watch the, the basketball games. I can't imagine what it would cost to build a building like that nowadays, but anyway after the basketball games, then we would have dances down in the, in the auditorium. And we, like I say we had drama classes where we learned to- Speaker 1: Were you in plays? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I was in plays. Speaker 1: What did you--tell us about a couple of them, or- Speaker 2: I can remember a play that I was in, but I can't even remember the name of it. I can't remember the name of it, but I know I was in a play. Speaker 1: What, what was it about? Speaker 2: I can't--I don't know. I can remember Mr. Crawford was--he was my, my boyfriend in, in the play. Floyd Crawford. And--but I can't remember, I really can't. That's a long time ago. We're talking 19, you know 30-something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In the 1930's. Speaker 1: Were you pretty good as an actress? Speaker 2: I thought I was. But I was--my older sister could sing. And when they started that orchestra up at Phyllis Wheatley House, she sang with Percy Hughes' band to begin with. Speaker 1: What was your sister's name? Speaker 2: Ruth. Speaker 1: Are you the youngest, or- Speaker 2: Middle. Speaker 1: You're the middle. Speaker 2: One girl older, one girl younger. Just two of us living. I've lost three siblings, 1992, '93 [1993] and '94 [1994]. Story_ID: 68928 Speaker 1: So, so what, what--now can you tell us something about why they named it after Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center]? I mean who's Phyllis Wheatley [sic, Phillis Wheatley]? Speaker 2: Phillis Wheatley was a little slave girl who was brought into the Wheatley family to be the companion to their daughter[sic, wife] [1961]. And she was the first published poet, maybe woman poet, certainly black, possibly first published woman poet, period. And so that could--must have been in the 1700's or something [1773]. I should know. Speaker 1: This is new, New England, Boston [Massachusetts] area I Think. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And so that's why Phillis Wheat--Wheatley was named after her because of her contribution and a known black woman, strong evidently. I guess she wasn't that, that strong physically, but certainly mentally, intellectually cause she learned to read and write and-- Speaker 1: Interesting, Hallie Q[uinn]. Brown too was another black woman. The St. Paul [Minnesota] center is named after her. Speaker 2: Yes, right. And both still existing. And Penumbra--I don't know if you have heard of the Penumbra Theater. It's housed in the same building with Hallie Q. Brown in St. Paul [Minnesota]. So--and we still run into each other, I mean you know, kids that we played basketball with or, or came over to the basketball games and dances. There's some of us still around. When, when you know, one gal, Gina Bell Taylor spoke at my eightieth birthday party talking about the good old days at Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center] and all. So it's been--I, I've been blessed. Story_ID: 68929 Speaker 1: Okay now, now you were involved in--you took leadership in a number of volunteer activities at Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center], right? And just, just tell us about some of the things you did as a high school student at Phyllis Wheatley in terms, terms of clubs and other things. Speaker 2: Well I can't say that I was you know one of the great leaders, but I was always involved at Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center]. And still you know, I have an association with an alumni organization. But I played, you know, basketball I think until I fell and got water on the knee. But always involved. But I guess I didn't consider myself as the, you know, the leader, but always part of the- Speaker 1: What other, what organized groups I mean were you part of there at Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center] doing, doing different things? Speaker 2: Well I told you about our camp activity. We'd go to camp every year. And that's where we learned to cook, that's where we learned to, to tap dance. I mean we had all those kinds of classes. Sewing, learned to sew, you know. Just--there was everything available. If you wanted to learn, you could learn. I don't know if you remember Hilda Simms was an actress, was from Minneapolis [Minnesota]. She started out in Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center]--was a girl's worker down there. We always looked up to her, you know. And she went on to be 'Anna Lucasta' was a play on Broadway for I guess many, many years, whatever. She came out of Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center]. And a number of, of people went on from Phyllis Wheatley to become, you know, very, very prominent. Roy--this is the home of Roy Wilkins. And who is the Urban League- Speaker 1: Whitney Young? Speaker 2: Whitney Young, Whitney Young. I remember when Whitney Young came here, he was with the Urban League, I remember when he came here. But all those people were very much, you know, involved with the Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center]. In, in the old days, everything that happened, happened there. I wouldn't be a bit surprised if that isn't where the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--you know the original here in Minneapolis [Minnesota] was formed, and the Urban League. There was just no place else to go. I remember they would have a weekly forum. My mother would attend that and be involved in that. Speakers would come and I'm looking back on some of the issues that they--remember the "Scottsboro boys" and something Herndon. I can just remember these names. But those were the issues that they would discuss, you know at those forums. And certainly later on you know when the war effort came along, they had PWA [Public Works Administration] projects over there, WPA [Works Projects Administration]. My mother worked on some of those projects. I think they were sewing. And my brother worked on WPA building sidewalks and whatnot at the area parks. So anything that was of importance was discussed and the function took place at Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center]. Story_ID: 68930 Speaker 1: Okay so a very important place. Speaker 2: Very important. Speaker 1: How long was Ms. [W. Gertrude] Brown in charge of it? Speaker 2: I think about thirteen years, twelve or thirteen years. Speaker 1: Was, was she in charge when you were in high school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Some, some of the high--some, some of high school. I'm trying to think of what year she left. But certainly during some of my high school years. And there has never been a person as kind and as committed as she was. There have been a lot of, you know, executive directors since then, but nobody that made the mark that she made. I volunteer at the Minnesota History Center. And every fall there is a Cathy Hardy is an actress who portrays three prominent black women, [W.] Gertrude Brown being one of them. And I learned things from her presentation that I didn't even know. For instance, she in her presentation, indicates that Ms. [W. Gertrude] Brown was asked to resign or left because she at--I think she wanted to promote public housing and had a lot to do with the project being, being built. But she would have never tolerated a segregated projects. So it was very possible that that's one of the political things that happened to her and the reason she left when she did. We moved into the projects in 1937. We were the first family in our particular apartment. And we thought we had become like rich. Our first refrigerator, you know. We came from an icebox, you know, and very poor housing. As a matter of fact, when we had to move out of the area for the project to be built, the house that we moved out of was better appointed than the one that we moved into. It didn't even have a bathtub. I mean we had go--we had to go back to tin tub in the house that we moved to. And of course we had the icebox and all that sort of thing. We moved into the project, our first refrigerator, first central heating. So we thought that we had really moved up. Like the "Jeffersons" moving on up. Speaker 1: The projects in the early days were a lot better kept and maintained than they- Speaker 2: Fabulous, I mean really, I mean we had people--see the north side was considered the poor part of town. South side was where the ritzier and the, the people lived. And we looked up and here come these people from--and these people from the south side moving into the project. Here we thought that they had you know, money and were all this and that. And you were supposed to be low income, you know, to get into the project. But we were happy about the whole thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 68931 Speaker 1: So when you were near high school graduation, did you have any idea of what you were going to do? Speaker 2: No. Because at that time--well you had an idea that you had to work. There was--I mean I knew that the minute I got out of high school, I was on my own. My mother wasn't in a position to give me anything. There was no money to go to college or anything. So I knew that I had to get a job. So I would say that summer a friend of mine was working in private family out near Lake Calhoun [Minnesota]. And--well maybe it was wrong, maybe I did get to, to play that summer. But she was going back to school in, in September, and she said, "Marion how would you like to take my job? I work for a family. They're very nice." And the family happened to be the J.T. Williams. They owned the Creamette Manufacturing Company, Mother's Spaghetti, Mother's Macaroni Creamettes, that company, [sic, Creamette Macaroni Company] at 2621 West 28th Street [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. I remember the address. And I took a bus and went out there and met them and agreed to take this job. And it was a family of--there were four boys, Mr. and Mrs. Williams, and then their daughter was married. But I had never ironed white shirts, for instance. Like who in my family wore white shirts? They changed shirts I think twice a day. So there were days when I would iron eighteen, nineteen white shirts. There were--Mrs. Williams had to teach me how to iron the shirts, cause I wasn't accustomed to that, you know. Scrubbed carpeting, wall-to-wall. Did some cooking, you know, and did the housework, cleaned the house. And I wasn't, I wasn't, you know, I just hadn't been trained for that, but I did it, twenty-five cents an hour. Speaker 1: Was that a low wage even for then? Speaker 2: No, cause I was making more than my sister, who in those days, you stayed on the place and she was making like five dollars a week. I wound up with about twelve dollars a week, twenty-five cents an hour. And I could give my mother five dollars and still go downtown to--Three Sisters was the store downtown, and get sharp, you know. So I thought I was, you know, doing pretty good. And I did that for about two years. And then I went to work at a, a beauty salon, Sheree Beauty Salon, making shampoo, helping taking down the permanents, putting the, the combs and brushes and things in formaldehyde to sanitize them and stuff like that, that was my next job. And I think that was like sixteen dollars a week, so I was moving up. Speaker 1: Formaldehyde. Speaker 2: Formaldehyde, that's what they put the, the combs and things in to--that smelly stuff. Speaker 1: That's the stuff you, you use to dissect frogs. Speaker 2: Right. You can almost smell it now, strong. Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did that last? Speaker 2: Let's see, that was probably 1942 and then the war came along. And we were able to go into the Federal Cartridge [Twin City Ordinance Plant] at New Brighton [Minnesota] and I was a machine operator making thirty and fifty caliber bullets, during our, our war effort, and writing to about twenty-three guys in the service. Every time my brother would run to--run into a soldier that didn't have anybody writing to him, he'd write to me and sa, "Marion, you got to write to so-and-so," you know. And then when he came out of the service, telling me how homely these guys were that I was writing. So remember--I don't--you wouldn't remember, but you know it's v-mail that you sent to the soldiers. It was a, a letter that folded up a certain way, v-mail. And so I think I corresponded with about twenty-three fellas. Speaker 1: Like self-mailing letter? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And of course it was sent to all--bout, bout twenty-three guys I think I corresponded with during the service. Speaker 1: And they were all homely? Speaker 2: My brother--when he'd come home he'd say, "Marion you should have seen so-and-so." But a lot of them were kids that we grew up with, you know. Who I'm still good friends with. And that was, hey that was, that was very important. You had to write, you know and keep them, keep their spirits up. Story_ID: 68932 Speaker 1: Now at this time did you have a boyfriend? Speaker 2: Actually, actually I guess I did (laughs), a few. But in--let's see 1940, let's see 19, must have been 1944, Chester Johnson who I had gone through school with and graduated from high school, came home. He was a sailor and he had gone to Great Lakes you know and was a sailor, came home and he was lookin' good. So we started sort of dating and whatnot. And so he sent me a hundred dollars to come and visit him. A hundred dollars was big bucks. I was working at a restaurant at the time, at Peggy's Restaurant. And was I working at New Brighton [Minnesota]? Anyway, he had me come out and visit him. And he was in San Francisco [California]. And I said, "I'm not gonna be out here," you know, they call it shacking up in those days. I said, "If you're serious, we gotta get married," you know, so we got married. And I worked at the naval supply depot in Oakland [California] as a storekeeper. We issued all--anything that you could get in the hardware, we issued to the ships. And so that was my job out there and I was out there for about six months and he got sent to Okinawa [Japan]. So he said and I don't want you out here with these--what did they call the guys--Jodies or whatever. Anyway you go back--Jodies, yeah. You go back to- Speaker 1: It sounds like "Jodie's got your girl" [song]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. You can't stay out here; you go back to Minneapolis [Minnesota]. So I came back to Minneapolis in 1940-- let's see, January. I was, I was only out there about six months and I got there the first day of, of 19--January 1st, 1945. So I was out there about six months and came back here. That's when--it was when I was out there that I got to see this aunt, my mother's sister who was living in Sacramento [California]. So I came back to Minneapolis and he came out of the service that November. And we didn't make it for too long. So that marriage did not last. Story_ID: 68933 Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you do next? I mean what did you--are you starting now to see like what you wanna--get a picture of what you want to do? Speaker 2: Work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Be, you know- Speaker 1: Employed? Speaker 2: Be employed. Be independent. Very, very important. If possible, get a home, you know, whatever. So I--that's when I went to work at Strutwear [Knitting Company], which was a hosiery knitting factory. First black hired after the war was over. And it was always important to me when I went on a job, to perform in such a manner that I could recommend other people to come to work there, and that people could work there after I left. So they did started--start hiring you know, other blacks. The job I laughingly told you that I had to take two aptitudes tests, one at the employment office and one at Strutwear [Knitting Company] to qualify for this job, which the, the, the position was called "Re-dye Clerk". And my job was to count one hundred twenty stockings into bags. Then those bags were taken and put in a, a solution to strip them of their color so that they could re-dye them for the next season. And that's what this aptitude test was for, counting to one hundred. Speaker 1: Test to be able to do that. Speaker 2: Right. But I--and having to go on different floors to pick up these, this hosiery that I would count and all. I saw girls working on power machines. And power machine was always piecework. The more you did, the more you made, the more money you made. So always being one of those, you know--wanting to go up, I asked if I could, you know, bid for one of those jobs. Well one of the supervisors said black, colored people couldn't do that kind of work because their fingers were too thick to handle this, this nylon, you know nylon was very fine. You know the nylon hosiery. And we probably couldn't do that. So- Speaker 1: So they actually- Speaker 2: Actually said that. Actually said that. So I made this report to Mr. Seeburn (ph.) at the Urban League, who was instrumental in getting me the job. And he came in and talked to the union people and all, and I became very active in the union. That meant that I went to hockey games. I think there's a picture over there with me sitting on some bleachers at the hockey game. And whatever it took, you know, I got very active in the union. So when I saw that job go up, bid, that--it was seaming. That was the name of the, the machine, the seaming machine. I applied for it and, and got it through a little pressure from the Urban League and, and whatnot. And the ur--and the union, having gotten active in the union. So I got that job. And you were guaranteed about thirteen weeks of training for that. I think it took me maybe fifteen, but I made it and became very, you know, proficient at it and started making really pretty good money for those, for those days you know cause it was piecework. The more you, the more output you could do, the more money you made. Speaker 1: Okay. So were you the only, the only black person in the union at that time? Speaker 2: At the time, yes. There weren't that many--I, I guess after a while they started hiring for different, different jobs. But I don't remember anybody else seaming. They probably did after, afterwards. But there was, there was one, one job where you--there was a, a form shape just like a woman's leg. And that was called mating. Where the stocking went on there and it went through, through a machine and was pressed by steam or whatever, so it became--you know how stockings came flat and shaped like a woman's leg. That mating was also a high paying piecework job. And I'm sure blacks after a while got on that. But they did hire quite a few, I know quite a few gals right now. One that you pointed out on a picture, Barbara Berry, you thought you knew her, she was one that came to work there. And there are two people in these pictures that I see that worked for Strutwear [Knitting Company]. Speaker 1: Okay. We've gotta change. Story_ID: 68392 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay-- Speaker 2: So you scored this major victory basically in a factory. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So did you see yourself becoming more of an activist in that place? Speaker 1: Yes. Never militant so to speak, you know from what I understand about being militant. Speaker 2: Militant is often exaggerated. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: How many people do you know that actually hurt somebody? Speaker 1: Really. No but I was, yeah definitely active, or I mean an activist in, in that respect. I couldn't see having come out of high school where I was not, you know, a dummy. And then had to be denied you know, fair employment. I remember for--probably right after three days, in a department store downtown. I think I took it cause there wasn't anything else, and cleaning toilets and things and here some girls that went to high school coming in there that I knew, you know wasn't--weren't any sharper than I was in high school. And that's what I had to do and they probably were downstairs, you know, sales people. And that was really aggravating to me. So I was content I guess if I had to work, to hide in, in, in, in somebody's home and do that kind of work, you know, away from where all people couldn't see me at least, you know. But as soon as I could get out of that, I did. And the people that I worked for were very nice people, you know. And I, I guess I learned a lot from them. But if I listened to them, I could have retired long before I did cause Ms. [J.T.] Williams always said, "Save part of every dollar that you, that you earn, Marion." I didn't listen too good. But they were frugal. When I went to the house and saw her, I, I thought she was maybe the cook, cause that's how she was dressed and that's how she was. She was just a plain person, you know. Story_ID: 68393 Speaker 1: But at Strutwear [Knitting Company] I thought--I think I opened the door for some other people to come behind me and work. And I got married while I was working at Strutwear [Knitting Company], second time around. And I had bought that old house I told you about in 1940, in 1947. Speaker 2: Tell me about how that- Speaker 1: Well we were living, we were living in the project. My mother, two sisters and myself. I don't think either of the boys were there. Was Hank [Henry Israel Majors] living with us? Anyway, you could only make so much and live in the project. And with my sister and I working making peanuts. Maybe I started to working at Strutwear [Knitting Company]. Anyway we, we had gotten over our, our allotted amount. So we were told that we had to move out. So I don't know where my mother came up with this ad in the paper, but she saw this house for sale on Emerson, 1015 Emerson [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Five hundred dollars down. So we had a loan company that we would, that we would borrow from, from time to time to send my brothers money to come home on furlough and like that. So she co-signed a loan with me for five hundred dollars. That was my down payment on this house, which the full price was seven thousand five hundred dollars. This house had seven rooms down and six up. So my mother and family lived downstairs and I lived upstairs. And I don't know where I met this carpenter person, but I boarded up rooms that would have been a living room you know, and made it into a bedroom so I had these roomers up there. I had three payments to make. I had borrowed that- Speaker 2: Let's not get past that point because people--I don't think not everybody's gonna understand what, what you're talking about when they see this in the future. But you made a boarding house out of it. Speaker 1: I did. Speaker 2: You know so you, you had like tenants in each room paying rent. Speaker 1: Right, right, it had to be you know. Because I had borrowed five hundred dollars which was a fifty dollar a month payment. I had a contract for deed because I didn't qualify for a first mortgage. I think that was probably--that might have been--contract for deed--I think that was fifty dollars. Then my first mort--I mean the mortgage was forty seven fifty, I can remember that like it was yesterday, forty seven fifty I paid to Twin City Federal, who had the, the deed on the place. So I had these three payments to make. So I not only worked at--not only worked at Strutwear Knitting [Company] Mill, I worked at an after hour joint on the weekends [Peggy's Barr B Q & Restaurant, Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Speaker 2: The way you say that is- Speaker 1: It was. Because we didn't have any license, liquor places, blacks didn't until Cashes opened, I forget what year that was. This is in the '40's [1940']s, '47 [1947], '48 [1948], '49 [1949], like that. And I think I made about three dollars a night there and tips. And then when they would have a sale at Dayton's Department Store which is now Marshall Field's [Macy's], I would go in and go there. So I'm working like three jobs to, to keep these, you know, payments up. And I stayed there--1947. Well I got married in 1951. My mother never thought that there was anyone good enough for us, so she was not happy about this, this, this marriage at all. Story_ID: 68394 Speaker 1: Now who was this guy? Speaker 2: Walter McElroy. He was born in Minneapolis [Minneapolis]. I did not remember ever seeing this man until one night at the Elk's Club. And a friend, a mutual friend of ours, introduced us. And I said--I think that was July 1st, 1951. And we got real tight. He, he, he didn't have anybody, I didn't have anybody, and so we decided to, to hook up. And that was in July of 1951. We married in November of '51 [1951], very short. And so when we got married like I said my mother was not happy about it at all. So I thought that if my marriage is gonna, gonna last, I think we'd better get out of here. So we flipped a coin and we said if it came up heads, we would go East. If it came up tails we would go West. He had lived in California and he had relatives in Cleveland, Ohio. And he had a, an uncle who owned a, a delicatessen. And he was ill. And he thought we could go there and be of some help, 'cause I always liked sales, you know. And so it came up for East. So we decided to go to Cleveland [Ohio]. So I left my family in the house, you know. I rented the part out that I was in, I rented it out to a couple, and we went to Cleveland [Ohio]. And would you believe the uncle that we were going there to help, passed while we were en route to Cleveland [Ohio], died. So here we go into Cleveland [Ohio], 75th and Kinsman was this delicatessen and he had an apartment upstairs. And Aunt Emma, that was his wife, what do they call it when people weren't really married? Speaker 1: Common law. Speaker 2: Common law, common law wife. So an aunt of my husband's from Memphis [Tennessee] sued for half interest in this, in this building and property that this man owned. Well how is this gonna look, you know? Here we come, strangers. This, this common law wife had never seen us before and here we come in you know, converging on her. You know, live in the place. And so in those days a lot of people believed in readers, you know that would come in, put down little potions and stuff. Speaker 1: [Unclear]. Speaker 2: (Laughs). I told my husband, "Hey, I like Aunt Emma, but get me out of here," cause you know- Speaker 1: She was a reader? Speaker 2: She was a--yeah she had those readers coming in, you know, reading and telling her what to do. I supposed to get rid of us or to handle this situation. So I said, "Hey, let me out of here." So I had gotten a job, gone to the Urban League and got a job in, in a cashmere knitting factory [Hadley Facotry]. And I started out doing something or other, but I spied that same type machine that I seen the, the hosiery on they were seaming the sweaters on. So I told them that I had this experience. So it wasn't long before I was allowed to, to go on that machine. Tore it up. They didn't think that this machine could put out this much because I had been working with this fine, you know, nylon. And here I am working with wool, you know, cashmere wool sweaters. Really I put more out on the machine than they thought it could do. So I was making really pretty good money in those days, this is 1953, '54 [1954]. And we moved out of that, that apartment like real quick, and moved into a, a--one of the gals that I met on the job said that she roomed out farther on Kinsman, off of Kinsman, 140--called it Mount Pleasant [Ohio]. That was a pretty nice area in Cleveland at that time. Wasn't that far from Shaker Heights [Ohio]. And so we moved in the same house where she lived. We got a room there. And I'm still good friends with that--with those people. And I stayed there until 1959, when we moved back to, to Minneapolis [Minnesota]. Well my husband came back because his father was sick and I stayed with some cousins of his for about eight months, but eventually came back. Story_ID: 68395 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I loved living in Cleveland [Ohio]--was fantastic. Speaker 1: So you were there during--well I won't get into al that--sports stuff. Speaker 2: Well it was, I mean the Cleveland Browns and what was, what was the baseball team? Speaker 1: The [Cleveland] Indians. Speaker 2: The Indians. Who was that? Speaker 1: They won the World Series in '48 [1948]. Speaker 2: Right. Trying to think of some of those players. I used to know them. But I enjoyed Cleveland [Ohio]. And I marveled- Speaker 1: Satchel Paige pitched for the [Cleveland] Indians. Speaker 2: Pardon me? Speaker 1: Satchel Paige pitched for the Indians. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: During that period. Speaker 2: But let's see, Marion Motley, was he football? Speaker 1: Yeah, football. Speaker 2: Football with the [Cleveland] Browns. But I was trying to think of some of the baseball players, but anyway- Speaker 1: Larry Doby. Speaker 2: Larry Doby, that's who I was thinking about, Larry Doby, that's right. In those days, so that was exciting to me to leave, you know, Minneapolis [Minnesota]. And got there and I mean there were a lot of blacks in, in Cleveland [Ohio]. And they had businesses, you know. That was, that was very, you know, an eye opener to me. And I loved it, you know. And eventually I got a license in real estate, worked for a company [1953], Reed Realty on 116th and Kinsman. Are you familiar with Cleveland [Ohio] at all? Speaker 1: Not, not [unclear]. Speaker 2: No. Got a license and at that time they called it "block breaking" where, where, where they'd sell a house on the block and then the real estate operators would go on and tell people that they should sell because blacks were coming into the area. Speaker 1: Panic, and general panic. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. So whole blocks would be up for sale you know. Speaker 1: And black realtors were making- Speaker 2: They were making big bucks. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Big bucks. The woman that I worked for, Ethel Reed, she did very well. I was not ever--I had too much of a conscience. Like I couldn't sell something to somebody that I wouldn't buy. She said well if you don't, somebody else will. So I never gave up my day job, I never gave up my factory job. I did it part time. And when you're doing real estate part time, forget it, cause somebody's got your customer and gone, you know. But I--I held the license and, and even got my license here in Minneapolis [Minnesota] when I came back. But never worked at it full time. Story_ID: 68396 Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you do next when you, when you came back to Minneapolis [Minnesota]? Speaker 2: When I came back to Minneapolis [Minnesota], I had to apply for unemployment compensation. And it wasn't very long [1959] before they suggested to me that would you like to get in on the ground floor of a store that's being built in Bloomington, Minnesota? And so I thought you know I love sales. And so I thought that could be interesting. So the GEM store, Government Employee Mart. Do you remember those? They were around the country. They were discount stores, the first of the discount stores, Government Employee. And you had to be a member, sold memberships. So I got in on the ground floor. I was hired in the Linen Department. So I helped get the merchandise off the trucks, into the warehouse, and set the department up. Real interesting you know, real opportunity. So I worked in that department for two years and I noticed that something was going on kind of funny with the gal that I worked for. She would never claim refunds that came in and stuff. And so knowing that if anything goes wrong, it would--the, the boss would be looking at me if there was a theft or something. So I decided I can't, I, I can't deal with this. But it was very obvious that this girl was doing something wrong on the cash register. So I made it known that I was going to leave, but I'd be interested in coming back to the store to work in some other department. So I went to Munsingwear [originally Northwestern Knitting], which was a, another knitting factory here in Minneapolis [Minnesota], International Market Square now is the building where Munsingwear was. So I went there and worked and I got a call from--they built another store in St. Paul [Minnesota], the GEM [Government Employee Mart] store did. So I got a call from the manager of the Luggage and Handbag Department, and he wondered if I wanted to, to go to St. Paul [Minnesota] and work. So I said not really because I don't wanna go that far to work. He said, "Well okay, you come and manage the, the Bloomington [Minnesota] store and I will go to St. Paul [Minnesota] and we'll trade off one day a week so I can come and take care of the stock and everything." So he hired me. So I managed the Luggage and Handbag Department for about nine years. Just terrific, I loved it, you know. I bought--he would send me downtown to do some of the buying because I was the one that was selling the handbags. And I stocked, and I sold. So it was like a three person department because they were leased departments. So it just so happened that I graduated from high school with the owner of that department, with the lessee of that department, Earl Lerner. We still exchange Christmas cards. Speaker 1: Earl Lerner, okay. Speaker 2: Mm hm. Story_ID: 68397 Speaker 1: So I did that for nine years. And there was nowhere to go, so I decided I'm gonna go someplace where I can get a pension, you know. You know a friend of mine had always said, "Marion why don't you go to the telephone company?" Some place where when you retire, you'll have a pension. So that's where I went. I went to the telephone company and I got hired in Yellow Pages [Northwest Bell, U S West]. First black hired in Yellow Pages sales. And actually at that time, women were not allowed to go out on the big accounts, you know like the car dealerships and all. We sold from the office. And our, our--the clients were doctors and lawyers and at that time, lawyers could not advertise. But there was a bold listing, bold, the darker bold listing in the white pages were the sales item. And so we had--"wobble" they called them, "WBL's", "wobbles", white pages listing. White, white bold listings, white pages bold listings. We, we, we nicknamed them "wobbles". So we had contests. So I always made the, you know I always made the, the contest. I have some, some certificates and things downstairs and, and items that I won, you know, for going over sales and all that. So I did that for two years. And then they asked would I be interested in going to management. Well that was affirmative action time, 1972. And so I said, "Well I don't know, I love selling yellow pages, you know." But then my husband at the time, he said, "You better go cause they may not ask you again." So I did, and I went to work in the employment office downtown Minneapolis [Minnesota], at Northwestern Bell. And I was Assistant Manager, Assistant to the Manager of Special Programs. And at that time, we were hiring hard to employ people. And we were being subsidized by an organization called NAB, National Alliance of Business. And so we retained our recruits to such an extent until they thought I was doing a pretty good job, you know. I'd go out, you know, and tell these kids--some of the ones that were hired, how lucky they were to be considered for a company like that, you know, with little or no training. And so after two years [1974], then they asked if I'd like to go out on loan from the company to the National Alliance of Business as Youth Director. So I did that in Minneapolis [Minnesota] for two years. And I was--had an office on Nicolette. And then after two years of doing that, I went on loan as National Director and got to go to Washington D.C., and direct the program on a national level, traveled about seventy-five percent of the time. And we talked about programs that we had that were so successful. For instance, I started a program--I had a Youth Motivation Task Force where I recruited people preferably from disadvantaged background that had succeeded in some area of their vocation to go into the schools and talk to the kids about the need to stay there and at least get a high school education. And then I also had a program where we had students to go out during Spring break and call on corporations to get job pledges for summer jobs. And that was very successful. So then when I went to Washington [D.C.], I'd go to the NAB [National Alliance of Business] office and talk about the programs that we had, you know, successfully promoted here. So that was my Washington [D.C.] experience. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 68398 Speaker 1: Now, now what, what was your relationship with local politicians here in Minneapolis [Minnesota]? Speaker 2: Always supportive, but--yeah, but never you know, never a real--what can I say--politically astute or whatever, versus [unclear] supported [Vice President] Hubert Humphrey, you know. And almost a "dyed in the wool" Democrat, but I have voted Republican in my lifetime. But I consider myself a Democrat, and very supportive of them. Speaker 1: So [Hubert] Humphrey, you had some contact with him. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I had met him here, you know, he was mayor [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. He--and Mayor, Mayor [Hubert] Humphrey and Governor [Luther] Youngdahl, they were given the credit for cleaning up Minneapolis [Minnesota], getting the, the racketeering element out of Minneapolis. And of course [then Mayor] Hubert Humphrey was always you know, he was an advocate for, for all people. And so he really had the, the vote of, of most minorities. And when I was in Washington [D.C.] with the NAB [National Alliance of Business], he [HM] Augustus Hawkins, they had a, a dinner and they were promoting--what was it? Was it a Fair Employment [Practices Commission] bill or something? And they had a dinner. And Northwestern Bell got me tickets to go to that dinner, and that's where that picture came from. And then I would run into him. I think I was on the plane with him once and we talked. And he was very complimentary of me, you know, having this position, very supportive. And then I asked him to be a speaker at my youth conference that I was having, you know, but they couldn't accommodate me there. Speaker 1: Okay now this youth conference, tell, tell us about that. Speaker 2: Okay. It was a national youth conference where youth directors like myself, came in from all around the country for I think a three day conference. And at that conference, there would be speakers, you know, encouraging us in our function as youth directors working with youth programs throughout the country. And the speakers that I had, one of them was [W.] Harry Davis who is well known in Minneapolis [Minnesota]. He was one of my speakers. And then I think there was Nate--I had somebody from the Urban League to come I think from Kansas City [Missouri] I believe. He was one of my speakers. And Alfreda Garibaldi from Minneapolis to come in as speakers on our program. And let me see--I was trying to think of some of the highlights. We would have seminars. I mean in the three days there would be things going on all the time to give the youth directors programs and specifics on how to function better in their position. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now you had quite a bit of material about it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Approach it in a systematic way where it appears to me that someone could take this model and do the same thing. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Is it important to, to leave a trail behind like that? Speaker 2: I think so. I think so. I have been, like I say, helped so much in my lifetime you know, encouraged to do this. I always tell people, "But I don't have a college education." And they'd say you know, it doesn't always take that, you know. And I've just been encouraged so I, I find it you know easy to try to push people along, you know, so that they reach their full potential. Story_ID: 68399 Speaker 1: What, what would you consider the highlight of your career at Northwestern Bell? Speaker 2: Okay. I guess that experience as Youth Director was one. But when I returned [1977] to Minneapolis [Minnesota], I got the position as Coordinator of the Minority and Women Business Enterprise Program. And at that time, the thought was that there weren't any successful entrepreneurs, black especially, that could supply Northwestern Bell with, with products that they would need. For instance they would need contractors for underground cable, you know, to install underground cable, things like that. They brought everything, I mean the company buys everything, you know, all kinds of supplies. So I made it my job to go out and beat the bushes to find minority suppliers. So the first directory that I put out, and it was the first in the Bell, in Northwestern Bell Company. I put together a directory, had thirty-three pages of minority suppliers. Was it just--I think I had other than blacks, I had you know, Indians, American Indians and Hispanics. But it was a directory of minority suppliers. And the next year it, it grew, you know to more pages. I have one to show you. And, and that was 1977. Well in 19--I think the first part of 1979, Northwestern Bell sent me to a trade show, a minority trade show in Chicago [Illinois]. And I liked the concept they used at their, at their trade show. They had minority suppliers stationary with corporate buyers coming in, stopping at their booths, and talking about the possibility of contracts. Prior to that in Minneapolis [Minnesota], the minority suppliers would have booths, those few that they--there were, as I said there weren't that many. They would be in booths and the buyers would come. Maybe they'd stop, maybe they wouldn't. But not that many contracts were written. So on September 15th of 1979, with the help of the Metropolitan Economic Development Association, MEDA, and the Minnesota Minority Purchasing Council, we combined our efforts and put on, and I coined the name, Corporate Minority Business Exchange, September 15th, 1979. And I think at that--I can't remember. I think we had over six hundred people to attend the first one. And we had it at our Training Center out on Wayzata Boulevard [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. There was--it wasn't the best situation, but the corporate buyers were in offices. It was on a Saturday, so that they had access to the offices that were in that building. And then the minority suppliers would circulate and talk with these corporate buyers. And we got a contribution from the corporate community, an amount where we could give them a luncheon that day. That event has continued. It'll be in October of this year. So I consider that one of my--the highlights of my career. Speaker 1: Okay. We're gonna change right here. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 68400 Speaker 1: Okay. So after this big event, I mean after your, your--the big event at Northwestern Bell, what, what did you--I mean what, what, what did you do? Speaker 2: I was doing that when I retired. That was my last, the last job and I traveled quite a bit. I was just thinking of--you talking about hotels and things. It's been my pleasure to have stayed in some of the greatest hotels in this country with my experience on loan, you know. In Washington [D.C.] I traveled about seventy-five percent of the time. And then in this position, there was always some conference or you know, a training session to go to as a pur--purchasing agent. I got to go to a lot of training sessions around the country. Our headquarters were U.S. West, where Northwestern Bell was Denver, Colorado. So I'd get to Denver. And prior to expanding to U.S. West, Northwestern Bell's headquarters was in Omaha, Nebraska. So I have really traveled extensively and like I say, stayed in some of the most fabulous you know, hotels in the country. And eaten in some of the most fabulous restaurants. So that was a--certainly a, a benefit from other jobs. (Simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 68401 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)- Speaker 2: Were you surprised that you were able to basically go into a situation like that at Northwestern Bell and, and really be able to show what you could do and, and make such an impact? Speaker 1: I was, I was. I never, never really gave myself you know, credit enough to do things like that. People say I always play myself down, especially I think I have this, this feeling about not having a college degree. For instance when I got to Washington [D.C.], all the--I mean most of the, the, the people in, in my position, that had my position, were college graduates. A lot of them had gone to predominantly black colleges. And you know after they find your name, then they'd say, "Well I mean what college did you go to and, and are you in this sorority or that?" It gave me kind of a you know, an uncomfortable feeling, but I tried to get over it and go on and do my thing, you know. But I've always I think been sorry that I didn't go to college. I have a sister, my younger sister, the only one in the family who did go to college because I guess we were there kind of to, to help her. But she was sharp anyway, the smartest in the family just without even, you know, working at it. But- Speaker 2: Where did she go? Speaker 1: She, she went back to, to--well she went to, to the University of Minnesota. Then married and had three children. And did not finish college. She went back on one of those career programs at, at forty and got her degree in social work. And I contribute that to the fact that her kids have excelled, the one, the one you talked to in New York, you know worked for the Transportation Department. Anybody that comes into New York to make a movie goes through her. So she's met Denzel Washington and people like that. Her son graduated from Marshall U [Marshall University High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], which was--is the high school here, on a scholarship to Harvard [University, Massachusetts]. He ended up having bio--degree in biology, but pre-med. Went on a full scholarship to Stanford [University, California] and was on the program. I'm traveling for Northwestern Bell at the time so naturally I could book myself into Cambridge, or to, Boston [Massachusetts], and got to go to his graduation at Harvard [University]. Then I got--was able to book myself into, into what was--Palo Alto, or into California, got to go to his graduation at Stanford [University]. And he was on the program. And now he directs a Pediatric Pain Center. He did it at UCLA [University of California Los Angeles] and about six months ago, and now he's gone to a children's hospital in, in Seattle [Washington]. And I contribute the fact that she went back to school. She really inspired them too I think, to excel. So I'm just so proud of them. I have really great nieces and nephews. Story_ID: 68402 Speaker 1: Now you remained active in NAACP, Urban League, Phyllis Wheatley Center. Speaker 2: Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center. Speaker 1: On the board. Speaker 2: No longer on the board, but very active. If he would, he would be a terrific person to interview. His name is Jim Brown. And his family, which is unusual, were born, or reared in like Alexandria, Minnesota, you know where there were very few. And he has history about his, his family. I mean, I mean the background way back, you know. And just a terrific story. But I asked him would he, would he like to be recommended--no I do too many of that stuff. But we volunteer at the [Minnesota] History Center. And they have an exhibit over at the History Center in St. Paul [Minnesota]. And it is blacks in Minnesota. And I had the privilege of working on the committee that put the exhibit together. And then I volunteered the first year once a month. But now I go every other month on a Sunday. And so many of the people in the exhibit I know, you know. But I learned a lot from just being a part of it. For instance, how long do you think blacks have been in Minnesota? You have any idea? Speaker 1: I would imagine since 1830's I guess, '40's [1840's]. Speaker 2: Eighteen thirties [1830's]? Speaker 1: Well maybe 1850's, I don't know. Speaker 2: There was a, a trader, a black fur trader, George Bungle. And he had a son born around Duluth [Minnesota] in 1802. So that means that he was here in 17- something. Speaker 1: Yeah I've heard of George Bungle. He's, he's included in- Speaker 2: He married Indian, Indian woman. Speaker 1: He has a book called 'The Black West' [William Loren Katz], was a story about him. Speaker 2: Black cowboys and whatnot. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So like I say I've learned a lot just by being part of that program over there, very interesting. A lot of the people that come and tour the [Minnesota] History Center are not from here, they come from all over the world, you know. I mean people from Australia and we've talked to people form, from everywhere that come to go through the [Minnesota] History Center and stopped in at that exhibit. It's very interesting. Story_ID: 68403 Speaker 1: Okay. What, now what do you attribute to your success? I mean what, what, what traits do you have do you think really contribute to your being able to, to rise from you know like a, like a labor position to an executive one? Speaker 2: I contribute I guess most of it to my mother who was a very strong woman, a very determined woman. Complicated and very complicated. But determined to push us as far as we could go. She couldn't understand why we wouldn't want to marry a doc--doctor. I mean we should, we should marry a doctor or a lawyer and I'm thinking, really? I didn't--you know wasn't able to go to college and stuff, but those were the goals that she had for us. And insisted on us, you know, going to school. When we would leave for school--now I remember this as a very young child. I mean maybe going to kindergarten or, or first grade. She would have us doing spelling bees. And when we left the house, we sang 'R-E-S-P-O-N-S-I-B-I-L-I-T-Y.' That was a song we sang. And she would have us in spelling bees. Ninth grade I guess wasn't that bad for her in those days, you know. And she was sharp and recognized as being you know, a good parent. Like I say, she was a very complicated person. Did not have a lot of friends, close friends. She was suspicious of people you know, and very protective of us, fanatically so almost. And but good for us and good to us. Speaker 1: Yeah did she--she got, she got a chance to see you become successful? Speaker 2: Yes. Let's see, when she, she died in 1970. So I went to the telephone company in '69 [1969]. So she did you know at least know that I was going there. And then her--my older sister had her real estate license and she lived with her in California for a while. She was a real estate broker. And Andy my older brother, was--I mean we were all gainfully employed. She never had to come to prison for any of us. My, my younger brother was just such a super guy. And if you read a little article about him when he passed away in the paper, you see some--he was like a, a, a youth director in Cleveland [Ohio] at a church, you know. And I think because of our beginning, I think we probably felt it our duty to, to give some way you know, to the community or- Story_ID: 68404 Speaker 1: Yeah you, you're part of a--you're obviously part of a strong tradition around the Phyllis Wheatley [Community] Center. And--but now what, what do you see as your own legacy? I mean not, not, not necessarily apart from them, but what, what do you see as your, your, your legacy? Speaker 2: My nieces and nephews think that I'm the greatest. "Auntie Mame," you know. They think I've done a lot of, you know, interesting things, they're proud of me. I mean at eighty you know, I do three miles at the Mall of America [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. I'm a mall walker, you know. And I belong to this club and, and I go--I try to go at least three times a week. Or I'll walk around Lake Nakoma [Minnesota], which is only down about six blocks, you know. And the fact that I've remained active. Now I coordinate this scholarship program for the school that I, you know, graduated from. Speaker 1: North High School [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Speaker 2: North High School. I've been able to, contrary to the person that had the position before me, he did not recruit one mentor for this program. I've been able to recruit thirty-seven mentors. And last Sunday, a week ago tomorrow, I had about forty-five people in my back yard, mentors and mentees, for a get together so that the mentees could talk with their mentors. They're getting ready to go off to school, you know. And it's been a pleasure. I, I, I feel so good about it because of the quality of people that I've been able to get. Owners of companies you know, and teachers, very qualified people who are committed to these kids. One is going--and this is the first year that they opened it up to predominantly black colleges. One is going to Alcorn [State University] in Mississippi. And his mentor is from Mississippi. I hooked them up spec--you know, especially for that purpose. She's been able to get his--get a cousin of hers on a conference call with his mother. And they have fallen in love with each other, both their names are Betty. And so he's got a family when he goes there. First time South, going South from Minnesota. You know he needed that. And so I've had other mentors who have taken their mentees to lunch, have given them money, sent them checks you know for graduation and things like that. And it's so needed because so many of them, they'll start out and they fall through the cracks, they just don't continue. So I'm just really proud of that. Story_ID: 68405 Speaker 1: Okay. And you still, you're still productive, and how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well as a person who despite their frugal beginnings, you know, poverty stricken beginnings, was able to rise above it and become independent and, and contributed to the community, gave back. And we haven't talked about, about my church affiliation, which is the--I mean without Him, none of this would be possible. I believe that. I, I say my Devotions. I'm died in the wool AME [African Methodist Episcopal], you know. And God is good. I feel blessed. And my mother had it so that if we didn't go to church, then you went nowhere that Sunday, you know. So we were in, in church. I look back and, and I wish she had been more involved, you know. I'm just getting so that I understand and, and read the Bible religiously you know. But she did make it a point of, of having us connected. Speaker 1: What was the name of the church you attended when you- Speaker 2: Wayman. I, I came up in Wayman AME, which is north Minneapolis [Minnesota] now. But south Minneapolis, so I attend St. Peter's AME [African Methodist Episcopal]. If I go to a city, I--first thing I do is find me a church. When I was in Washington, DC I went, you know, halfway across town you know, to go to church. In Cleveland [Ohio] I didn't find an AME church close. So I went to an ME, United Methodist Church. There's so little difference. Story_ID: 68406 Speaker 1: And golly I've had so many fortunate things to happen in my life. In 1978 I was going to Las Vegas [Nevada] and I ran into this old boyfriend of mine who I think I dated when I was twenty, and he was working at Caesar's Palace. And had the, the--what would I call it--in the bathroom he had his little business where he shined shoes and did--a valet, a valet service. And he owned a triple wide mobile home out there. And anybody that would come to, to Las Vegas [Nevada], he would invite them out. And the guys from here that knew him, 'cause he had lived here off and on for years, they would take him fish, you know cause fishing is great in Minnesota. And he'd want him to bring him fish. So I ran into him. So I said--so he was inviting everybody out there. I said, "Well I'll come out and help you, you know, fry the fish and all." So I went out. And then I said, "Gee whiz, I might wanna come back out here on my vacation." Said, "Why don't you?" So he sent me money to come back out there and we started dating. You know he would come here to visit me, I'd go out there to visit him. He passed away in '84 [1984] and willed me his place, his dog, his car. So for--until 1991, from eighteen to nine, 1991, I would spend like three months out there in the winter. But it was not my lifestyle and I knew that I was never gonna you know, move from here. I was about seven minutes from the [Las Vegas, Nevada] Strip, could walk to the Strip almost. Just a really neat place, a gated community and all. But I just got tired. I had my brother and my cousin living with me at the time. My cousin had congestive heart failure. And I just couldn't see packing them up every year and going back and forth, cause it was really not a vacation for me. 'Cause once I got out there, I had to cook and take care of the house, you know, like I was here. So I sold it in 1991. But that was quite a, quite a, you know, an experience. And now a lot of my friends are moving to Las Vegas [Nevada] and I'm thinking did I make a mistake? But it was never my lifestyle. I'm not a gambler. I'm too cheap to gamble, you know. Twenty dollars and that's it. Speaker 2: So--and that is a, kind of a interesting story, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And a lot of people--it raises an, I don't know--and this probably has nothing to do with your life. But I--it does I guess remind [unclear]. I know in Chicago [Illinois], Minnesota first in the early '90's [1990's], and now Las Vegas [Nevada] are the two places where people are going after they, they're removed from CHA [Chicago Housing Authority]. In other words they knocked down the projects and so forth. Have any inside information about that? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: But those are the two spots. Speaker 1: Is that right? I wasn't aware of that, although I know there are a lot of people here from Chicago [Illinois], you know. Have, have migrated here, but no I did not, I did not realize in that--in great numbers. My brother lived in Chicago [Illinois] for thirty-one years and I would--when I lived in Cleveland [Ohio], that was halfway. So I, I would always stop in Chicago [Illinois]. As a matter of fact, I have a very dear friend in Chicago [Illinois] who I visited about three weeks ago. [HM] Nelvia Brady, who wrote the book 'Mothers and Daughters'. She was a counselor here, her life is really something. It's a small world. She was a counselor here at a high school when I was Youth Director for NAB [National Alliance of Business]. And that program that I had where kids went out and called on companies and that Youth Motivation Taskforce, she was one of the counselors that worked with me, one of the high school counselors that worked with me in that program. So when her picture was in the paper about this book, and she was coming to town I guess for some book signings or whatever. I said, "Gee, that name sounds familiar." So I go back and I look at my papers and sure enough, it's the [HM] Nelvia Brady that I know. So when she came to town, a group of us got together and she had another friend, and a friend of mine, we had a mutual friend here. We got together and had three book signings for her. So she did pretty well. As a matter of fact, she stayed here, she stayed at my house. And so we've gotten to be really good friends. So this mutual friend of hers and mine got married last summer, and I had a shower for her out in my yard, I have to show you my backyard. And [HM] Nelvia [Brady] surprised her by coming. She came in a day early. Helped us do all the cooking and planning and everything. And when Doris and her husband came to the gate, she went out and greeted them. They didn't even know she was coming. So about three weeks ago, Doris got a new 2002 Lincoln for her first anniversary present. So we had to try that Lincoln out, and drove down to Chicago [Illinois] to visit [HM] Nelvia [Brady]. Had a great time. She has a, a mutual friend, Ed Williams, do you happen to know Ed Williams. He's a big shot at Harrah's Casino [Illinois]. He is in Human Resources or whatever. They're so respectful of him when he goes through there. Anyway he had us over there and had us to lunch and, and he gave us all a, a goody bag when we left with all kinds of goodies in it. So I met some really great people in my life you know and try to keep up a relationship with them. I lose them sometime and find them. Story_ID: 68407 Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything you wanna tell us that we haven't asked you? Speaker 2: I don't think that there's anything we haven't covered. If it is, I don't know what it could be. I've had a very interesting life, a very blessed, blessed life. And we have a, a person that I referred to you for an interview is Al McFarlane, and he is the Publisher of Insight News, which is a, a black owned newspaper. And we also have another one, Minneapolis Spokesman, Launa Newman. I'm very good friends with both of them. And Al has--what can I say? Well he started, he founded a weekly forum over at Lucille's Kitchen, was a black owned restaurant over north [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. And every week he has this forum and deals with all kinds of issues that, that affect the, the minority community. He's had the Somalis over there, you know on the program. We've hooked up--he has some kind of hookup where we have hooked up with, with--golly, what small town is it? A small town where farmers think that they have a, a problem, you know, and we compared our problems and whatnot. And then he--I got him involved with AARP [American Association of Retired Persons]. So he's their communications person for AARP. They opened a new state office over in St. Paul [Minnesota]. And so he's on the, the council. Golly there's a name for the council, but anyway--and so he was in Chicago [Illinois], was he in Chicago or Washington, DC? Anyway he had a hookup so that, that, that Tuesday forum, he could speak to us you know and we could speak back to him, you know, on, on the microphone. Speaker 1: Oh, video-- Speaker 2: Video, really, really great. Speaker 1: Teleconference. Speaker 2: Yeah, so he's so committed to the community until every week you, you don't wanna miss it because you know that you're gonna come away having learned something. Speaker 1: Okay. Well we're gonna follow up on that. Speaker 2: Do, he's great. You'll love him. Speaker 1: And thank you very much. Speaker 2: You're so welcome, my pleasure. It's been a pleasure. Story_ID: 68408 Speaker 1: This is my Uncle Dorsey Willis, who--a book has been, well a book has been written about the incident, the Brownsville Raid [1906] in which he was one of the 106 soldiers that was dishonorably discharged from the [U.S.] Army. They were charged with a conspiracy of silence because supposedly a white woman had been raped in the town of Brownsville [Texas] and they were accused of it. They accused--well they said that one of them did it. But because there was this conspiracy of silence, they dishonorably discharged one hundred and six of them. And it wasn't until in the '70's [1970's] when it came to light and I do know that [Vice President] Hubert Humphrey entered a bill in Congress [1973] and--or maybe it was our state legislature, I don't know which, but anyway he was awarded twenty-five thousand dollars. And there is a book written on the incident, 'The Brownsville Raid' by Mr. Weaver. What was his first name? VIDEOGRAPHER: John Weaver Speaker 1: John Weaver, I, I met him. He's been in my home. I think he might have autographed that book. But he and Dorsey Willis became very good friends. And he was visiting him in Los Angeles [California]. And, and became very, very concerned about him. So that had been a skeleton in the closet in my family. I never knew about it until it came out in the paper. Story_ID: 68409 Speaker 1: Alright, we're ready. Speaker 2: Now that, that's my sister and I, and we're standing by a, a neighborhood friend's car. And she had just graduated from North High [School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], that was her graduation outfit. And we're hugging and I guess just talking about, you know her, her graduation. Speaker 1: About what year is that? Speaker 2: That had to be 19, two years, okay I graduated in '40 [1940], 1938. That would be 1938. And that's at 803 Fifth Avenue North [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. That's the house that I told you I moved in and didn't have a bathtub. We had to go back to the tin tub. Speaker 1: That's the same sister. You know these are two of the, the, the pictures that I treasure. She had come to Washington, DC. I was on loan there. And it was during the inauguration. She worked for Congressman [Lionel] Van Deerlin in California and she was able to send me invitations to some of the events that took place during [President James] Carter's inauguration. And so that's why she was there. And we had a nice visit. Speaker 2: And that just happened in March. That was during my eightieth birthday anniversary. My niece on the right had come from New York City. And she and a friend of mine, Joyce Smaybe [ph.], dreamed up this, this birthday party for me. And we had it at the new Urban League building over north on Penn and Plymouth [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. And that's my sister on the left, her mother. So we had a great time. Speaker 1: That's 1925. That's my mother in the background pregnant with my younger sister, and that's my oldest brother Andrew, my sister Ruth who you just saw in the other picture, and Hank and myself. Speaker 2: Let's do this one. When we have a group, why don't we go left to right. I don't know if you did or not. Speaker 1: No I didn't. No I, I mentioned my mother first, but on the left is my younger brother and behind him my older sister Ruth, then- VIDEOGRAPHER: Hold it. Speaker 1: Then on the right I'm in the front and my brother Andrew Junior in the back. Speaker 2: That has to be 1919. May of 1919 when my older brother was born and he was the first child. That's my mother and dad, Andrew Raymond and Ruth Albertine Majors, 1925. And that would have--I don't know if we were living at--they were living at six, 621 Lyndale Place in Natchez [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 2: That's a picture over at Rick's Cafe. And [W.] Harry Davis on the right was the father of the young man that owned that restaurant. And in that picture from left to right is Donald Riley and I don't know the lady next to him, but he would have been a buyer, a corporate buyer from one of the--Borson, Borson Construction is where the fellow on the left worked, and she was a corporate buyer. Then, then that's [HM] Gale Sayers who had come to, to Minneapolis [Minnesota]. And I was introducing him to buyers in my company, he had a computer company. And then me and then his wife is next. And my clerk is, is Peggy, Peggy Newman and then [W.] Harry Davis on the extreme right. Speaker 1: That's a--not been too long ago. And [HM] Maxine Waters was here. I can't for the life of me think of what--she was here for a presentation. And from left to right is Myrtle Thomas in the yellow, Myrtle Thomas. Very active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. And behind her Leota Seals who was President of the NAACP for a long time. Then in the pink is Marilyn Green from Los Angeles and a very dear friend of mine. And behind her is [HM] Maxine Waters. And they knew each other, so they were surprised you know, to see each other at that event, then myself in front. And behind there is Lynn Daniels who works for the school system and Barbara Berry on the extreme right. Very close friend. Speaker 2: That depicts one of the programs that elementary school where I was a mentor. And it was Field [Community] School [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. And one of our friends' daughter is a teacher there. So I don't know the person on the, on the left, the first two people on the left. But the person who's arm on my shoulder is Larry Brown, who is a lifetime friend. And then Jerry Bell is an executive with the, the [Minnesota] Twins organization. And then the daughter of a friend of ours who invited us to be mentors at that school. And we were there for a presentation to students that day. Speaker 1: That is my graduation picture from Sumner Elementary [School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], combined elementary and junior high school, located on Sixth Avenue North, which is now Olson Highway. And I think I counted eight blacks in the class. [Pause] I think there were eight on our--how many in the full class. Let's see, two, four--anyway I believe there were about eight blacks in that class and, and maybe fourteen whites. We were, we were pretty well integrated at, at Sumner School. Speaker 2: June 1937. Speaker 1: June 1937. Speaker 2: And you were right here, right? Speaker 1: That's me. I can remember that dress. Speaker 2: You ready? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Story_ID: 68410 Speaker 1: That's out in San Francisco [California]. That was my first husband [Chester Johnson] in the sailor outfit and his best friend, we roomed at the same house, but we were out on the town that night. I forget where we were, the name of that club was. But we had a good time. I think I was drinking a Singapore Sling. Speaker 2: There's the house, the house. I paid five hundred dollars down on that, that house, it was a duplex. Kind of rundown. But I bought it in 1947 with a five hundred dollar down payment. The full price was seven thousand five hundred dollars. And it was to house the family after we were asked to leave the project because my sister and I were working and we were making too much money. Speaker 1: That's the kitchen in that house. Now I had come back, I had moved to Cleveland at this time and that was my tenant that I had rented it to. And that was the kitchen, a big kitchen. Speaker 2: Here you are. Speaker 1: That's me. Skinny I was then, weighed one hundred six. Speaker 2: And Odessa Williams was my tenant. Speaker 1: That's in Cleveland, Ohio where I moved to in 1952. And I'm out enjoying myself. I don't remember the people's names. There's one, one couple in there I Remember, but I think most of them have passed on. But my husband [Walter McElroy] is right behind me. I'm in the, in the striped dress and my husband Walter is behind me. Speaker 2: That picture took place in 19--in the 1930's when we were at a Phyllis Wheatley camp. We, we, we actually--we were loaned that camp. It was at Big Lake Minnesota. It belonged to Wells Memorial Settlement House [St. Paul, Minnesota]. And we would go there I think around the last two weeks in August. And I'm down in front in a fur jacket. My cousin's girlfriend had cut up a coat of hers and made this fur jacket. And I had to carry this fur jacket to the camp, and it was probably one hundred degrees out there. But as you can see I've had furs for a long time. Speaker 1: And that's where one of the workers--no there's something wrong there cause what's underneath there doesn't go with the picture. No, no there's two, they must be stuck together, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. That's a picture of an event, it was a dinner, a Congressional dinner in Washington, DC when I was there on loan from the telephone company [Northwest Bell]. And Roy Weir had been given tickets to bring to me to attend that, that dinner. And I had invited William Seaburn [ph.] and his wife, and Gene Thomas who was a friend. But that was a picture of Roy Weir, of Humphrey, [Vice President] Hubert Humphrey, and myself. I think Hubert as Senator Humphrey and [HM] Augustus Hawkins had entered a, a bill for fair housing, was it fair housing? Speaker 1: Opportunity. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This isn't the Eddie Anderson? Speaker 2: That is the Eddie Anderson. Speaker 1: Eddie Rochester Anderson? Speaker 2: No, no, no. [Laughinf] NO that was an Eddie Anderson who's car my sister and I were standing near. And he taught me how to ride a bicycle. That's why my knees are all scarred up now. But the municipal market wasn't very far from there. They sell all kinds of vegetables and things down there, and that's where I learned how to ride a bicycle. That was in 1930's. Speaker 1: Seven. Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty seven [19370]. Speaker 1: And this is 19--I think there's a confusion on that date, but it's when my brother came out of the service. And I would have thought that--I think it--that should be 1945. And that's my--on the left is my younger sister Lucille, and then my brother Hank who could make you laugh. You, you, you could not, you could not be sad around him. And then myself, and then our young neighbor and my mother. And we were just happy to have him home. We were at 989 Aldrich then in the projects [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. That was taken in the project. Speaker 2: That's about 19--it is 1933 because on, on the blackboard in the back is February 22nd, 1933, Washington's birthday. And Jean Thomas who had been a worker at Phyllis Wheatley Community Center, I think she was sixteen years old, was giving us some instruction in a Girl Reserves, a group that we had. Speaker 1: And here you are. Speaker 2: That's me there, and there are about two or three other blacks in the, in the picture. One, Phoebe Givens who is a lifetime friend and Catherine Grissom. So that I believe was at Sumner [Elementary] School [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Speaker 1: That was a fun night out. We had been to the Elk's Rest after Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center], we call them Pow-Wows, where we went out to Theodore Worth Park [Minneapolis, Minnesota] and made a big bonfire and had a few, a few drinks. And then we came back, we came back to the Elk's Rest where we continued to have fun that evening. But those are all people that I grew up with and I think most of who are still alive. I see one, two, three that have passed on. But we still get together in an alumni organization at Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center]. I can name some of them. From the left to right, [W.] Harry Davis, his wife Charlotte, Jack Straughter who's passed away. Behind him is Evelyn Martin and in front is Marcella Mays. That's Joyce Straughter, myself. Behind is Teddy Martin, and then Mildred Lacey and Albert Wallace. Story_ID: 68411 Speaker 1: That's Christmas of 1973 is it? That's here in this house. And on the left is my niece Sydney. Shall we start down in front? Speaker 2: Well start at the far left. Speaker 1: Far left is my, my niece Sydney and that's, that's Mark, a great-nephew. His mother is right above him, she's the one that you talked to in New York, with that hat on. That's [Ruth] Albertine, that's me, and then that's a nephew Stephan Majors, and that's my cousin Reginald Willis, the son of Dorsey Willis. And a stepdaughter that I was presented with. I didn't tell you about that. And then that's a nephew on the right who is a doctor now. Speaker 2: You were presented with a stepdaughter? Speaker 1: Yeah. I'd been married twenty-twenty-two years and she was fourteen. Okay that's a club, my Minneapolis Socialite Club. I, I had the club meeting out in Las Vegas [Nevada], at my place out in Las Vegas. And that's the group that came out, part of the group that came out. And we had a great time. On, on the left you can hardly see him, is Jimmy Lawson, then myself and then Adelia Nevels, Pearl Scofield and Millie Clark and Floyd Clark. All members of the Minneapolis Socialite Club. Speaker 2: Those are friends, that's 1974. That's my great-nephew down in front. He will come out of law school next May. That's how long ago that was, Mark Majors. And then there's Rose Calloway. We worked together at Munsingwear, and myself, and my dear friend Mercedes Brown who has passed on, and Colby, my Doberman dog. Speaker 1: My latest, my latest picture. A friend had come to his mother's eightieth birthday party and I had celebrated mine a few months ago. So he dressed us up in his leathers and I'll tell you that's the top of the line Harley Davidson. And I actually went around the block on that motorcycle. Not driving it, but as a passenger. That was fun. Speaker 2: That's the, the [national] youth convention in Washington [D.C.] that I discussed. And the fella at the microphone is from the Urban League in Kansas City [Missouri] I believe. I can't remember his last name. Napoleon, Napoleon--I can't remember, can't remember his--Johnson, Napoleon Johnson was with the Urban League out of Kansas City [Missouri] and he came as a speaker at my request. And then I'm next to him on the left, and then [W.] Harry Davis who was here from, who was there from Minneapolis [Minnesota]. And that was a football play, player. It might have been Ray Hamilton. And then I can't remember the, the person's name on the extreme left. But I coordinated the program where football players went out and got job fellowships for students. Speaker 1: That's my grandfather, Squire Israel Jordan, who was an itinerant minister. But to supplement his income, he was a shoemaker. He made boots and shoes. And that I believe--that could have been, that could have been in Memphis [Tennessee], I'm not sure. I know his son had a bike shop in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. That could have been--it could have been Oklahoma or, or Memphis [Tennessee]. Speaker 2: And he was an AME. Speaker 1: He was itinerant AME [African Methodist Episcopal] minister who built churches in and around Enid, Oklahoma. My mother said once he'd get one built and they'd send him off to another one to, to build. Guthrie. Speaker 2: A black town in Oklahoma, yeah. Speaker 1: So I never got to meet him; he passed away in 1929 and I know my mother had asked him to come to help her with us cause she was raising the five of us. And I, I have a telegram or a letter from him where he says that he wouldn't be able to do that; that he was not well. Speaker 2: And that's a group from the corporate, or from the Minnesota Minority Purchasing Council. I know that's Jim Sherard on the left; he was from First National Bank I believe. And I can't think of the fella's name next to me. But to the right, the tall fellow is Al Kelly. He was with me at MEDA, the Metropolitan Economic Development Association, and Bob Riley on the extreme right was a Purchasing Agent from 3M, and then I'm in the middle. We were probably at a conference out of state. We would go in the group--could have been Chicago [Illinois], could have been Detroit [Michigan], could have been Charleston, North or South Carolina. Pardon me? VIDEOGRAPHER: Date? Speaker 2: Pardon me? It's in the '70's [1970's], probably, probably '79 [1979] or '80 [1980]. VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay. Story_ID: 68412 Speaker 1: That's almost the same group of guys. That's Bob Riley on the extreme left from 3M, and Dwayne Sims from MEDA [Metropolitan Economic Development Association], and then myself, and then Mayor Vladimir--what the heck was his first name? George Latimer from St. Paul [Minnesota], and Al Kelly. George Vladimir had probably given us a proclamation for the day of that Corporate Minority Business Exchange. Speaker 2: Okay that is a, a picture of union executives and the CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of Strutwear [Knitting Company], Incorporated. June Brooks was secretary I believe of the union. And John Sherman was the executive at Strutwear, Incorporated, which was a, a hosiery knitting factory where I worked. And they--we had gotten together that day because they were the first company in the area to include a fair employment practices clause in their contract. On the extreme left is Tibbits, Lawrence Tibbits I believe his name was, who was the president of the union at that time. And on the right, can't think of his name, standing, but that's- Speaker 1: Now what year was this? Speaker 2: Bill Severns [ph.] seated. Pardon me? Speaker 1: Yeah, the year. Speaker 2: The year, that would have been probably 1948, '49 [1949]. VIDEOGRAPHER: While the tape is rolling, you want to get a spelling of that company? Speaker 2: Strutwear was S-T-R-U-T-W-E-A-R. I think it's 1015--what is that, A, A Street South, right across from the Metrodome [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Speaker 1: That's a Phyllis Wheatley [Community Center] early group. I would say I was about five years old there, four or five years old. I'm right in the center with that way out hairdo. That's my brother behind me, my brother Andrew. To the right is a girlfriend who we are still friends and see and talk to each other, Catherine Quarterman Grissom. Then behind her is my sister Ruth. The rest of the people in the picture I just don't remember. VIDEOGRAPHER: Can I get a year? Speaker 1: That had to be--that couldn't have been over 20, '29 [1929], '28 [1928], '29 [1929] or '30 [1930]. Twenty eight [1928]; I, I betcha that isn't--I couldn't have been over four or five there would you say? Speaker 2: Yeah [unclear] four or five. Speaker 1: So I was born in '22 [1922]. Speaker 2: Elliot Richardson. Speaker 1: Yeah, Elliot Richard, Richardson and I are probably talking about the program that I coordinated there where our football players would go out during the off-season and develop job fellowships for players. VIDEOGRAPHER: When was this? Speaker 1: That was taken in Washington, DC, probably 1976. AS a matter of fact, I have the certificate that you can take a picture of, if you like. It's on my wall. Speaker 2: Get a copy of that. Speaker 1: Get a copy of it, okay. And that's a group of gals that I worked with at Strutwear. And that's probably our Christmas party. And I have not kept up with any of those girls, sad to say. I'm sorry to say because we had good times together. But that would have been at a hotel, probably the Normandy at downtown Minne--downtown Minneapolis [Minnesota]. It was our annual Christmas pres--party, which would have probably been 1948, '49 [1949]. I worked there from 1947 to 1952. Very, not very hard, not very hard. I was, I was it. I was the, the dot. But in that picture are executives from Strutwear, all from the front office. I think that's the President in the center in front. Speaker 2: Right here. Speaker 1: Right there. Henninger, Lawrence Henninger. I haven't said that name in forty years. Lawrence Henninger, H-E-N-N-I-N-G-E-R, Henninger. And- VIDEOGRAPHER: (Unclear) Speaker 1: June Brooks, who was secretary of the union. I don't remember a whole lot of people. I know that- Speaker 2: Probably shouldn't-- Speaker 1: No, no. That's me. And I made a point of becoming very active in the union so I could bid on a, a better paying job. Speaker 2: Okay. That was at that fabulous house at 1015 Emerson Avenue, North [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. I was always coming up with some idea to, to raise money or to get together. And that was a get together of, of friends and I don't know whether I was selling barbecue dinners that night or, or cocktails or what. But anyway I think it was a fundraiser of some kind. That was at 1015 Emerson Avenue North, probably in 1948. I don't think any later than that. Speaker 1: That's my father Andrew Raven Majors. I think he was born about 1877, died in 1951. Speaker 2: That's my little mother, Ruth Albertine Majors. And I don't know how old she would have been at that time, but she looks quite young. And she was born in Memphis, Tennessee in 1890, and passed away in 1970. She was a very powerful, very--..