 Story_ID: 79408 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers today. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My name is Salim Muwakkil, S-A-L-I-M, M-U-W-A-K-K-I-L. Speaker 1: Now, do you care to give us your former name? Speaker 2: My former name is Alonzo James Cannady, A-L-O-N-Z-O, C-A-N-N-A-D-Y, James, J-A-M-E-S. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a name change story? Speaker 2: Well, yes I guess, you know, you know I changed my name while I was in the Nation of Islam. I had gone to Uganda twice, the first in 1975 with the O, as an observer for the OAU [Organization of African Unity] conference and then in 1976 as a part of the black, a, a, delegation of a black journalists that were visiting Uganda as a fact finding, on a fact-finding mission, and when I got back I was, I, I was received by Imam Warith Deen Mohammed who was the, at that time the leader of the, the, what was the World Community of Islam [in the West, formerly the Nation of Islam, now the American Society of Muslims] and he asked me did I want to choose a name, that I had distinguished myself, and at that time in, in, in the World Community of Islam if you distinguished yourself in some way you, you chose a name and, and I chose Salim Muwakkil. Speaker 1: Okay, sir when and where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in New York City in 1947, January 20th, Harlem Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sixth floor. Speaker 1: All right, that's pretty good. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 10, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: 1900 South Michigan Avenue, HistoryMakers [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into--oh I'm sorry what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm editor, journalist, columnist. You want-- Speaker 1: No, that's good. Speaker 2: --locations or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you could. Yeah could say-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm senior editor In These Times magazine in which I do editing, and I also write columns and, and articles, longer articles, essays, and I also write occasional columns for the Chicago Tribune. Story_ID: 79409 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now before we go into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you. The first one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Whoa man that's--you know my, my favorite food actually is swordfish, you know, I, I like--swordfish cooked at the right consistency I don't think there's anything better than that on, on the planet. And now that they've been much more careful in the way they harvest swordfish and they, they stopped injuring other endangered species I'm, I'm, my conscience is clear. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Negril, Jamaica. I also would have to say Entebbe, Uganda, but it's been so long that I, I may, it may be more a figment of my imagination than a real place, but, but, Negril, Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I, I can't think of one. Story_ID: 79410 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, let me ask you about your family history. If you can tell me as much as you know about the history of your family in terms of how far the family goes back and if there are any stories from the 19th century or anything like that that you could--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, one, one particular story I think relates to the early question you asked me about my name. When I was in the Service, the Air Force, from 1964 to 1969 and through part of that period I was in Georgia, which is the, I guess you would say the ancestral home or the home of my grandparents, many of grandparents and I went to visit some relatives that I hadn't even known existed, but I go the add, their address from my grandmother. And I went and there was a story that was pretty well known in the family about someone who, our ancestor, who lived on one of the Georgia Islands off the coast of Georgia and they called him the "Guinea Sultan," and he was supposed to be a slave, a former slave who had come to this, who had been captured in Guinea and he was a practitioner of Islam and had reached a certain high level and came to, to this particular Island off the coast of Georgia, they called them the Geechee Islands or the Gullah Islands as, as we now call them, but he, he was, you know, like a patriarch of a clan on the island; he was my, my, relative, my ancestor. That was the first time I had ever heard of it, and it was really the first time that I had really began to connect myself with Islam in any other, any other way than what I had grown up on the streets of New York hearing from the Nation of Islam and Malcolm X and what not. And so, it really turned me toward more of a serious study of Islam and so that's one mythological story in my family that I, I don't how, how true it is. It may just be an anecdotal or whatever that word is which means that, you know, the, the word that it's more legendary than it is factual. But, that's one of the, that's, that's a pretty pivotal story in my own conception of what my family, my family's history is. Story_ID: 79411 Speaker 1: My grandmother [Alice Taylor] was born in Flo, in Florida. She lived in Georgia for awhile and then she moved to New York and she, she--the reason why is because she came with my aunt who, who was also in Florida, so they moved to New, they came to New York together and she met her husband [William Dotson] in New York they--and my mother [Bertha Merriman] was born in New York City and she met my father [Alonzo Cannady] who was originally from Florida, from Clearwater, Florida (he was born in Clearwater, Florida) where he was, he and his family was originally settled. That name, the Cannady name, can be traced back to a family of Cannadys in Florida that owned slaves in that area of Florida. In fact, I think there's, there's a representative today from Florida whose last name is Cannady [sic, Charles Terrance Canady], and he's a relative of the, the slave owners of my paternal, the paternal side of my family, so, that Cannady name came from them. Speaker 2: Are you related to the other Cannady's in Chicago do, do you think? Speaker 1: I don't think so. There were three or four Cannady's that we tried to make some connections, and they--we did--although one, one of the families we did have a, I mean, we found relatives in the Baltimore [Maryland] area, although they were different relatives, I mean, even, even they, they different, but, but the name is really not that common, although I have, haven't found any, any relatives outside of the family by, by mere, you know, name similarity. Story_ID: 79412 Speaker 1: Okay now tell us--give, give us your father's name and can you spell it for us and give us his date and place of birth. Speaker 2: My father's name is Alonzo Cannady. He was born in Clearwater, Flo, Florida. You know I, I sent, I sent a form with his date of birth, but without that I really can't remember when it was. Speaker 1: Can you approximate it? What do you think? Speaker 2: Well, okay let's see. Speaker 1: I'm coming to your rescue here right now. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Nineteen-twenty four, June 1924. Speaker 2: Yes, June 1924-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and from Florida he came, he came to New York with his family. They, they moved to, to what, what we now call Sugar Hill, the Sugar Hill area, area of Harlem, and he grew up in Harlem. He went into the Service [United States Army]. His nickname was "Army." He was a male nurse and he, he had a heart problem and he died at forty. Speaker 1: So, what was he like? I mean what are your memories of your father? Speaker 2: He, you know, he was a giant as far as I was concerned, although he was a qui, quite a short man. He was 5'7. He, he was muscular. He, he was musical. He, he--I remember him taking me on boats, row boats in Central Park in the pond area of Central Park. He was, you know he was my hero. Him and my mother separated. He and my mother separated while I was, I think I was five years old and you know there was not too much of a separation because I would see him frequently, and I, I regretted the fact that he wasn't in the house, but I got to see him pretty frequently. Speaker 1: Okay, now what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: He was a male nurse. Speaker 1: Oh, okay through, throughout--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: He became a male nurse during, during the last period of, I think after he was 25 five or so, 26. Well, no af, after he was in his 30s he, he became a male nurse. Speaker 1: Okay. So I thought maybe he was when you mentioned it at first I thought it was just in, in relationship to the Army, but-- Speaker 2: No, no, no I think, I think that's where he got, you know, he, he was a medic in the Army, and I think he just carried, that, that training over, yeah. Story_ID: 79413 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what about your mother, give us her name and spell it for us and birth day. Speaker 2: Bertha Dotson, B-E-R-T-H-A, D-O-T-S-O-N, her maiden name, born 30, not 95. Yeah, help me out again. Yeah 30, August 30th in New York. August 19th, I'm sorry, New York 1930. She was--you know she when she had me she, she, she, she was sick and I was born and she had to go into, into the hospital, so I spent a lot, the first period of, of the earliest part of my life with my grandmother [Alice Taylor] who was really like a surrogate mother at that time. You know my mother was sick and, and, and so she, you know, she had--when, when she came out of the hospital she, you know, you know she just--I grew up in the household in which it was my mother, grandmother, her, her mother, and it, it was four, actually five--it was four generations of, of, of us in that particular household and luckily you know we were all living in the same household so I, so while my grandmother, while my mother was in the hospital my grandmother was keeping me. It really was no interruption in the continuity of my routine as growing up. Speaker 1: So your great grandmother was alive too then? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah exactly right. I grew up knowing her well and in fact her sister was, was the aunt that brought my grandmother to New York and so she--they all--we all lived in the same building in Harlem, 221 West 141st Street, which I'll never forget the address nor the phone number, 841-3191, so that was like a very idyllic situation of growing up. I had a lot of cousins in the building. It was like, it was like our own family building in many ways, you know, so when, when people talk of New York as, as this kind of urban area that, that sunders families that was quite the contrary in our case. We were all kind of centered in that, in that, in that building in New York City. Story_ID: 79414 Speaker 1: Now, now how did your mother [Bertha Merriman] and father [Alonzo Cannady] meet? Did they have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: I don't know it. I don't know it. I, I've heard, you know, you know my father was, was, you know, a zoot suiter during this period. This was a period in New York Harlem was always, was known as this hipster area, and my father was fully into that. And I, and I also have heard stories that my mother used to like to go to the Savoy Ballroom. I've, I've heard stories her and Count Basie, Count--she used to--my mother used to sing a little bit and her and Count Basie,--Count Basie--the Woodside Hotel, the famous Woodside Hotel that he made the song about ["Jumpin' at the Woodside"] was right up the street from us in New York. It was, it was located between 141st and 140th, and we lived on 141st. So, Count Basie was often at the Woodside, and my mother had become kind of like his protege. She was singing and what not and so I, from what I understand they met at one of these clubs and my father fell in love with her and the rest is history. Speaker 1: Now, what was your mother like, I mean, what, what did, what did she do? She was a singer-- Speaker 2: Well, she sang a little bit, but, but then she, you know, she, she became a po--she got--she started working for the Post Office, and she, she was a postal wo, worker. She rose through the ranks and by the time she left she was a manager of one of the major sections in the New York in the, the, the large Post Office in New York City. So, that's, that's what she did basically for--she retired as that. Story_ID: 79415 Speaker 1: Okay. I want you to reflect back and give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Ah man, New York City playing conga drums on peoples cars. We used to have--every, every block had a beat. We, we would--it was so sophisticated in terms of the sound intonations we knew certain, certain, 'cause Dodges made a certain noise, DeSoto's were very good as well. And also at the time Studebaker's. If, if you hit 'em in a certain way they would make a certain bass sound as you hit 'em and each block, which was really amazing when you think back on this each block had a beat that was their signature beat and I remember that very, very vividly. I had to join a gang when I grew up, the Sportsmen because had I not joined the gang I would have been, I would have been attacked by others because the block I lived in was Sportsmen territory, so I would be--they would have assumed that I was a member of the gang anyway and so I had, I might as well have joined it. But then later on I grew up with, real close to my cousins and we were very close, the twins, and the older one, but the twins and I were virtually inseparable and when one would fight the other would fight and so they gang members began to respect us for our, for our selflessness toward each other, our, our willingness to, you know, to go into battle with, with each other and so I didn't, I no longer had to really be a member of the gang. We gained respect simply because of our willingness to, to, to fend for each other. And so those kinds of things, I think, you know are, are what, what stands out when I think about New York City--the swimming pool, Colonial Park, City College. City College was right up the street. All I had to do was look out a window and you see these, these gothic tem, these gothic spires and what not. It was--and ivy colored walls. It was very inspiring environment in many ways, you know. I also grew up next to a Catholic church. I was a Catholic. I grew up as a Catholic and there were gargoyles on the church and when, when I would, you know, when I would be in the bathroom all I had to do is look at the window and the gargoyles would be looking into the window and so I had this, I don't know when I look back on it, you know, it seems as if the gargoyles were just part of my life. This, this, these ugly statues that are supposed to ward off evil spirits, but the, you know, that sensibility, the, the, the architecture, all of that is really part of the flavor of, of New York when I think back on it, you know. It all kind of merges into this, this, this, this myth, this comforting cloud of, of, of these various influences. But, it was really--when people talk about Harlem as being a fearsome environment or, or some sort of negative, caldron of negative influences or whatever I didn't see, you know that wasn't my experience at all. It was, it was, it was a play, it was a playground. There were problems, of course, I mean, we grew up for example hating the police. The police treated us as if were vermin. They would gratuitously accost us and, and harass us and when, whenever they would find a chance to, to insult us or, or to humiliate us they would use it. Like caught and they would make us pull down our pants, just gratuitously, you know. So, we had a very rocky relationship with the police. It was as, it was as if--it seemed as if as I look back in retrospect that they wanted, they wanted to make it very clear where the line was that that there was, there was this line of authority that we could not pass and so there were, there were negative aspects of the experience as well, but I look back on that period of my life as a, as a very happy experience really. Story_ID: 79416 Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were a fairly happy-- Speaker 2: Yeah, sure. Speaker 1: --young fell, fellow in this--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you--how far did you range around your neighborhood [Harlem, New York City]? Did you-- Speaker 2: Well, you know I, I grew up during the period where I be, I became, came of age--well I moved to New Jersey when I was eleven. My mother [Bertha Merriman] began to fear for, for, you know, the things that I was coming in contact with and in fact there was a lot of, I mean, there were a lot of--I saw drug use, open, open drug users. This was the period when there was a heroin epidemic really in, in Harlem, and-- Speaker 1: Late '50's [1950s]. Speaker 2: Late '50's [1950s] right and I saw a lot of that, and it didn't really touch me, but I did, I did see a lot of it and, and, and my mother was a little bit fearful and so my grandmother [Alice Taylor] at that, at that time remarried and had moved to New Jersey and her husband who was a saint really accepted me. You know, he, he, he said well, you know, come on, come on over the Jersey get away from the area and, and so, so you know I moved from New York to New Jersey during this period. Speaker 1: Now, now you got like three other siblings? Speaker 2: Yes I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now were they with your family too--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: Well, my mother was still in New York when I moved to Jersey. She had, she had just given birth to a son and, and, and that, that's Bruce [Cannady], that's my closest sibling. He's, and he, he was, he is ten years younger than I am. So, I had ten years as an only child, you know, kind of I was spoiled in that way. And then my mother remarried. Well, she, she moved to Jersey four years after that and, and she remarried. My father [Alonzo Cannady] died. My, my--when I was (laughter)--it's on that, it's on that list again. Yeah, yeah he--my father died in '63' [1963] right and--but she, my mother moved to New Jersey before that. They had, had, they had been divorced. He died in '63' [1963], well she, she, she had remarried and-- Speaker 1: What about the time that you moved, I guess, you were about eleven then I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah I was about eleven, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she remarried and had, had twins and those are Julian [Merriman] and, and Joya [Merriman] and her husband's name was Julian Merriman, her second husband, and so their last names are Merriman. And those, those are my four, those are my three siblings. It's four of us altogether that my mother had, four children. They still live in New Jersey. Story_ID: 79417 Speaker 1: So, you know when I left, I left I--you know I moved around. I, I did a lot of wandering around New York [City], and in fact I know even though I lived in New Jersey I was going to school in New Jersey I very seldom stayed in New Jersey when I didn't have to, you know. I was, I was a New York boy, and New Jersey was kind of like a foreign country at first, you know. And so I would go to New York every weekend and basically hang out there whenever I got the chance. I, I saw Malcolm X in New York when he used to speak at Harlem Square on 125th Street and what not and, and in fact I really, I really attribute my affection for intellectual pursuits, I guess you could say, to, to that period when I was listening to Malcolm. I would hear him and rather than--it wasn't his ideology that captured me or, or his, his belief, his, his Islamic beliefs, it was his, his presentation, his intellectualism. The fact that the used these words and he, he was able to, to joust with white, with, with, with white people who differed with him on their turf, you know, I mean and, and he would be successful often and that was extremely attractive to me the fact that, that he was so well, well read and well, and, and so learned. And I would, after I would listen to Malcolm I would go to the library and to the dictionary. I would try to, you know, learn the words he, he was speaking and, and discover the places he was talking about, you know, try, trying, try to learn about those. And so he--it really--he made in many ways, he made intellectualism hip in a way. It was, you know, I considered my, I considered it cool to be, to be, to, to use multisyllabic words or, or to, or to know about foreign countries that other people didn't know about. That was, that was a hip thing, and, and, and, and that whole aura you know I, I think Malcolm kind of brought that to, to more so than the movement. I think he's, I think he's often underrated for the fact that he bought a sense of intellectualism to, to, to the black community that really hadn't been there before and you see, you see all kinds of le, the legacies of that and so that's really, I think, what spurred me into the, into the direction that I, that I went into, you know. Story_ID: 79418 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in Harlem [New York City, New York] as a young man I don't know if you encountered any of the--did, did you encounter any of the cultural icons from Harlem like, like Langston Hughes or, or, or-- Speaker 2: Well, Count Basie, although I never really met him. I mean, you know, he, he, his, his, he was gone before I really became conscious of what that meant. But, oh yeah, you know, Sugar Ray Robinson had a, had a bar in the area. He would show up there sometimes. Joe Louis had a, had a, also he had a liquor store in the area. They all seem to be focused on, on spirits, but Wilt Chamberlain had something called Wilt' Paradise, [Big Wilt's] Small's Paradise, but Wilt Chamberlain bought it and, and so I would see him occasionally. A lot of jazz artists would hang out, Art Blakey, [HM] Wayne Shorter, John Coltrane. I've seen 'em all pass through various night spots that I used to frequent in the area, and they were really--it was really a vibrant area all, all the way up until, until the '70's [1970s] actually, you know, when it began to deteriorate. And yes I did see quite a few. None, none of the intelle--well, later, you know, later one of my instructors were [HM] Yosef ben-Jochannan and-- Speaker 1: Jackson, I think John Jackson. Speaker 2: Or John Jackson exactly, right, John Jackson later on was one of my instructors as well, Amiri Baraka. I was also attracted to the beat movement, which Baraka was involved in when he was Leroy Jones. I was attracted to that. I used to go to a place called the Cafe Wha? in, in the [Greenwich] Village quite a bit befo, right before I went into the Service. I was a young, I was a teenager. I was sneaking in, but I was really attracted to that, and I think one of the reasons for that again was Malcolm [X]. The Beats had, had the same kind of vibe, the same kind of intellectual concern, Jones, and, and, you know Gregory Corso, few, a few, a few of the writers of that period, [Jack] Kerouac and, and those guys. They, they were dealing with, with, with French philosophy and, and Buddhism and all that exotic stuff was very attractive to me as a, as a youngster and so I began to dabble a little bit in, into that and that, that kind of set me apart from the pursuits of a lot of, a lot of, you know, the guys on my, and a lot of peers, but, but I was still involved in what they were involved in as well. I was attracted a little bit to the, you know, to thugs, to the gang thing, and you know all of us wanted to be pimps and all that, you know (laughter). So, we, we had to go through that stuff, you know. Story_ID: 79419 Speaker 1: In '63' [1963], we went to--I was in [New] Jersey and you know Jersey and New York I was basically living in two places. In '63' [1963], I got into, into the car with five other guys. It was, I remember it was a Chrysler Hemi head was a beautiful car and it was very fast and we went down to [Washington] D.C. to the March on Washington because we head it would be a lot of women, a lot of girls there, a lot of co-eds. That's what they say co-eds, you know. That was, that was a special word then, you know, and we went seeking co-eds and, and found co-eds. I didn't hear any of the speech or any, any of that stuff, but I was there, you know, so I was at that historic place and that next year--and so I knew it was something going on, you know, and, and it was also, that was also the period when, when the, the Bull Connor released the dogs on, on [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and, and, and so we, we were really involved in, in, some of that Civil Rights stuff. We were very angry at Martin Luther King because we thought he was kind of an Uncle Tom, you know. We thought he was bringing out people into danger and to these people who wanted to kill 'em, and so we were much more--we, we wanted more action, you know. We, we--Martin Luther King didn't fit our style, the overalls and all of that didn't fit our style. But, we didn't, you know, we didn't know what else to do and then in '64' [1964] I was, I was in New York [New York City, New York] one night and we, we were singing doo-wops as a lot of us did, and I was in several doo-wop groups and that's another, that's another one of my passions is singing, so we heard that they were breaking windows on 125th street, this was in '64' [1964], in August of '64' [1964] and, oh July I think of '64' [1964] and we went down there because 125th street was had Flagg Brothers store and I had seen some shoes in Flagg Brothers that, that I would, that I, I was coveting and so if they were breaking windows I though well maybe this was my opportunity. So, I went down there only to find this crowd, this amazing crowd of people who were angry because of an incident of police brutality and it had become a riot basically, the first of the long hot summer riots in '64' [1964] in Harlem, and before we got--on our way down it was me and two cousins and some other guys, a cop shot my cousin in the ba, in the back, point blank. We weren't doing--we were standing there looking at the crowd, the cop came up behind us and shot my cousin in the back. I could not believe wha, what had happened. It, it was, it was totally jarring to me and, and, and, and my cousin was very, he was injured very badly. He, he survived and he's doing all right, but you know that was something that, that shook me to my core and frightened me at the same time. That's when I realized it was really something going on I might not be able to control, you know, there was something happening in the streets and, and so I went into the Service [United States Air Force] right after high school, right after I graduated. Story_ID: 79420 Speaker 1: Now, now let me take you back to school 'cause we skipped over a lot of ground-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and then we'll come and pick the Service [United States Air Force] back up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What was--(unclear)--what was grade school like for you? Speaker 2: Grade school was--I went to Catholic school from, from mo, from, from much of the period, which was very strict, thankfully so. My mother--I had grown, like I said, I grew up next to a Catholic church. We were really much a part of that church, St. Charles Borr, Borromeo was, was the name of it. It was Italian Catholic and we--and so I went to the school and when, and then when I left that, when I went to [New] Jersey that's I was so far ahead of my class I, I had a reputation of being a brain, which was very good for me because, because I liked that reputation and, and so I tried to, I tried to maintain it. So, school was I, I really enjoyed school. I think it was, and I have to, I have to give credit to, to, to the instruction of Catholic school, I mean, they were very strict, made sure that we did what we were supposed to do, and it was a place of learning, nothing else, although you know we used to manage to get a few things in, but it was primarily learning. We, we, we were in mortal fear of the, of the nuns and the, and, and Mother Calista [ph.] who was the principal and so we--so that started me in, in the right track I think academically because after that I, I kind of almost coasted on my reputation, although I won't say I coasted, but I had the reputation of being a smart guy and that, that helped me quite a bit because I was also an athlete and I didn't suffer, I guess you, you would say, some of the negative social consequences of being academically sufficient. I, I was just as I was academically sufficient I also played on the football team and all that kind of stuff, so I managed to escape the ostracism that a lot of academically proficient people get trapped in. And again like I say I, I looked at being intellectually superior or, or (that's the wrong way to put it), intellectually oriented as, as a, as a positive thing, as something cool. It wasn't something that was negative as, as they, as you often hear now a lot of young, young black people look at intellectual achievement as something white or something that, that's contrary to their culture. It was, it was exactly the opposite for me. Speaker 1: And so you think it was tho, those intellectual heroes in Harlem--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: --Dr. Ben [HM Yosef ben-Jochannan] -- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or other people. I, I know there are a lot of street corner orders in those days-- Speaker 2: Very much so. That was high tradition in Harlem. Speaker 1: Carlos Cooks did you ever hear of him? Speaker 2: I sure have. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's right. Carlos Cooks he started out with [Marcus] Garvey, but he went on to, you know. Yes, the whole Garvey movement there were many remnants of the Garvey movement in Harlem in that, in that period, and people wanted to discuss the very intellectual oriented, very internationally oriented. When things were happening in other countries, I mean, it would be serious discussions of that. I was very attracted to that. Yeah. Story_ID: 79421 Speaker 1: Okay, well who were you--did you have any teachers and how--where did you go to high school and-- Speaker 2: Well I went to high school at Linden High School in [Linden] New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had teachers there, but you know I can't remember any that, that were really distinctive in any way. Mostly were my peers who, who I got inspiration from. I met a lot of guys who were serious about learning and, and wanted to learn history and took it beyond what was going on in school, really serious about learning things and I, I, I was attracted to that and so we, we, you know and then I was also singing. I was in a singing group in high school and that took me around to a lot of different cities in New Jersey and I met a lot of people that way. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a doo, doo-wopper? Speaker 2: Yes I was a doo-wopper, right. Speaker 1: What was the name of your group? Speaker 2: Well, we had two, The Beltones, The Prides. The Prides we--The Prides we sang at har, at, at the Apollo Theater and then there was, there were regular talent shows at the theater in New Jersey which was pretty, which was a pretty big venue. Now it doesn't seem that way, but it was a pretty big venue in those days and we would sing in talent shows there, and we, we were, we were regulars. We would win all the time, you know, at this particular shoe in Jers, at this particular place in New Jersey. But, we also sang at the Apollo. We didn't, we didn't win, but we-- Speaker 1: You didn't win at the Apollo? Speaker 2: We made a good show. We didn't get thrown off the stage. Speaker 1: You didn't get hooked there did you? Speaker 2: No, no we didn't get hooked. I used to hang out at the Apollo a lot too in the dressing room to see the stars come through. Story_ID: 79422 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you were, I guess--is there anything else about your high school [Linden High School in Linden, New Jersey] experience you wanna tell us or anything outstanding that happened? Speaker 2: I played football. I was a football fanatic. Speaker 1: What, what did you play? Speaker 2: I played halfback. I was pretty good as a freshmen, and then I got, I, I, my shoulder was broken as a freshmen, so I didn't play my sophomore year. I played my junior and senior year in var, varsity as a halfback; I did pretty well. I was a pretty decent guy. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Now, did you have any sports idols in those days? Speaker 2: Jim Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Jim Brown, man that was my man. Him and Bobby Mitchell that was, I thought that was an unbeatable team [Cleveland Browns], Mr. inside and Mr. outside. I also like--there was a guy who played for San Francisco I can't even think of his name. Speaker 1: Ollie Matson or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: John Henry Johnson. Speaker 2: No, a white guy. Speaker 1: White guy. Speaker 2: A white halfback. Speaker 1: McElhenny. Speaker 2: McElhenny, right. Speaker 1: Hugh McElhenny. Speaker 2: Yes exactly. I thought he, I thought he was a pretty runner. I loved the way he would, he moved, you know, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay all right, student of the game. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Story_ID: 79423 Speaker 1: So, now, while, while you are on the verge of graduating from high school [Linden High School in Linden, New Jersey], what were your thoughts? Did you think you'd go to college or what did you think you would do? Speaker 2: I really, you know, I was, I was, I, I didn't think--I mean I thought about college, but, I, I didn't know how, you know I, I didn't know how I would be able to get in, into college. My family really, you know, wasn't that well off. They may have been able to sacrifice to get me through, but I didn't, I didn't, I didn't even want to put them through that. I wanted to figure out some way I would be able to get in, and there were a lot of programs that were developing in that, in that period, but I really quite frankly I wasn't thinking about that. When, when I graduated from high school, I went into the Service [United States Air Force] right after that because of some of the things that had happened during that year, that year which was six, 1964, and that was that summer before graduation was when my cousin got shot and was still in a little trauma because of that, you know. I was a little afraid of New York City. I didn't wanna, I didn't wanna, you know I didn't know what to, I was really confused. There were a, there was a lot of activity going on in the country. Speaker 1: Yeah that summer was a big summer. Speaker 2: It was a big summer man. Speaker 1: That was the Freedom Summer-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in Mississippi-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and that was on television. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: The convention-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in New York City-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --[Atlantic City] New Jersey right there. Speaker 2: Right there, and so it was a lot of, a lot of turmoil and, and I guess as a way of to find some refuge from that turmoil I enlisted into the Air Force, and so I spent time in Miss, in, in, in, Texas and then Mississippi and then I went to Germany. I, I--in Mississippi I, I took ditty bop. I was a Morse code operator, and I was very good at it for some reason. One of the instructors told me that every now and then somebody comes through and has this kind of proclivity for it that no one can quite understand where it comes from, but they have it and for, and, and I could never understand what it was, but I, I got it so quickly, that Morse code. And the, the Air Force was very serious about teaching you how to type and so by the time I left typing school I could, I think I could type about, about 115 words a minute. I was very good touch typing and so I trained as, as what they call ditty bopper, which was, which was Morse intercept operator. My job was really to intercept foreign intelligence services and, and, and transcribe what, what they were saying. It was for the NSA, the National Security Agency, that the Air Force was kind of a part, a part of that connection then. And so that's what I went into. I was very good at it. I finished number one in my class, and that allowed me not to go to Vietnam [Vietnam War] because this was a period when many people were going to Vietnam. Sixty-five [1965] is when I graduated and I chose to go to Germany and so I spent two and half years in Germany doing that. Speaker 1: Smart of- That was smart of you, wasn't it? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Story_ID: 79424 Speaker 1: I knew many people who did go over to, to Vietnam and in fact I did do TDY [Temporary Duty]. I did a temporary duty stint in Thailand, which, which got me close to the, to the area. In fact, I, I suspect now when I look back on it I suspect that I, that we did do some illegal stuff over Laos and Cambodia probably. I was on a plane doing it, intercepting. So, that was my experience in the Service [United States Air Force]. But, the Service was a place where I really became radicalized also because there was a lot of anti-war activity going on. In fact, some of the most aggressive kind of act, anti-war activity was going on--the GI's were the ones who were promoting it. So, I got involved in a lot of that. In Germany, we had a lot of black groups. There was a lot of racial solidarity going on. Groups that, that were emphasizing black pride and what not, and I got involved in those groups. I had a car accident in Germany when I broke my jaw and, and so you know that, that was one traumatic period, but pretty much Germany was, was a good experience. I, you know, there's a story in there--I don't know, I don't know how relevant this story is, but, well I'll, I'll (laughter), I'll refrain from that story. Speaker 2: Go on and tell us the story. Speaker 1: Well, okay. I, I got involved with one of these, with a Fraulein who, who, who was the daughter of, of one of the members of a bank in Frankfurt, and so she was pretty well off and she would come to pick me up in, in this Gullwing Mercedes and I, and there were, someone told me that we would inspire hatred from some of the officers who would look from their windows and see this rather striking German girl come pick me up in, in this Mercedes. And so, within a matter of two months I, I got orders reassigning me to Georgia and so I wound up in Warner Robins, Georgia, for the last part of my, my, my service commitment and this was also the time, you know, when, when you know-- Story_ID: 79425 Speaker 1: It was in '67' [1967] that I was shipped to [Warner Robins] Georgia and that, and then late '67' [1967] and in '68' [1968] was another very chaotic year in this country. [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] got shot. There was chaos on these, on these bases. I don't know, I don't know how much of that got out to the, to the public at large, but-- Speaker 2: It didn't really, I mean, what, what happened? Speaker 1: Well, there were, there were, you know, the, the black, the black servicemen, the black GI's would march and have very, very serious demonstrations on, on many of these bases, and they would be squashed by the MPs, ruthlessly in many cases, and there was a lot of turmoil on, on military bases around the country, especially after the Martin Luther King incident. A lot of, a lot of black servicemen began to ask, "You know, why are we serving in in a, in an institution? Why are we serving our country when our county can't even protect our leadership, you know." That kind of reasoning was pretty widespread. We were marching--I remember one of, one of the chants that we marched, "ungawa black power, ungawa," and this was, you know, this was, these were people in uniform, you know, and it was a lot of turmoil. And in fact what happened to me was, was because of this turmoil. In ni, in sep, the last day of August in 1968 I got shot. I was in a motel in Warner Robins, Georgia, and, and I got shot. It wasn't, I wasn't a noble reason, you know, I was, I was, I was in the motel for, for, you know, the reasons that many young servicemen go to motels, but, but I got into an argument with, with, with the, with the motel owner who was a new--I was a regular at this motel. This was a new guy. I got into an argument with him over the price of the, of the room. I used phrases like, "Oh you know because I'm black you know you gonna over-charge me." And you know this was in '68' [1968] in Georgia. They weren't quite finished saying "Negra." They, they were still saying Negra. To say you were black was something considered very militant. And at the time like as I said I, I was in a car accident earlier in the serv, in Germany. I broke my jaw so, so I had an excuse to wear a beard because I had laceration under my chin that I claimed was to sensitive to shave and so I had, I had, I had a reason, I had an excuse to grow a little goatee, which distinguished me also from, from, from my colleagues because they had to be clean shaven. But, this goatee gave me a resemblance, you know, of someone like Eldridge Cleaver or [H.] Rap Brown or whoever and I guess was who the motel owner saw me as, because as I was railing about this room he calmly pulled out a .38 and shot me in my abdomen. Yeah, and just like that and had it not been for a friend of mine I probably, he probably would shot me again because I was so hyped up that I didn't stop I kept trying to craw. Even though I was shot, I was trying to crawl toward him, and he had the gun on me, my friend told me. He had to pull me out of the motel. And he pulled me out and pu, put me in his car and took me to the hospital. And so I had to stay in the hospital from that day until February the next year convalescing, so I had to stay in the Service longer than my normal discharge date. And I wound up getting out in February of '69' [1969]. Story_ID: 79426 Speaker 1: And while I was convalescing, I was nurturing a very serious black militancy, a militance. I was reading everything I could read that, that would give me the, the theoretical grounding I needed, to, to, to launch what I, what was becoming my war against white America. I thought that we needed a socialist revolution with black people in the vanguard, and it was one group that was talking about that and that was the Black Panther Party. Right after I left the Service, the Air Force, even before I went home, I went to the Black Panther Party headquarters in Jersey City [New Jersey] and offered my services, and this was '69' [1969]. And--so you know that's how the turmoil affected me. I, I became a dedicated activist at that point. You know I thought that was my role in life and, and I, I stayed--but soon, you know soon the Black Panther Party--it, it was an undisciplined group of folks. I mean, it was, it was a tonic, you know, as I said before the Civil Rights motif didn't make sense to me, nor did the, nor did the, the wardrobe, you know, but the Blank Panther wardrobe, the, the beret and, and the, and the, the leather jackets and all that, that was very attractive. Speaker 2: Urban American. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Urban American. Speaker 1: That's right. It was right up my alley, you know. So, I was really attracted to that, just like many others. I mean, it was a tonic man and it grew too fast. There were, there were not enough strictures. I mean, there were, there were ab, absolutely no criteria for joining. Anybody could join, so a lot of people under a multitude of, of motives came into, into the Black Panther Party. It was really undisciplined and, and that lack of discipline eventually became I, I began to see as a detriment. And as I was reaching this conclusion, I began looking at another group of people who were very disciplined and in fact exact opposite of, of the kind of un, unruly Panther energy. It was this disciplined energy of this group of people who were not saying anything. They were going about their business building schools, providing positive images of family life, things that I began to see were very lacking in our community, and that was the Nation of Islam. Story_ID: 79427 Speaker 1: Many times and in my activist period I would go to members of the Nation of Islam and ask them to get involved when we were struggling in the high schools. You know one of the things I was doing with the [Black] Panthers I founded something in, in, in the part of Jersey I was living in called the Black Student Union, and we tutored kindergarten students. We tutored students, elementary school students after they came home. We provided like a child care service, and we did many of the things that the Panthers became known for, anemia, sickle cell anemia testing, medical stuff like that. And, and, and during that period I began to ask, I would ask sometimes these people in the Nation of Islam, you know, would they help in the struggle to get the school or do something with the curriculum. They said "No brother we, you know we're building our own school. We, we, you know, we don't--that, that's, that would be defusing our energy, you know, to get involved in that struggle. We don't see that struggle as being valuable." You know after a while I began to see the logic in what they were talking about that how could we expect people another, from another culture perspective to, to be so respectful of us that they would, they would be truthful about how they violated us, you know. So, it made sense to me that we would have to do our own, build our own schools if we seriously wanted to free our minds from, from the kind of colonialism and culture inferiority and white supremacists enculturation that we had been subjected to. And so I became involved with a Nation of Islam. Speaker 2: This was about 19 what? Speaker 1: This, this was '70' [1970], late '70' [1970]. I was, I was with the Panthers for, for a little more than a year. Also at this time I entered Rutgers University. Rutgers Newark in, in, in Newark, New Jersey on the GI Bill because I, I met, I met some, I met sympathetic doctors in the ser, in, in the Service [U.S. Air Force] while I was, while I was recovering from my wounds and what not. And because at first, the, the Service was, wasn't going to--I think I was going to get an undesirable discharge or something. I really had done nothing to deserve that. So any way this, the doctor in the hospital spoke up in my behalf and what not and the, the, final analysis is that it was considered in the line of duty like most injuries are considered for servicemen. So, I got, I was able to, to, to get a GI Bill to, to get in on the GI Bill, and they helped pay for my tuition. And so I went to Rutgers and during that period I was in the Nation of Islam I was writing, I started writing for, for the, for Muhammad Speaks. I also was hired--at that time I was hired by the Associated Press. They were looking--the Associated Press in Newark, Newark, New Jersey, which is where I was going to school, had a black population of about 65 percent at that time. There had ever been a black reporter in, in, in Newark at the AP and so they were looking for a black reporter. They went to Rutgers. They were looking for someone fairly liberate, literate. You know I was doing a lot of writing for, for--anything I could do, you know, the poetry, the magazines, and anything I could write for. And so they grabbed me and I started writing for the AP while I was in, in the, in, at Rutgers. I started writing as, as a newsman out of Newark, New Jersey. Story_ID: 79643 Speaker 1: Now you had just started working for AP [Associated Press] and that was like part-time? Speaker 2: No, that full-time. Speaker 1: Full-time, oh. Speaker 2: Yeah, Associated Press. I was working full-time, going to school [Rutgers University in Newark, New Jersey] full-time. It was a full load, man, but I was, I was really, you know, charged up and the AP was a marvelous job. Man, I mean, it was the best journalism experience, best journalism training I could possibly have had. You know basically a deadline every five minutes, you know. As I was talking about earlier, I thought I could write when I went there and when I first started I thought writing was the last thing I wanted to do. They would mark up my stuff, edit my stuff, so, so, so stringently. All of my flowery prose that I had been, become so, so proud of, so fond of they would tear it up and, and, and at first I was very crestfallen, I guess is the way to put it. But then I saw that, you know, that, they treated everyone that way and so I began to respect that, you know, that, that editing process and learned from it and not put my ego so, so deeply into it. And it was really the best journalism training I've ever had and, I mean, I can't, I can't imagine anything better. Now, it has really serves me in good stead in many ways because, I'm, I'm much more easily edited and I understand you know we need to be concerned about what editors are talking about. I'm an editor as well, so, you know, it made me a much better writer Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I, but then as I said I would go home--I was writing for the AP, but I was in the Nation of Islam. So, I would go--sometimes I would do a story for the Associated Press and then I would go home at night change the perspective and send it to the Muhammad Speaks, same story, different perspective. So that enabled me to see the difference in the way that news was perceived by the different communities kind of a bifurcated vision. Mainstream sensibilities I knew because of the AP and how to handle that and what they considered news and how to handle it object, so called "objective news," but I also saw that, you know, when, when the AP--for example, one, one of the, one of the, the rules for the AP is when, when you--in order for anything to be verified to have any veracity you had to say like police said, you know. A man was shot in his room by his wife last night, police said. If you don't say police said, then it has no, th, th, there's, there's no jus, you're not really justifying it and it is not true. But, you know as I told you my experience with police was anything, as far as I was concerned they were anything but a beacon of veracity. The police were the ones who were lying on you, and the police were the ones who would shoot you in the back. So I, what the, what the AP considered a sign of veracity was to me a transparent sign of hypocrisy, so I always, you know I, I understood the limits of that, that AP formula and I would use that understanding and, and change the perspective and what not and write for, for Muhammad Speaks. Eventually I became the, that, the, the--(unclear)--or the Northern New Jersey correspondent for Muhammad Speaks. I would write several articles to, to the paper. Many, many, many of which I, I gathered most of the material while writing for the AP. And I did that and I wrote for the AP for two years from '72' [1972] to '74' [1974] and then I got a call from, from the Nation of Islam. In fact, I got a call specifically from Elijah Muhammad and, and by the time, you know-- Speaker 1: You got a call specifically from Elijah Muhammad himself? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah right, right to come-- Speaker 1: And this is during his last years. Speaker 2: Right, this was in 1973 is when I got the call. Speaker 1: That's the year before he died. Speaker 2: Well, two years before he died. Speaker 1: Two years. Speaker 2: He died in '75' [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And before, before the word, you know, before I could hang up I was, I had one foot out of the door, you know, and I was Chicago and that's that's when I moved to Chicago. I, I fully moved in '74' [1974]. I started in '73' [1973]. I fully finished in '74' [1974] and I been here ever since. Story_ID: 79644 Speaker 1: Did you--was Dick Durham in charge of the Muhammad Speaks? Speaker 2: John Wood--Dick Durham had just left and John Woodford was the, was the temporary editor. Charles 67 or Askia Muhammad was the intr, he was the managing editor who was coming in, but-- Speaker 1: 67X, huh? Speaker 2: Right, Charles 67X, right (laughter). Yeah, those X's man. I was--at the time I was Alonzo 4X and, and I would, I would do, I would do a lot of stuff from, from Newark and New York and, you know, a lot of stuff that I would do originally with, with the AP and then when they called me I just came and left the AP. I gave them my notice and, and left. That was my dream, you know, to, to write for a black-owned publication. Muhammad Speaks was world-renown at that, in that period and to be an editor was, it was far beyond my wildest dreams. Speaker 1: So did you, did you all work out the Pioneer building over there on Cottage Grove? Speaker 2: No, we worked out of the Muhammad Speaks press plant on 26th Street and Federal [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was, it was a self-contained plant. We had our own presses. In fact, we used to print for the [Chicago] Defender at one point. We had our own presses, independent, our own buses, our own trucks that deliver the paper. We had our own--we would go up to get the news print from Canada, bring it back, and, and then when, when the paper was printed we would distribute it all over the country with our own transportation system. It was truly a self-contained operation. And, and at one point we had a million a week circulation, incredible. And it was a really enjoyable experience, you know, working, working for the paper doing a lot of the kind of stories that I, I was really interested in, going wherever, going all over the world. I went many places. I went to, as I said I went to Uganda and Jamaica, Kuala Lumpur [Malaysia], many, many places, and it was a valuable experience. Story_ID: 79645 Speaker 1: Okay. Did--now you were around when the Nation of Islam went through the, this change-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a change after the death of-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Elijah Muhammad right? Speaker 2: I was there. I covered the funeral. I shared in the anxiety of who would lead. What would happen to the Nation after, after Elijah Muhammad wa, was, you know, was gone. Speaker 1: Now, what was your perspective on that in those days? Did you, did you have a clear cut choice in your own mind of who you wanted to lead the Nation? Speaker 2: I really didn't. I was, I was willing to go with whatever, whatever the ruling judgment was, the conventional. I thought, however, that, you know, Farrakhan, [HM] Louis Farrakhan, would be chosen. He was a popular figure, but I also was reconciled to the fact--in, in fact I, I, many of us suspected that it would be Wallace Muhammad [Warith Deen Mohammed] because Wallace had come back about six months before his father really got sick and he was doing regular Thursday meetings. Thursday meeting were irregular. The regular schedule were Wednesdays, Fridays, and Sundays, but when Wallace came back he would do these Thursday meetings, which would, you know, kind of an irregular addition, and they were talking about "the second resurrection." He would, he would drop these things about the second resurrection a very ambiguous phrase, as mystical phrases, and there was also this, this kind of providential understanding that, that the founder of the Nation of Islam, Master Fard Muhammad [Wallace D. Fard] had pointed to, to, to, to something to WFD on the wall or something and Wallace was supposed to be the next leader and then there was a, there's a photo, a famous photograph in the Nation where there is a picture of Wallace D. Muhammad and, and, and Elijah Muhammad sitting down pointing to him and then also pointing to his son, Wallace, and it's like this tri, this triad and that was, you know, alleged to mean that Wallace was the next man. So, there was kind of a providential understanding that, that Wallace was the next man and, and so there wasn't there wasn't much debate at all or, or much, dis, disagreement when he came in as the leader. In some, in some sense there was a lot of relief. In my case, it was a lot of relief because he, he, he promised to change the Nation in ways that I thought it had needed changing. Speaker 1: What, what ways were those, what ways? Speaker 2: To become more involved, to become more engaged with the black community, more engaged with the black movement, which was something that I wanted to happen. To, to be more involved in, in Amer, in black culture. To, to give some direction or, or some comment on black culture, not to sit it out or let it go on, but to have some input. And so when, Wa, Wallace came in he changed the name of the paper from Muhammad Speaks to "Bilalian News." He called us "Bilalians" after Bilal [ibn Rabeh] who was the first Muezzin of Islam, the first caller of prayer who was Ethiopian and, and he called us Bilalians in the honor of this, this African Islamic figure. "Bilalian News" became a lot more open to pop culture. In the Nation of Islam, you know you couldn't go to the movies, you couldn't dance, you couldn't listen to, you know, allegedly or, or, or purportedly or the, the dogma was that you couldn't do these things. Many people did them anyway, but, but, when-- Story_ID: 79646 Speaker 1: Which opens another can of worms in some ways because I've heard all kinds of stories about people in the Nation [of Islam] who were doing, not quite doing what people thought on the outside that they were doing in terms of very worldly things and stuff. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, where there was, there was, that was going on, yes indeed. In fact, that's one of the things that Wallace [Muhammad, also known as Warith Deen Mohammed] came and--that's one of the things he railed against when, when he came in. Speaker 1: Yeah I know. He was much concerned about that. Speaker 2: Very much so. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The kind of worldly concerns. The pimp attitude, this notion of, of conspicuous consumption. A lot of Muslims were accused of that. Wallace was very hard. And I was a very--and quite frankly I was, I was a little bit concerned about it myself because that was quite, you know, from, from when you, when you come into Chicago [Illinois]--when you're outside of Chicago this was Mecca. In Newark [New Jersey], we looked at the Na, Chicago as like a kin to Mecca. Orthodox Muslims look at Mecca. It was a place where the light was shinning. It was-- the messenger himself was living here. This should be a place where people were very, very attuned to his, to his teachings and assiduously attending to the, to the duties of Islam and what not, and that was the case I found. There was a lot of backsliding, a lot of people who were doing "lip professing" is what we call it and, and that also was very upsetting to Wallace Muhammad. So when he came in, he really-- Speaker 1: And I heard that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --there was a great deal of trepidation on the part of some that he would, that he would ascend because he had, he would, he had been a critic of the kinds of behaviors that he intimated to Malcolm X that led to Malcolm X's-- Speaker 2: Absolutely right, absolutely. Speaker 1: --assassination. Speaker 2: Some of the same criticisms that Malcolm had of the Nation it, it's concern for materialism, it's, it's rigid hierarchy, it's mistreatment of, of, of the sol, the ordinary soldier, you know ordinary member. Speaker 1: Ne, ne, nepotism in the family. Speaker 2: Nepotism in the family. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 2: That whole royal family image that, that, that they, that they perpetrated. Speaker 1: And then did you, did you have any thoughts about the financial activities of John Ali? Speaker 2: John Ali was, John Ali became our immediate supervisor at one point. It was a really incredible experience. Very, a very tumultuous experience as well, but, well you know it was tumul--eventually John Ali had--we rebelled, the, the management of the paper rebelled against, against John Ali's leadership, and he was, he was ousted, but, but it was pretty, pretty deep while he was there. But, no, you know, I, I, I really respected what, what Wallace was trying to do, I mean, and, and he was trying to open up the group as well and, and just exactly as I had hoped. He wanted us to have more of a, more of an influence on popular culture rather than a kind of hands off abstentious relationship. He wanted us to be much more aggressive and engaged, and, and we were at Muham, at Bilalian News. We really changed the paper. Story_ID: 79647 Speaker 1: It [the Bilalian News] became, I thought very creative. I thought it was one of the most creative black publications in the country at one point. I mean, we try, we were trying new things with layout design, different kinds of design. We were focusing on, on unusual issues in the black community. We were trying to, trying to shine a spot light on, on, on qualms of black experience that were traditionally ignored. We, we were bringing together notions of the music, you know the Earth, Wind, and Fire; the Lonnie Liston Smith. All, all of that--the jazz and the R and B, all had a kind of common theme. All of them were beginning to be kind of message, they were message music for, for African Americans to lift themselves up and it was inspirational music. And we were trying to, you know, trying to show how all of this was related in the way that was not a part from popular culture. That it was part of the--and so it was, it was very exciting period for, for-- Speaker 2: Did, did the, did the Nation, Nation of Islam influence [HM] Kenny Gamble in? Speaker 1: Very much so. The whole Philadelphia experience for Gamble and even now, you know. Gamble and [HM Leon] Huff--Gamble became a member. Kool and the Gang, Joe Tex. There were many, many members of, of the Nation during that period who, who were beginning to, to express solidarity with, with the Nation's message and, you know, much of jazz music, was, was moving in that direction, spiritual concerns, concerns with, with the creator. And, and it was, and as I said it was a very exciting period and I was really luck to be at, at Bilalian News during, during this period. But, but also for me after having been in the Nation and being kind of restricted by dogma and, and, and then, and then breaking out of that a bit, dogma itself became less and less desirable, whether it was the Nation of Islam's dogma or Wallace Muhammad's [also known as Warith Deen Mohammed] dogma, orthodox Islam dogma. I never really was quite frankly that much committed to the Islamic aspect of the Nation of Islam. I got involved with the Nation of Islam primarily for black nationalist reasons, for movement reasons, and, and I saw the Nation as a, as a philosophical backdrop to my nationalist sentiments. I, I didn't, I didn't, you know, I didn't accept all of the dogma that the Nation of Islam taught, and much of it I interpreted my, my own way. In fact, I translated it into my own kind of, my own beliefs, but I understood what Elijah Muhammad was doing, and I respected it greatly and, and so I, I went, you know I, I went alone with, with, with the movement. But, after, after awhile I began to really chafe under, you know, these various dogma and I began to see myself as something more, more, or, or you know it's hard to say more. I, I began to see it as too restrictive for me. I, I had other, I had other areas I wanted to explore. So, I began to move away from, from Bilalian News and do a little more freelancing. And also I began to see that a lot of the demonology--I was never fond of the demonology of the Nation of Islam inciden--I mean I understood-- Speaker 2: Demonology of the white man is a devil. Speaker 1: The white man is devil and all that, you know. I mean, I, I thought it had a strategic importance. I mean if you think of the--if you think of white people as not being able to offer you assistance in a way that forces you to do for yourself you don't rely on someone who is not going to help you anyway, and that's what I thought Elijah Muhammad was trying to do, some psychological, you know, tricks or, or maneuvering, and, and I understood that and I thought that was, I thought it was worthy for us to really be much more concerned with our own self-reliance. But, in term of the devil and all of that I never, I' I thought that that was over the top. Speaker 2: And with theo, the theology and the history with the, of Yakub--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yes, Yakub's history, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: You couldn't adjust that? Speaker 1: No, I couldn't, I couldn't go for that. I mean, as I said, I thought it was mytho, mythological. I, I, and I gave it, I gave it a philosophical patina, so, so I could accept it, you know, but, but it was always a little bit too cartoonish for me. Like most, like most theology, you know, Genesis stories, all cartoonish (laughter). So, so that was, that was, but so I, I reinterpreted it in my own way. Story_ID: 79648 Speaker 1: But, but then after awhile I just became a little bit less tolerant of, of da, of dogma. And in fact, I became kind of a debunker of dogma. I wanted to--because I saw that even, even Wallace's, even after Wallace [Muhammad, also known as Warith Deen Mohammed] changed the Nation of Islam members were still, they still needed a devil. They still needed to hate somebody, and then it became, it became "Yakobins." It became, you know, different names for, for, for their demon, you know, and so I, I got a little bit frustrated with all of that. And then one time as in, in the paper I had, I had a photo, a photographic display of a hospital in, in the city that there were some Muslims involved in, in, in, (I forgot exactly how we were involved), but anyway I had photos and one of the photos resembled Wallace Muhammad. To me it didn't look like him at all, but there was this, you know, I found out later there was a group of people who were examining the paper and they thought that I was making subliminal references to Eli, to Wallace being sick because I had this photo of this guy who resembled Wallace in the hospital. And, and so I began to say well you know this--it wasn't that specific incident, but just that whole, that tendency to make these kinds of oversimplified connections and, and these wa-- Speaker 2: Those, those are the days of "Subliminal Seduction" [by Wilson Bryan Key] and all that. Speaker 1: Exactly right and that was one of the books that Wallace Muhammad recommended for a lot of his readership, his followers to read, and they read it, man they went crazy. They saw subliminal seduction everywhere they looked (laughter) and so I was accused of being subliminally against Wallace. I said man this is--we used to call it too scientific. We, we called these guys, we would call 'em a "bean scientist" and, and, in the Nation we have called 'em bean scientist and so that the whole bean scientist tendency carried over the Wallace's reign and so the same bean scientists were at work making these--and I said "Well I can't tolerate bean scientists" and so boom I was gone from Bilalian News. Story_ID: 79649 Speaker 1: And then I started freelancing all over the place, a lot with the Chicago Reader and you know a lot of people told me I would never, you know, "Man you can't write for the Reader that's a white, that's white folks, you know, they, they don't like black people." The first column, the first article I was, that was ever published in the "Reader" that I wrote was called "What color is Jesus Christ" and it was about the Nation of Islam and Wallace Muhammad and Al Sampson, [HM] Reverend [Albert] Al Sampson who is still around. But, they were having a debate over, during that period about Wallace was, was launching the campaign against images of divinity, against white images of divinity in the churches-- Speaker 2: I remember that, I remember that. Speaker 1: --and, and Sampson was saying "how dare you come into our church" and blah, blah, blah. But, Sampson was a pro-Elijah man, and he was trying to, he was trying to come down on Wallace for losing the nationalistic perspective, and so it was a real interesting struggle. Story_ID: 79650 Speaker 1: This is an interesting dynamic here that in those days black nationalist thought, tend to sympathize with Elijah Muhammad and the myth, the ascendancy of Wallace [Muhammad] who actually did put an American flag--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes he did. Speaker 1: --and did all that, but at the same time the very same nationalists had they known a little bit more would have probably have been upset with Mr. [HM Louis] Farrakhan for his role in the demise of Malcolm X, you know, but the pe, pe, people didn't know. It was a very strange time-- Speaker 2: It was a strange period. Speaker 1: It made strange allies. Speaker 2: Absolutely, that's true. It was a strange period. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was a strange period man. Speaker 1: --the whole story--(unclear)--yeah. Speaker 2: So, yeah right and, and-- Speaker 1: Nationalists welcomed Farrakhan when he struck out on his own. Speaker 2: They welcomed him with open arms, right. Speaker 1: Yeah for about three years (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah and then the arms closed a little bit. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right, right yeah. I remember 'cause he, he met a Haki's [HM Haki Madhubuti] place right the first time and I remember that. I remember when he first started out and, and a lot of people were urging him to step on out for a long time. When, when, Elijah Muhammad first died in '75' [1975] I was with Farrakhan in Uganda. We went together in fact to, to, to--Idi Amin was, was anointed the head of the OAU [Organization of African Unity]. It was, it was his chan, it was his, his reign. Farrakhan and I and, and one of Farrakhan's bodyguards, a guy named Muhammad Ali we went to Uganda and this Farrakhan was weighing the change at that point because, 'cause he was a little bit concerned with Wallace's direction. He didn't know where he was going, and Wallace was talking a lot against his father at that time, and Far, and Farrakhan loved Elijah Muhammad and so this was really troubling him how he could reconcile his love and, and affection for Elijah and at the same serve Wallace who was saying things at that time that were, you know, pretty critical of Elijah. And so I, I was there while he struggled a little bit with that. I heard his initial, his initial rationalization was essentially that Elijah Muhammad was during his period the Nation of Islam was like an isolation ward. We were sick, and we needed an isolation ward in order to rehabilitate ourselves and to convalesce and now we are pretty, pretty much, we're, we're pretty well. We're, we're better and we're able to face the world now and so Wallace's Muhammad, Wallace's form of Islam was a lot more mature and, and open. Speaker 1: Closer to traditional Islam-- Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: --you know then-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the Nation of Islam really was, I mean was-- Speaker 2: A cult. Speaker 1: Yeah, far from orthodox Islam. Speaker 2: Very much so, right. Story_ID: 79651 Speaker 1: [Wallace Muhammad's form of Islam was] Almost even, far from even the non-orthodox Islams that are out here--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes, and but you know as, as I look back and, and you know you see these various Islamic movements around the world it's really not that far off from a lot of other like, like the Ahmadiyya in Pakistan. They, they had, they had their own lea, they had their own leader, you know, and, and-- Speaker 1: A lot of black Americans were Ahmadiyya Speaker 2: Ahmadiyya as well, that's right in Chicago [Illinois], especially. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--Detroit and I know in Ohio as well. Speaker 2: And Chicago. Speaker 1: Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah, Detroit and Chicago right. And I didn't realize that. Ahmad, Ahmad Jamal and, and Yusef Lateef are both Ahmadiyya and, and, and a lot of other jazz musicians were very much attracted to that, to that kind of Islamic-- Speaker 1: And, and, but the Ahmadiyyas are considered hare, heretical, I guess, in, in the-- Speaker 2: They are to the Sunni. Speaker 1: By the Sunni. Speaker 2: And Shia or the Shia consider the Sunni and vice versa, so yeah that's, again that's a problem with when you get down to dogma and doctrine, man it's, it's-- Speaker 1: The Baha'i is another group that was considered--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Baha'i. So, you know, when you really, when you, when you contextualize the National of Islam it's really not all that errant from other strains of Islam, but, you know, so, so. Speaker 1: Today it wouldn't be, I guess, but--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: No, well now he's really-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right, I mean, right, but, but even then, I mean, he talks about, about, you know, about the deity in human form and kind of person up, personification of the deity, that's really heretical for Islam. But, even, even that other Islamic groups have hinted to that kind of thing as well. The Ma, the Mujaddid, you know, the Sudanese, you know. I mean, they, they kind of deified the Mujaddid at one point. So, it's not the point, you know--I, I, I've gained a lot more understanding and cu, when you, when you contextualize a nation it's really not that, that far away and especially when you consider just how radical, radically different our history was from any other people. I mean, this, this whole slave crucible of slavery and what not and the way that happened. It did require a unique approach, you know, whatever, whatever it may be. I, I've gained, quite frankly I've gained a lot more respect for Elijah Muhammad's teaching methods as, as time has gone on. You know, who knows maybe in the future I'll, I'll be less respectful. You know I've gone both, you know, I've gone from one to the other, but I think as I, as I, you know as, and I get a, a longer traje, trajectory I get more respect for, for what he was trying to do, you know. Story_ID: 79437 Speaker 1: Well, I did a story on Stokely for Muhammad Speaks in, man, '71' [1971], '72' [1972] somewhere around then. Speaker 2: Stokely Carmichael. Speaker 1: Stokely Carmichael and, and he spoke in Newark and he was very much against the Nation of Islam at that time. I was very for, very much, you know I was in the Nation and so I wrote--it was kind of a, an attack, well not really an attack, but a, but a critique of Stokely. He was, he was talking about consciencism at that time, [Kwame] Nkrumah's thing, and I, I tried to do an ideological deconstruction of Stokely during that period, but so, so I had been following his development for quite a while, you know, and, but, but by the time I did this piece in the [Chicago] Reader on, on, on Stokely I, I was in my debunking period. That was my debunking period when I hit--I did, I think "For Colored Girls [Who Have Considered Suicide," by Ntozake Shange]. There was a lot of controversy for "For Colored Girls." I began to--my position began to crystallize. I began to see ideology as an, as an, as a hindrance to our creativity. These ideological prescription for certain kinds of art. I, I began to see something that was really hampering us from really exploring at a full range of our creativity. It was to, constricted and, and so I was, I was, I was arguing against that at that period. And also deifying leadership. I wanted to break. I want, I wanted to show that leaders were humans. They, they weren't deities that we should worship, you know. These were humans that we should understand had foibles that we all had and we all had to deal with that. And so that was my, you know, I, I saw that kind of as a mission, a side mission to break down people, break down dogma, to, to criticize dogma whenever I got the chance. Speaker 2: Now did you, did you, was there any backlash from your-- Speaker 1: Quite a bit. Speaker 2: --breaking out as a black, young black man who is on the inside--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Quite a bit of backlash, yeah. Qui-- Speaker 2: Yeah working for the Reader another--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Yeah, but you know I adopted as my, I adopted my ideology at a time I, I adopted this notion of being an ironist. Irony wa, was what I took refuge in, you know. Of course, of course this was inconsistent becau, but it was ironic, you know. Everything is ironic--you know when you--irony is the God of the universe really when you look down on it. Whenever you think something is important or sanctified or, or something to be worshiped sooner or later you'll find out that it, it's some since of failure in it, so why, why be so invested in it in the first place. I mean that was my, that was evolving philosophy. I, you know, without an ideology, you know, I was, I was casting about for something to feel secure about and, and I guess I settled on that and I did get a lot of, I got a lot of criticism from people who thought I was airing dirty laundry in public and, and, and all of that. And, you know, I, I listened and disagreed. I understand where they were coming from now. I wouldn't, I wouldn't be quite as promiscuous with my, with my charges as I was then, but you know I, I think that, I think that was health, healthy for me to stretch myself a little bit. Luckily, I didn't, I didn't do a lot of damage during that period and, and now, you know, I just think it was a growth period. It was a growth period for me. Story_ID: 79438 Speaker 1: Yeah there were quite a bit of, quite a few revelations in that period of time. I remember an article in "Ramparts" called "The Party's Over" about The Blank Panthers. Did you ever see that one? Speaker 2: That sounds very familiar to me, sounds very familiar to me. Speaker 1: A Panther gentlemen through a hoop or something on it and said the Party's over, you know there was--and it was, you know, debunking of--I mean it was-- Speaker 2: Re-evaluation. Speaker 1: Yeah looking at what Huey Newton was really doing these days--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Was it by-- Speaker 1: --the party ever really did. Speaker 2: Was it by [David] Horowitz? Speaker 1: I don't think so. Speaker 2: 'Cause you know what he's doing now, right? Speaker 1: Yeah right with the reparations. Speaker 2: No, right, right, and, and other stuff. You know he's got, he's got a magazine [FrontPage Magazine]. He, he's pretty right wing, pretty seriously right wing. I--that might have been the beginning of his change, you know. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--I'm not sure who wrote now, but--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: He's very critical of the Panthers now. Panthers, there was a lot to be critical about, you know. Also a lot to be celebratory about, but, you know, as you know it, it was, it grew without any discipline and there were a lot of people who got involved in it for their own ulterior motives. Speaker 1: As someone who was involved on the East Coast even for a brief period of time maybe you can comment on this. It has been said by many that the East Coast Panthers were a lot more serious and a lot more productive than the ones on the west coast. I mean, if, if--'cause the west coast gets all the glamorous-- Speaker 2: Well that's true, I mean, I think wha, what we did again there was a lot of community stuff like was doing, that people were doing like we were doing. We had these, these tutoring programs. We were really serious about that and, and these medical programs. We even tried to set up little community stores and all that, but you know, our resources were basically achieved by extortion and, and, and--well you know we, we would, we would, we would go to a, to a, to a store owner and say you know we need some, "We need some donations for our program and you know you're in our community so donate and if you don't your store might not be here tomorrow." You know what I mean that was--we, we didn't, we didn't, we weren't serious about building institutions that would be enduring. It was only, it was a, it was a provisional program, you know, here and there we would get this and that. It didn't, it didn't have any staying power, but we were doing it. You know, we were really serious and then, then what happened I think is it became this very serious revolutionary wing. Th th, the, the Black Liberation Army and you know they became serious about, about you know armed struggle, robbing Brinks [Brink's robbery of 1981] and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --robbing banks-- Speaker 1: Assata Shakur. Speaker 2: That whole, that whole thing, I mean. Although Assata, I, I don't think Assata was ever charged with anything. Well yes she was, she was charged with-- Speaker 1: She had to go, she--(unclear)--Cuba. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was in Cuba, but, I'm--I, I think that was at the shootout. Incidentally I was with the AP when that happened and covered part of it for the AP when she was JoAnne Chesimard at the time. I was, I was "Alonzo Cannady" for the AP, but I was also "Alonzo 4X" for Muhammad Speaks, so I kind of covered that for Muhammad Speaks at the same time, you know, when that was going on. I had just been, you know right before that I had been--I knew some of those brothers and some from that area from the Panthers, you know, so I was pretty close to a lot of that stuff when it was going on. And quite a few brothers who are still incarcerated right now I knew who were in the Black Liberation Army who, who came to the conclusion that they had to attack the state in a specific kind of way in order to be serious as revolutionaries. Luckily I didn't get involved in that, but I almost did, you know. It was very serious stuff. People were talking, you know, now, you know they were saying this is not cops and robbers. You know, this is, this is serious, this is a serious commitment, and it was. Story_ID: 79439 Speaker 1: Now, now back to your debunking period. As you were debunking, were you able to earn a pretty good living? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, yeah that's an interesting questioning, man. I was writing regular columns, regular articles for the [Chicago] Reader, but of course freelancing you never earn a good living. But, not just the Reader I was writing all over the place. I was writing for "Success" magazine. I was writing for a magazine out of the University of Chicago. I was writing for any, anywhere I could get a column, any, anywhere I could get published because you know freelancing--so, but then I also I, I was working for a Cedar program. The Cedar programs were just phasing out and I go in on, on the last--there was something called a Black Arts Celebration. Do you remember that? Speaker 1: Yeah I do. Speaker 2: Well, I started working with the Black Arts Celebration. I was doing some writing for them and, and that helped me get, get through, much, much of that lean period, you know. Not, you know, it didn't help--it wasn't a lavish help, but it was some help, you know, and I, you know I got involved with that for awhile. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 2: John Bellamy. Speaker 1: Yeah Nalijah (ph.)--(unclear)--I mean were, were some--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes, Nalijah right exactly, yes. Speaker 1: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. That was an interesting period Speaker 1: He produced some television shows. Speaker 2: Yes television shoes and health, health fairs. We did some health fair stuff. John is still producing television stuff yeah. So, then you know I did that for awhile and then I got hired by HUD [Housing and Urban Development]. I started working for HUD as a, as a, as a writer, editor, perfect. It was an intermittent job. That was my, you know, it wa, it wasn't, it wasn't even like part-time. It was intermittent, which was perfect for me. You know, all I had to do was finish a newsletter and I would, I would do the work to finish that and, you know, the rest of the time was my own and it allowed me to do a lot of freelancing. I was still doing a lot of freelancing. This is when I started to expand a little bit. I started freelancing for the New York Times, the Washington Post. I started doing book reviews for, for, for Washington Post and New York Times. You know using again the, the kind of understanding of mainstream sensibilities that, that I gained through the AP [Associated Press] while still doing the kind of some, some alternative, some, some writing for alternative publication. I was still doing my [Chicago] Reader stuff and alternative publications in different parts of the country. So, that, that was getting me through. And then I wrote a piece about [HM Louis] Farrakhan and [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] in the Reader when Farrakhan registered to vote for the first time '83' [1983] I think it was. And, and I highlighted the, the, the, you know, the paradox of this the Rainbow Coalition hooking up with someone who believed that, that one part of the rainbow was, was the devil, you know, I mean that was just a pretty odd, odd juxtaposition. Anyway, you know I didn't, I didn't, you know I, I kind of did it in a humorous way, you know, and, and, and so a paper called "In These Times" picked it up. They, they liked the way I handled it, you know. It was really, I wasn't ridiculing anybody. It was a critical analysis, but it was still funny, funny. It was humorously done and, and they liked the style and, and they contacted me af, after that and asked me was I interested in doing any kind of stuff for any other kind of publication. I said yeah, so they hired me. "In These Times", this was in '84' [1984], '83' [1983] actually and been with them ever since, still with them. Story_ID: 79440 Speaker 1: Now, now '83' [1983] was the year that Harold Washington came in [was elected mayor of Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right, I did a lot, a lot of writing on Harold, a lot. And that, that whole Harold Washington movement, which was a tonic to us at that period. I mean, it represented such a, such, such promise, you know. We thought that Chicago had found a way to the millennium, you know. Th, th, the, you know, unity kind of, kind of functional unit between various groups and coalition politics. All, it all came together with, with the Harold Washington campaign. Crusade, political campaign, I mean it all, it gave [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] the idea for this campaign crusade. So, it was a very hopeful time for Chicago and, and we, we really celebrated it in these times; you wrote about it a lot. Speaker 1: Now what kind of paper is In These Times? What, what was it--can, can you describe like, like what kind of publication it was or what its appeal was initially? Speaker 2: Well you see I, I had been reading even before it picked up my piece, because it was a paper that at the time I was a little bit disenchanted with, with radical, radical movements, the left, especially the hard ideological left. I saw so much sectarianism and what not. Yet I was still--I was also a little bit--I had, had gone disenchanted with nationalist, black nationalist movement primarily for the reason that I began to contextualize nationalism as a right wing, as, as both left and right wing and, but I had seen a right wing dominance in, in the movement. I saw touches of Nazism and, and in my, my experience in the Nation of Islam, I mean, it was I felt good, you know, and I understood the appeal of it, but when I began to look at some of the statements and, and the style, the paramilitarism and, and then I did some more studying of Nazis and the fascist period I began to see too many similarities between, between, between nationalism and fascism and how it could easily slide into the other, you know, how, how you can get--you know [Benito] Mussolini was a nationalist, you know. And, and so I became very disenchanted with that and disenchanted with doctrinated Marxism, you know, that, that scientific socialism, that kind of stuff. So, I was--you know I, I, I, I, you know, I knew that we needed some kind of combination of all of that, that was non-sectarian, but I, I didn't know where to, where to find it. And so In These Times it was perfect because I had began to read it was not sectarian. It was unlike the, at the time The Guardian was out and The Nation and all of them had a harder edge it. In These Times, was vaguely socialist, but not doctrinaire so and, and, and yet it allowed expressions of ethnic particularity, ethic pride and what not and, and, and many of the pieces I wrote, were, were, were, was, were bringing this notion of nationalism to the left rather than--you know where I was focusing my, my concern was like trying to demonstrate to the left that there was a need for a nationalist perspective. Most black people were attracted to nationalism. That's what captured black people and, and it wasn't, you know abstract socialist doctrine didn't cap, didn't get anybody, it wasn't interesting, so, and so the left needed to stop being contemptuous of nationalism and understand it and contextualize it a little bit more and I looked at my job as kind of being that, that, serving that function. Story_ID: 79441 Speaker 1: Now, why do you, you think that black people are more easily drawn to nationalism--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: The call of the tribe is, is the strongest call. I mean the call of blood and, and, and skin is, is an obvious connection and it's also a very primal connection and I, I don't think, I don't think anything is more attractive to any group of people than that kind of primal connection, no matter where they are. I think you can lead them into other more expansive ideologies once you connect with them through that primal connection, but I think ultimately that primal connection is, is, is dangerous because we have to evolve behind, beyond it. Because it's primal it is also becau, because it's primitive, it's primitive, and we have to, we have to, we have to go beyond it. We have to understand that all humanity is connected, not just that skin blood thing, but we we're all connected in, in, in, in, you know, to, to, to each other really. You know, we, we're all one humanity and the sooner we understand that, you know, the, you know we better understand it soon, sooner than later. I think sometimes though you gotta bring people to that understanding through, through, through their own particularity. They have to understand--they have to be drawn into it through their own provincial concerns, and sometimes that's, that's, that's--all the time I mean it's that primal connection that, that's the most powerful. Speaker 1: Do you think it's also, I mean, has to do with the political power and the lack, I mean, the lack of political power and, and the need for it that, that drives black people towards that? Speaker 2: Yes, well, yes of course. You know we, we, you know we, we only- black people--we only think of ourselves as black people politically because white people made us that way, you know. We didn't--we were just Africans, you know and then suddenly we became black people and, and so because our, our, our, our oppression was, was framed in a racial, under a racial umbrella we, we use that same umbrella to, to find a way out of our oppression. Again, you know, like why I, why I again I have more respect or I understand a little bit more of what Elijah Muhammad, what, what [Wallace] Fard Muhammad was doing when he talked about the white man is the devil. In, in, in 1930s Detroit [Michigan] they were surrounded by this dogma of, of, what, the curse, Cain, Noah's son-- Speaker 1: Ham. Speaker 2: Ham's curse. The curse of Ham, right. I mean that was, that was pretty much common, con, con, conventional wisdom and Christianity that black people were destined to be the hewers of water or the carriers of wood or whatever, that we were destined to be divinely destined to be the servants of man forever because, because Ham saw Noah naked. I mean this was a widespread belief and many black people believed it and so what Fard came to do was to, you know, reverse psychology, turn that on its head and say well you know they say that you are the cause, that you're, you're the cu, curse, no you're not. You know you were cursed by someone else who, you know, the devil whom, so I mean I understood that a little bit more. It's a reaction and our, our sense of blackness, our, our racial consciousness is, is, is in response to our racial victimization. Story_ID: 79442 Speaker 1: And so yes that's true, I mean, it is our political oppression that causes us to seek that, that kind of solution, but, but still even if we, you know, look, look, look at African countries now they're still this, this ridiculous kind of nationalism, this ridiculous kind of ethnocentrism or xenophobia between people, I mean, you got it now at the Ivory Coast. When I was, I was there I couldn't beli-- Speaker 2: You mean amongst black people--(simultaneous)--yeah okay. Speaker 1: Amongst black people. I couldn't believe the animosity between so called Tutsi and Hutu when I was in Eastern Africa. It's visceral, man. It's worse--and I've been to Northern Ireland and I know that they, the serious animosity between Protestants and Christians [sic, Catholics] there as well, but man that animosity in Eastern Africa and, and it's, its animosity that's, that's, I mean it's, it's incomprehensible, but you see it in various cultures. You see it in Sri Lanka between the Tamil and Sinhalese who if you look at 'em you couldn't--when we look at 'em we can't tell the difference. Just like in Northern Ireland I can't tell the difference between Protestant and Catholic. They say they can, you know; I don't see how. And in, and in certainly in, in Uganda and in Rwanda in those countries it's hard to tell the difference between Tutsi and Hutu, although there is, there is some difference, but they've been interacting so long that I can't tell the difference, but yet they, they have these visceral hatreds of each other and so I, you know, I've come to believe that tribalism is something that is hardwired into us as humans, that we, that we are, that we have some sort of instinctual xenophobia of difference with, with some fear of difference, and we have to work on it. I think it's, it's natural that we have that because that's how we evolve, you know, and you know we have to be fearful of someone of another group because we don't know if they want our resources. You know they may want our resources, so we have to be cautious. That's, that's a primitive response to difference and, and I think that that's what we have to overcome as a species of, of humans is that primitive response to difference and, and I think race, this notion of race basically sanctifies that. But, here we are, you now, and we can't simply step outside of, of our context. We have to make the best of it and, and I think that one of the ways that we do it is to gain the kind of confidence of ourselves and then we can move beyond and be respectful of other peoples, but first we have to, you know, we have to love ourselves first and we have been socialized to hate ourselves as African Americans because of our social, socialization process, you know. Story_ID: 79443 Speaker 1: Do you think at that stage of your involvement with In These Times that most white people didn't understand the need for black people to co, coalesce amongst themselves? Speaker 2: I think so. I think that they were, they were curious about you know why should black people be allowed to do the black thing and white people not do the white thing, you know. There was that kind of misunderstanding about where, where I was coming from. And so I think I really, I, I think I, I helped a lot in making our motives, the motives of nationalism a lot clearer to progressive whites, white folks. And also and I was trying also to, to, to reach black people to the fact that there are, there are white people who can be very helpful in our movement and especially now, now all Jews for one thing. You know Jews are, have been very helpful to our movement. In fact, many of the most progressive white folks we've come in contact with have been Jews and because I, I--there was, there was, there was an underlying development of anti-Semitism in, in our community that I, that I found also, I sensed and I had to admit, I had to acknowledge that was there, and, and attack it and not simply ignore it. And so I started doing that kind of stuff and, and eventually I began, I became less concerned with debunking and more with trying to contextualize, you know, and I think that's where I am now pretty much. Story_ID: 79444 Speaker 1: Okay, so you started with In These Times in '83' [1983] and, well what have been some of the highlights of your career with In These Times? Speaker 2: With In These Times? The Harold Washington [Chicago mayoral] campaign, the [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson [presidential] campaign, both of them. I was, I was, I, I, I was there with Jesse in '84' [1984], '88' [1988]. You know I was there when he, when he announced and followed him many places and did a lot of writing on it. I, I went to Burlington, Vermont and, and did a story on Bernie Sanders. He was the only socialist mayor in the country before he became the only socialist congressman. I got to know him pretty well. In fact, I went to Burlington several times. It is a nice city. One of the interesting things about Burlington is whenever I would walk down the street in Burlington people would always stop and try to pick me up. I wasn't even hitchhiking, you know. You know and that's quite a change from, from Chicago [Illinois] or any other place where there is big black community when, when white people see you they, that's not the first thing they wanna do is pick you up when they see you walking on the street. But, it again demonstrated to me how when, when we're not a threat and when we're not see, perceived as a threat to people, they're much less willing or, or less susceptible to racist behavior. People are much more willing to give you a chance if they don't, if you're not perceived as a threat. There are very few black people in Vermont, and the ones who are in Burlington are either at the university [University of Vermont] or work for Kodak or some, in some management capacity, so, so their experience with black people is on a certain level and, and black people are not threatening to them and so they're much more friendly. In some ways, we're kind of exotic. You know it reminds of the time I was in Sweden and, and when I was in the Service [United States Air Force] man I was at almost every corner I was being, somebody was trying to pick me up, you know. I was an exotic, I was an exotic product and they wanted to have access to me, you know, and that's kind of like the feeling I got in Vermont. So, so that was one highlight that I always remember. There, there have been many man in, with In These Times. I've, I've travelled many places. Ah man, and you know I did a story--one time I did a series on black mayors and, in Birmingham and Atlanta [Georgia] and Newark [New Jersey] and, you know I, I was doing the whole thing and, and I covered North Carolina when (I forgot his name already)-- Speaker 1: Jesse Helms was running against the brother there [Harvey Gantt]. Speaker 2: The brother there (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. I know his name too and I can't think of it. Speaker 2: His, his, his daughter [Sonja Gantt] is at [W]GN. If I can think of her name I'll--I can't think of his name now, but anyway I covered both of, both of his campaigns in Charlotte, North Carolina and I, I, you know I done a lot of, a lot of travelling under the auspice of, under the auspices of In These Times and West Coast, East Coast. Story_ID: 79445 Speaker 1: What else? Have we exhausted all the highlights with In These Times or? Speaker 2: I mean, there are all, all kinds of highlights that if, if I think long enough you know they'll, they'll come up. But, you know all these years, man, and I've been, I've been--I do, I do stuff for the stories and then a lot of times I get, I, I do speaking engagements on behalf of In These Times. I'm called around the country a lot to do, to do speeches on journalism and, and, and racism and, and how the alternative media has dealt with racism, which is something often, you know that often gets overlooked, you know. How in many ways there are more African Americans in the mainstream media than there are in the alternative media, although the alternative media is purportedly more progressive, you know, or professedly more progressive. Story_ID: 79446 Speaker 1: That, that kind of raises a question--(unclear)--. What would you consider philosophically, I guess, to be progressive in 2003, progressive? Speaker 2: You mean in terms of specific issues or, or-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: --political orientation? Speaker 1: Political orientation, maybe some issues too, you know. I mean, just what, what would you--just you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I'd say Speaker 1: --on it, but you know what you, what you--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, I say somebody who is concerned about like for example the incarceration epidemic in this country, the drug war. You know we're locking up people--we have the, we have more, we, we have more prisoners than any other country on the planet. In fact, we're, we're, you know, we're five percent of the world's population and we have twenty-five percent of the world's inmates. That's an amazing disproportion and, and even more so an, an amazing disproportion of them are African American. You know two million people in prison and, and about a million are African American and-- Speaker 1: So the justice system is something-- Speaker 2: The justice system-- Speaker 1: --that needs to be critiqued, a serious critique. Speaker 2: It needs a serious critique, and I think a progressive critique of the justice system would be to, to focus less on punishment, to become more rehabilitation oriented, to, to, to understand that the drug war has, has, has, has diminishing returns. That this, the prohibition of, of drugs leads to drive-by shootings just like prohibition of alcohol lead to drive-by shootings in the '20's [1920s] and we need to adopt the harms reduction kind of program that we see in Europe. We need to--and so I think in many ways European Union, some of the programs that are being enunciated by the European Union by banning capital punishment, focusing on rehabilitation, focusing on, on distribution of wealth rather than this kind of profit orientation that you find. You know with the demise of communism or, or the apparent demise of it, or let's say with the, with, with the, with the fall of the Berlin Wall [1989], capitalism has no competitors now. No ideological competitors nor any material competitors. We rule the roost. This country essentially rules the roost. The market, market logic is, is, is the philosophy of the day. Nothing challenges that. And so something pro, the progressive opposition to, to, to logic of the marketplace is, is a, is a, is a logic that is more egalitarian and basically it's, you know, it's the same as it's always been it's a concern for egalitarian distribution of wealth, democracy. I think, I think in this particular context the progressive would mean increased democracy, democratic decision making, bridges built. You know market logic has no provision for, for, for social justice. Social justice is something that is really irrelevant to market logic. The bottom line is the important thing. And, and, and the people who are concerned with, with building, with, with, with building a bridge between social justice and market logic, I think, are moving in progressive directions. And I think opposition to market logic is really what determines or what defines progressive orientation these days it seems to me. Because they really--you know market logic has become basically religion. People are talking about, you know, m, ma, market populism like, like, like if it's profitable it, it must be right because you know it's the people choice. Rather than voting or rather than the electoral system, market activity has become the new democracy, money. Speaker 1: What people will pay for--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: What money people will pay for, exactly. So, until and you know whatever, whatever contests or challenges that kind of, that kind of exclusiveness logic I think is a, is a progressive orientation. Story_ID: 79447 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Tell me about--now, now I don't want to miss anything, but, but am I jumping ahead too quick, but like tell me about your involvement with the [Chicago] Tribune. Is this, is it time for this? Speaker 2: Well, yeah I mean one--I would--let's see who did this, who did it really start. I, I was doing a show called "Beyond the Beltway" for, when I was--early in the '90's [1990s] and, and I would oft, often be paired with a guy named Tom Roeser who is a conservative and-- Speaker 1: He's a Republican. Speaker 2: Republican conservative and often we would be, you know, we would, our views would contrast and we would be on the show with, with diametrically opposed views and so the editorial editor, the editorial page editor of the [Chicago] Sun-Times, a guy named Mark Hornung called Tom and I to a meeting one day and, and, and, and proposed an arrangement in which we would write a column on the same day, left right, left right, and that sounded like a good idea to me, you know, I mean it would be a good way of exploring issues in a way, both sides of an issue in a way. And so I thought that would be a good idea. So, I, I said yes and, and Tom said yes as well and so I began to write. Tom didn't write. I don't know what happened, but essentially I became, I started writing for the Sun-Times. Mark Hornung, you know, invited me to write columns, and I would write consu, weekly, sometimes two, twice a week for the Sun-Times. After '93' [1993], '94' [1994], '95' [1995]--I started in ninety, '93' [1993] for the Sun-Times and, and I wrote, actually for four years. Mark left in 1996. He got--he left, he left the position in '96' [1996], so I was kind of an orphan. You know, he, he brought me on and so--and then, and then right after that the ownership changed at the Sun-Times. A guy named Hollinger--a guy named Conrad Black bought it. He, he's the, the CEO of Hollinger Corporation, owns a lot of Canadian papers and European papers, Austrian papers as well, and is very right wing, very right wing, very pro-Israel. And many of my columns were an, were anti-Israel. Well not anti-Israel, but anti- [Benjamin] Netanyahu, an, anti-right wing Likud party and, and, and, and very--and, and so I, you know, my, my--after I think three or four columns after Hollinger took over my columns began to appear a little less frequently in, in the paper and then one day I was told that not, you know, they would no longer accept my columns. So, that was in '97' [1997] and so right after that I got, I got a call from, from the editorial page editor at the [Chicago] Tribune asking me was I interested in doing a column for the Tribune and I said yeah sure. He said well he'll let me know and so about six months later I got a call to do it and I started in '98' [1998] with the "Trib" and at first I started a column every two weeks because there were other columns. There was a rotating position in which columns, columns, one column would do it one week, another column this would do it the next week. It was every two weeks. So, I was with a guy named Doug Kmiec I think, I forgot. I, I'm not sure that's the way you pronounce his name, but eventually they dropped him and asked me to do a column every week after six months of that and so I began doing a column every week. And, and from, excuse me, 19, from January '99' [1999] 'til now--until February 2003 I was writing a weekly column for the "Trib." And it, it was a wonderful experience man, a very prestigious perch. The platform gave, you know, gave me credibility in many ways. I don't think I needed that credibility, but you know others feel that, that makes you credible and so I appreciated that, you know. Story_ID: 79448 Speaker 1: To just put it in context on some level that the two papers in Chicago [Illinois] I don't think I'd be going out, going out on a limb if I said that most people think that the [Chicago] Tribune is the most serious one, further more intellectual one--(unclear)--. The [Chicago] Sun-Times seems more of populist paper, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, tabloid, the tabloid format and a kind of breezy-- Speaker 1: Easy--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes that's true. The Sun-Times, however, started out as, as the most liberal paper in Chicago when it was owned by Marshall Field and it had that reputation in the African American community as a friend of black people, but it has changed drastically from those days. First, at first it was, it was owned by Rupert Murdoch, you know, the, the notorious Rupert Murdoch and, and he, he chased a lot of people away with this increasingly tabloidization, you know, this garish headlines and these sensationalized, the sensationalized treatment of news really turned a lot of people away and they, and they, they fled the Sun-Times, but then he, he lost, he sold it, the paper, and now it's own again by a right wing ideologue, the Hollinger people. And, although they are a little bit more responsible than, than Rupert Murdoch was, they are still pretty much making the paper a right wing mouthpiece, especially a Likud mouthpiece. If you read the editorials, they are virtually indistinguishable from the Likud's positions in Israel, the right wing Israeli party and they take a pretty right wing position on many things. It's columnists are rabidly right wing, except now they, they, they've hired a few black columnists to kind of make, make them a little bit more attractive to black readership, Laura Washington. They have [HM] Mary Mitchell and, and I think on now they run [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson every Thur, every Tuesday as a column. So they're trying to be at least trying to be responsive to the black community in some ways, but, but other than that, other than that kind of a window dressing they're rabidly right wing and the Tribune is much more, a much more cons, a, a much more deliberate paper. I mean, it's, it's a much more considerate. It takes time to, to assess views. It's, much more serious. It gives sober treatment in ways, sober treatment of issues that the Tribune, I mean that the Sun-times sensationalize. It makes a better attempt to, to contextualize stuff that is going on in the black community. Recently it has done some excellent work in, in, a, in promise of incarceration in the death penalty and stuff like that. I mean, the Tribune is in many ways the, the, is trying to be the paper of record for, for the Midwest and because of that it has to, it has to be a lot more inclusive than, than the Sun-Times and it is. Story_ID: 79449 Speaker 1: Okay, now you started writing for them [the Chicago Tribune] in '98' [1998] you said-- Speaker 2: Um-hum '98' [1998]. Speaker 1: --yeah and it was a surprise to some pe, people in the community to see you in the Tribune. Speaker 2: And I know, I know, man. It was a surprise to me at first, you know, and actually many, many times I was really surprised that they would publish some of the stuff I was writing 'cause I was, I wasn't holding back, man, I was--I said well they got me in here, you know they know my position, so I'mma go for it, you know until they stop me and they stopped me (laughter). I went for it, and I, you know, and, and I think what happened is during this, this period, this war, this crazy period where these, where these, where, where America it's hard to understand what's going on in, in the policymaker's mind, you know. This aggressive and unilateral aggression against Iraq it's, it's completely, I mean it seems to me such an obvious violation of international protocol, not international law, but protocol. The whole reason for the UN [United Nations] is, is the Nuremberg protocols, and the Nuremberg protocols the primary issue that they attack was the Nazi's aggressive war, not, not the genocide which came up later and, and, and turned out to be just as horrible, but their, their original reason was to, to, was to stop any other nation from mounting the kind of aggressive war against other nations, unilateral aggression against other nations that the Nazi's did and here we are proposing exactly that. And it seems to me that wher, you know where are, where's our leadership, why aren't we protesting this, and so I've been very relentless about this. Apparently, too relentless because I think that it's--I don't think we're getting enough information in the media. I think if you read (thank goodness for the internet), I mean you have access to all of these international papers and you see what they're presenting. It's almost, It's almost criminal how the news that we're getting is so different and so bereft of context that I feel someone has to try to present that view in, in the mainstream and so I try to do that and, and apparently I ruffled too many feathers. Story_ID: 79450 Speaker 1: Now did--okay, was there a specific column that you wrote--(simultaneous)--that did it [ended his writing for the Chicago Tribune]? Speaker 2: Well, yeah the last column I wrote, the last column I wrote there was criticism about it. You know the [Chicago] Tribune says, and, and, and this is true, I lasted longer than any of the other rotating columnists. I started to be, I started as I said you know people were writing six months, then they would leave, I started out in that, in that mode. Usually the columnists would last two years at the most. I lasted five, almost five years, so there is an argument, and this is the argument that they made, make that, it was simply time for me to rotate out and, and you know for them to have another columnist in. So, that's a reasonable argument. It's just that I, I, you know, I, I don't think that that's all to it, you know. Speaker 1: So it, it seem to come on the heels of your last column which-- Speaker 2: My last three columns. Speaker 1: Three okay. Speaker 2: My last three columns were all on this in one way or another. The last column was particularly rough because the title of the column was "How do we stop this Juggernaut," this war Juggernaut and, and I was making the point that people are becoming desperate in, in ways to stop it. After, you know, it was just these millions of people marching all over the, all over the planet against this war and [President] George [W.] Bush acts like that, you know, it was just a walk in the park, you know, "who cares about that?" You know, how can we gain the attention of the American people to put a stop to this that wh, wh what's getting ready to happen in our name. And, and so I made the comparison between the Nazi's, you know the Lebensraum. They call it "Lebensraum," the Nazi's nomenclature for their, the rationale for their aggression was that they needed more room. They needed breathing space. That was their rationale. Our rationale is "preemptive defense." It's a, it's a, it's a name, it's a title, it's a nomenclature, but it means the same thing aggressive unilateral aggression against a people. And so I made that point in, in the arti, in the column and, and it was taken out because the, the editors claimed I didn't really make the connection well, and I understand, you know, and so I understand that. If, if that was the problem, they could have called me before the column was published, and I could made adjustments then, but-- Speaker 1: So they published the column without that reference. Speaker 2: Without that reference, they took it out and so, you know, that was, that was pretty upsetting to me, but after he explained it I under, you know. I still thought I should have had the opportunity, but anyway apparently it was that column that pushed, pushed them over the line and said well you know "We just got to get rid of this guy" or, or "Let's take this opportunity to rotate Salim out." They, you know they may have said that I, I was becoming too predictable in my views or something, and, and I could even accept that except that I was, I was paired with or I guess you could say tripled every Monday with two right wing commentators who were relentless pro-Israel and relentlessly pro-Iraq and so if you're gonna--so if I'm gonna be-- Speaker 1: The Iraq War. Speaker 2: Iraq War, right Iraq War. So if you're gonna--if I'm going to be criticized for my concern, for my re, for my consistency why not criticize them for their consistency. So, anyway I, I, you know, again it's, it's the tri, it's the Tribune's decision to make. I can't, again I can't even blame them if that was the reason. If they, if they thought I was not, you know, living up to what they wanted me to do, then this is their publication, so I understand that. It's just that I believed that, you know, we need--I think that made a mistake because I'm a, I'm a unique voice in Chicago [Illinois]. I'm a Chicagoan and I have a national, international niche actually and, and I, I write about a variety of subjects and they're many, they're, they're various groups that, that have risen up and, and to protest me being, being my absence at the Tribune. Jewish groups, Arab groups, Muslim groups, the drug, anti-drug war groups, church groups, black nationalists, Sunni Muslims, and Nation of Islam Muslims have risen up, you know, to, to, to, to protest my absence and so I really think I, I, I occupy a unique kind of niche that, that they really are missing by, by, by releasing me, although, you know, the, the Tribune says I can still contribute occasional Op-Ed columns, pre, with pre-publication reviews. You know they have to check 'em out and see if they fit their requirements first and, and you know if they, they publish that, you know that's all right. So, you know, we'll see, we'll see what happens, but I think they made a mistake and, and, but, but again I'm not mad at 'em. They gave me an opportunity. They didn't have to and in many ways there was a, there was a period when they were really being criticized strongly by groups that threatened to boycott, in fact have instituted boycotts against them be, in part because I'm writing, because of my writing, and they stuck by me on that and so I have to really, you know, give them kudos for sticking by me for that. And so I, you know, and in a lot of ways I don't have a complaint about what the Tribune did. It's there, it's there discret, it's up to them, you know, at their discretion. I think they made a mistake, and I think, I think the United States, I think the American people need my voice in, in, in that kind of venue. Story_ID: 79451 Speaker 1: Okay, and I know there are groups probably meeting as we speak trying to figure out a way to twist the arm of the [Chicago] Tribune-- Speaker 2: Yes there are. Speaker 1: --back, you know (laughter). How do you feel about that kind of stuff being done in your name, I mean-- Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's an extraordinary feeling man, it really is man. I never really thought about it that much, you know. And, and see as I say, you know, like from being a debunker at one point it's difficult to imagine people, a constituency developing behind me because you know as soon as somebody, you know, says I'm, you know, they're with me I, I'll criticize them. Like I've been hard on the Nation of Islam and [HM Louis] Farrakhan, you know. I've been hard on, on, on other Muslims too, you know, for, for, for, you know, th, th, separation of church and state problem and, and how, how do you deal with pluralism and, and, and, and, and the Sharia, you know. These are prob, these are serious problems and, and I've been critical of Islamic groups as well as being critical of the, the critic, of, of the opposition to Islamic groups. I've been critical of, of the Israeli's, but I've been critical of the Palestinian suicide bombing thing. And so there have been times when I said well, you know, who can support me. You know I'm too much of an iconoclast and I come down on--I don't really have an allegiance that you can, you know, that you can, that you can gra, graft a group to, you know, but apparently I do. Apparently, a lot of these people feel that I'm speaking in their behalf. Speaker 1: You think it might be that all these, all--a lot of people no matter what group they're in probably the long for some kind of progressive agenda, I mean, as you described it earlier too. Speaker 2: I think that may be it. Speaker 1: There may actually be Muslims that don't want the Sharia and don't know how to get rid of it or-- Speaker 2: Brother. Speaker 1: --Jews that don't want the Likud and don't know how to get rid of it. Speaker 2: Man I think you hit on something very, exactly man, exactly right. I get, I get that kind of expression frequently. There's, there's a group, there's a Muslim group very iconoclastic Muslim group man. I'll give you the website. I don't have now, but, but it's, it's, it's at home, but it's a very interesting group man that--and they publish these kind of parodies of, of Muslim and, and satires and ironic stories (it's very interesting) in which they are kind of critical of, of the dogma of Islam as well as, you know, it's, it's it's a procru, a progressive critique of that dogma even as they are sympathetic, you know. It's a very interesting website, and they use my stuff a lot. I've written stuff on zealotry, the dangers of zealotry. I've written stuff that, that has, that have, that got me invited to the secular humanist convention to give a speech, you know. You know and so I'm critical of organized religion and yet I have a lot of support from, from Christian ministers and, and Jewish rabbis you know. I'm critical of a lot of things and, and so and so I'm really gratified by, by the response, man I really am. I, I never tried to build any, any kind of constituency and, and, and, at the time when I thought about I said well damn I'm probably, there's probably more people against me than there are, you know, for, but it turns out that there are a lot of people who are, who really appreciated the kind of critique that I, that I bring and, and they, I think they respect my intentions. They don't think, they don't think that I'm trying to--they don't think I have an ulterior motive, that I'm simply bringing critique, and that's really a compliment. You know, it's really a great compliment and I really appreciate that and, and I, I really I don't think I would have gotten the full measure of it had I, had this thing that happened at the [Chicago] Tribune. The responses that I'm getting are really pretty amazing, you know. Story_ID: 79452 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. We ask this of everybody pretty much, but what, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: My concerns for the black community is that we understand our power. That, that, you know, we, we, we have inherited a lot of, a lot of values that are not, that don't, that don't maximize our talents. What I mean by that is that we've been socialized in, in a white supremacist society. Much of that socialization is perverse for us. We perform perversely for our own pr, progress. If--the only way I see us changing that is, is to gain more understanding of our agency (the fact that we have power to change our, our environments). The only way to do that is, is education. We have to become--I think we have to--it has to be a furious effort to educate children. That has to be one of our major concerns. Education, educating children and inmates, the incar, our incarcerated population. It's a bombshell. It's a crisis, and if we don't get resources to, to all these people who are coming out of prison--with this record number of people we have in prisons, record numbers are coming out. They're coming out to communities that have no possibility of reintegrating them or, or educating them so they are readily absorbed into the community and that's going to be such a--they're going to be an indigestible part of our community that will create havoc if we don't take care of it as soon as possible. Story_ID: 79652 Speaker 1: You were talking about the prison--. Speaker 2: Vested interest, man. So many--there are increasing numbers of people with a vested interest in the criminal justice system, the jails-industrial complex [prison-industrial complex]. It is a serious complex. When people develop vested interest in a, in a, in a, in, in the fact, and in a certain number of inmates and a high incarceration rate then they will do what they can to insure that that incarceration rate stays high. And, and that's not just people who benefit from the drug war like, you know, the, the, the, the, drug dealers, and all that, but the judges, the whole complex, the police departments and the special sys, the special teams and now they confiscate drug loot and, and they use that to finance their salaries and, and there perks and various police stations. They focus on a certain kind of community. It's, it's an incredible vice that you have young people in. We relegate them to these resource poor communities, these moonscapes in which there has been this massive urban disinvestment. We, we, we, we, we subject them to under, un-education that the schools they attend are really a joke in many ways and then they get out the only thing, the only, the only economic activity they see--the only commercial activity they see is the underground economy. They get out, they see that, they see people surviving, and, and they see the people who, who have the, the material wherewithal are, are, are functioning in the underground economy, so they make, they make a-- Speaker 1: Listen to the song, the song lying eyes those who--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: They do indeed, they do indeed. And you can't, and really you can't blame it. It's, it's an obvious kind of thing, you know. They see success. We, we see it, we, we understand, we contextualize it, but they don't know that context. That's what they see. They see these people succeed and they want to succeed. They wanna use their intelligence to, to, to, you know, to put them a step above their peers and so they do what they have to do. And then they get, they get penalized for using their ingenuity, and then they become enemies of society and they get caught into that, their trapped into marginality, into economic marginality and, and, and, and to crimina, criminalization and boom and there they are. And now we have this amazingly, enormous incarceration epidemic going on. Speaker 1: The criminal justice system is, is like it's own echo system. If you take out the--if you did,--if you could stop the brothers from committing crimes the whole thing would collapse, wouldn't it--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's right Speaker 1: --(unclear)--become extinct--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's right, right, that's right. Speaker 1: It's a vested interest to fight against that, you know. Speaker 2: There you go man, the, the, the--if we can get a crime-free community man, the, the, the, the economy would, would go bust, you know. Police stations, they wouldn't know what to do, I mean, whole infrastructures devoted to this, to this, to this, you know, charade man, and the war on drugs is a part of it, you know, a very big part of it. Story_ID: 79653 Speaker 1: Now, now you advocated the legalization of drugs? Speaker 2: Yeah I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do and, and, and, and I, I think the Europeans have the right idea. You know drugs are not good, but the worse part of it is, is the, the, the commerce and the profits that derive from, from its, from its illicit nature. That's, that's a lesson of prohibition it seems to me. We haven't learned that lesson. Other countries are finally beginning to learn it, ev, even Britain, you know. Canada recently legalized marijuana for medical use, which is another absurd obsession with our government. You know we're busting marijuana growers in San Francisco [California] who are providing AIDS patients and, and, and people who have, who are using marijuana to, to deal with rigidity in these other kind, and spazz, and, and, and that kind of spasmodic movements caused by cerebral palsy and what not and, and, and marijuana has proven to be helpful in, in these things and many other ways and there has been much research that has, that has concluded that marijuana is indeed more helpful than it is harmful. Much of the research is being censored by this government, although the, the government conducted-- Speaker 1: The studies themselves. Speaker 2: --the studies themselves. You know it's eight, nine states have, have had referendum in which they, in which they legalized medical use of marijuana, but the government refuses to recognize the legality of it. Story_ID: 79654 Speaker 1: This is really an incredible time we're living in. And, and, and the government is so, seems to be acting with such perversity it's, it's almost beyond belief. It really is. That's why it's so hard to believe that, that we are accepting what [President] George [W.] Bush is talking about in terms of Iraq. That's--as Senator Robert Byrd made a speech in, in the Senate I think February 5th or so, February 6th. It was a masterful speech in which he says this is a new road that we're embarking on. This preemptive defense thing in which we're unilaterally invading folks. Speaker 2: Preemptive defense that means "I'm gonna get you ahead of time before you even think about getting me," right? Speaker 1: "Or if I think you're thinking about it I'm gonna bomb" and, and, and the provision is we can also use tactical nuclear weapons. That's part of the, that's part of this whole batch. You know, we, we are, we are embarking on some really new terrain here and, and it's very, very dangerous. I don't think we can turn back from it. If we, if we, if we step out on it, I think we, you know, we're putting into motion some very, very dangerous forces and so I think we have a responsibility to stop us, to, to halt, at least to force us to think about the implications of what we are doing and I, and I don't see many people doing that. Although increasing numbers are and there's been, you know, a lot of, a lot of activity in recent days, you know, the, the demonstrations over, over the last two weeks have been demon-- continuous demonstrations. They'll, they'll be more this weekend. Anything to try to get the Bush administration to, to look at what's going on, you know, but they have their own ideas and I don't know if we'll, we'll be able to change their minds. Story_ID: 79655 Speaker 1: Okay, tell me now what do you plan to do next? What, what's on your agenda next? I know you're still the editor of "In These Times"--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes, senior editor of "In These Times." Also, I'm a, I'm a media fellow for the Soros Open Society Institute [now the Open Society Foundation], which I did a project. Basically the project was to write about the crim, criminal justice issues and, and, and I, I've basically done that. I mean, I've, I've, I've fulfilled that obligation in many ways, but all, but while doing that I came across a fantastic story on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] that I decided to really do a book on, to use it to illustrate exactly the problem that my subject was about. And the subject was really about these people coming home from prison, the, the class problem that, that is implied by that. Now a lot of these young people they don't have respect for traditional kinds of leadership that you find in the black community and middle class leadership, clergy-oriented leadership. They have different demands for leadership, and that leadership often is gang related or related in somehow to that unsavory prison experience, and that leadership is, is, is shunned in general by, by our traditional middle class leadership, and that's gonna create an enormous problem in the community. And, and, and this particular subject that I'm going to deal with is about a brother who was an exemplary leader in bringing young sis, there's a word that they use, "at risk," young at risk men. He, he was bringing them to the, to this, to the notion that they had to change in life. They had to look at life a little differently, learn life skills. There's a group called Amer-I-Can, you know-- Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--Jim Brown. Speaker 2: --started by Jim Brown, right, and there trying to do that stuff around the country. And they hired a brother in Chicag, in Chicago and he was excelling at bringing people into the group and getting them reoriented and trying to change their lives. However, he was murdered in a very spectacular West Side murder. He was kidnapped, shot, and left in the street, and, and it was found that he had connections. He had, he still had connections to, to, to some gangs, to some street gangs, and when that was, when they found that out and they found out he was also working for Amer-I-Can the, the state cut the funding for Amer-I-Can because they found that he, they were still consorting with a gang member. And this is exactly the kind of guy that young people need to pull them out of what they're going into because he, he had come through that and he had a new orientation he was trying to teach to them. He was still connected to the gang and that was an unfortunate thing, but a lot of these guys do have those connections, and that's the point I am making that we're going have to reevaluate our, our criteria for leadership as we get this flood of new people coming out of prisons who are going to demand a new style of leadership, and I think that this story really exemplifies that dilemma very well and, and so I'm focusing on that and so I'm gonna do that. I'm gonna also get a compilation of some of my essays and columns and articles and get something together. In fact, I--well I won't, I won't mention that on, on that on, on this, but somebody you know well has expressed interest in, in, in that, in that project, so, third world press. Those are the two things I have, you know, planned. And, you know, I have some other things, you know, in, in the works. There are some other publications who have expressed interest in, in my, in my, in my writing, and I might, I do that. It all depends, you know. I, as I say the [Chicago] Tribune has given me, you know, some credibility in, in, a national platform, and, and it has enabled me to, to get some contacts and connections that I, I, I may not have had otherwise and so, you know, I appreciate that as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I am going to exploit those contacts. Story_ID: 79656 Speaker 1: Oh, is there anything that you would do differently at this point? Speaker 2: Oh you know-- Speaker 1: Would you have done differently? Speaker 2: Ah man, I--you know that's it's hard to say because, because you know in, in retrospect you see trajectories and you see blind alleys much easier than you did when, when you were there and you, but you also see how one thing leads to another and how connections are made in ways that you, that, that you, you, you had no foreknowledge of. And so I think that, you know, I'm beginning to, to see as I mature that, you know, it's all, it's all working for, it's all working for my benefit in one way or the other. It's all working for--it's all working for the good of the whole and, and, and the idea if you--if, if I can get myself--if I can accept, you know,--if I can accept my, my affect on the world--well th, th, th, you know, I, I'm get, I'm verging on a philos, you know this philosophical thing. I, I think, no I, I, I don't regret (laughter). Speaker 1: No regrets or nothing you would change, huh? Speaker 2: No, I don't regret any-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause you know it was all supposed to be the way it is, you know. Story_ID: 79657 Speaker 1: Okay now that being said, you're still young I know, but what would you consider your legacy? Speaker 2: Wow, you know I didn't--I don't know, I didn't mentioned my, my children right did I? Speaker 1: Oh no--(unclear)--they're important. Speaker 2: They're important. I, I would consider my children--you know it's traditional to stay that that I would consider my children my legacy, but I really don't. I mean they, they have their own, they have their own lives to construct. I have two, I have two daughters live in New Jersey who is 34 and 32. They'll be 35 and 33 this year. Doing well, married, married to beautiful men, beautiful brothers man, I, I--they are, you know, I'm very lucky, they are very lucky, you know, because they have a fine family, both have-- you know, well educated young ladies and, and part of their, I think, part of their stability comes from the fact that they, they spent much of their early schooling in, in, [Muhammad] University of Islam. You know, they went to the University of Islam in Newark [New Jersey] and in Chicago [Illinois] and they--and I think that that sense of confidence that, that is projected in those institutions is part of, part of the reason for their success today. They're not Muslims. Speaker 1: Were you married while you were in the Nation of Islam or? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got married while in the Nation, yes, and also got divorced while, while in the Nation. But, but yeah, but, but my daughters are I, I, think, you know, I'm very extremely proud of them. They have, each has, has two children, so I have four grandchildren and, but, but I don't think I would consider them my legacy because you know that, that's saddling them with too much. My, my, you know, my legacy I think is, is that you know I'm, I'm someone who, who tried to, tried to transmit the experience of black America in, in the mainstream to, to, to mainstream readers and at the same time maintain a presence in alternative media. I was, you know, I, I was the, you know I was the one doing two things at once. I was the, I was working both sides of the fence so to speak. I guess that could, you know, that's as good a legacy as any, you know. Equ, Equal facility in the alternative and mainstream media. Story_ID: 79658 Speaker 1: Okay, and sir how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Man, as, woo, as a scholar journalist. A scholar journalist dedicated to social justice. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Story_ID: 79659 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMER MALE VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: Me. Speaker 1: Yeah, just describe the photo and if there are people in it that you can identify and describe them left to right or something--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMER MALE VOICE): Who, what, and where. Speaker 1: If you're in here, I could point you out. Speaker 2: This is 19, this is me here. Right. This is 1973 Saviours Day in Chicago [Illinois]. This is, th, this is my first time to Chicago actually. I was in the Nation [of Islam] and I was writing for the paper [Muhammad Speaks] and I was coming to, you know, to, to the ritual, to that Saviour's Day ritual and I, and this was my first time and I was, I was in the crowd, and there I am. And you know, this, this picture is-- Speaker 1: That, that's a picture, that's just a photo I took for, for a speech I gave in California on, on the alternative media and it was just a--I took the photo as, to give, you know, to provide a more, I guess you could say establishment look because before then-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): What's the year for this? Speaker 1: This was 2000. Speaker 2: Well that's 1976 me and Idi Amin. I was the leader of a delegation of black journalists, and this was, this was the beginning of a news conference and, and this was the, the negotiating period, so it's myself and Idi Amin. Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): He said it. Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1975. This is at the airport in Uganda, Entebbe Airport. That's [HM Louis] Farrakhan when he was a youngster, and that's me next to him on the couch fixing my camera, and those are Ugandan officials on, on the left. This is Farrakhan and I when we went to Uganda in '75' [1975] for the OAU [Organization of African Unity] conference. Speaker 2: This is me giving a speech at the Bloomsburg University in Pennsylvania [sic, Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania] on ir, altern, on, on African American images in the media. That was one of the, that was one, one of my specialties speaking on African American images in the media. I taught a course on that at the Associated Colleges of the Midwest [Chicago, Illinois] and so that was often what I spoke on. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): When did this take place? Speaker 2: This was in '94' [1994]. Speaker 1: This is 1975 I'm working at Muhammad Speaks newspaper writing an article. Speaker 2: Nineteen-seventy five I am standing outside of a mosque in Uganda with Louis Farrakhan and a host of Uganda officials. I am on the far right in, in the dark suit. Speaker 1: Nineteen-seventy six at Muhammad Speaks. Speaker 2: Ah man, this is ni, this is 1975 in my Muslim best. Speaker 1: No bow tie though. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I,--that was the day I didn't wear the bow tie...