 Story_ID: 56513 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My full name is Shirley Mahaley Malcom, that's S-H-I-R-L-E-Y M-A-H-A-L-E-Y M-A-L-C-O-M. Speaker 1: All right. Is there a story behind the name Mahaley? I've never heard of it. Speaker 2: I've never heard of it either. I mean the people who have it tend to be relatives. That's the only thing that I know. But I really, you know I've tried to find other Mahaleys when I've gone into other towns and things like this but I really haven't found any. I found a few and--but really have not been able to trace any of the history related to it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born September 6th, 1946 in Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. And ma'am what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation now is I'm an association executive. I head education in human resources programs at the American Association for the Advancement of Science or AAAS. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 8, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At the present time we're at AAAS headquarters in Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 56514 Speaker 1: All right. Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as sort of a warm up and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Absolutely. Fried chicken. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite what? Color? I don't know that I have a favorite color. I wear a lot of black largely because it's convenient for the amount of traveling that I have to do. It used to be red but I think that as I've gotten older it has toned down. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I like spring. It's my favorite time of the year. Speaker 1: All right. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like Paris. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or sentence? I guess "what doesn't kill you makes you stronger". Story_ID: 56515 Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, then your father's side and then we'll bring them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Lillie Mae Funderburg, F-U-N-D-E-R-B-U-R-G Mahaley. Speaker 1: And Mae, M-A-E? Speaker 2: M-A-E, Mae. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: September 20th, 1914 in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Well my grandmother lived in the home with us. Or we lived in the home with her. My sister was born in 1942 and my dad had been drafted to go to World War II [1939-1945] and so my grandmother--my mother moved from the house where she was with my father into the house with her mother and father at that time so we lived with my grandmother. My grandmother had quite a bit of information about the family and the family bible. Somehow that has gotten misplaced over time and that's one of the things that I really wanted to do is to track it down. She was a member of a fairly large family in terms of the numbers of children. She had a twin brother so we always were meeting like cousins that were children of her siblings but it was hard to keep them all straight because there were so many of them and I was a young kid and you know couldn't keep the names as straight as I wished. She had lived in Birmingham but she had come from Birmingham from Talladega County [Alabama], in Talladega and Aniston [Alabama], that area where they had lived. And so that was--she would, we would often travel back and visit relatives in Aniston. We would sometimes go to the church in Talladega you know where they would have this, they would only meet once a month because they had such a small group. And when they met they had picnics and all kinds of celebrations and things like this. And I remember those but in terms of her mother, her father, I know--I remember very little actually about that. My grandmother was born in 1886 so you can kind of get a sense that we were, we're getting pretty far back in terms of talking about that particular side of the family. Speaker 1: Now what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Bessie Estell, E-S-T-E-L-L Funderburg. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there--are there any stories that she passed down about life in the 19th century in Alabama or anything about reconstruction or emancipation or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, not really. I--the only thing that I know is that it was a large and extended family. And so when my grandmother moved to Birmingham, very soon for some reason she became like the guardian for her younger sister and brother and I don't know whether this was because of a death that was you know, that was in the family or whether that was because of the perception that there were better opportunities in the city than there was in the rural area, but not a lot of focusing. She would occasionally you know tell me that she for example knew that her father or his father had been the, I guess the owner of one of the plantation or whatever it is that they had worked on and referred to someone named Captain Wilson. And I, that was as much as I, as she ever really talked about. I mean you--the thing that you found was that people were reticent in talking about those times that were right after slavery. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your mother--did your grandmother have any particular skill or occupation that she pursued that--? Speaker 2: My grandmother was a homemaker. She had never worked outside of the home. Her--she had had an eighth grade education which I guess at that time was quite something given the fact that she was in a rural, came from a rural area. My grandfather worked on the railroad and had, was a brakeman on the railroad. And I think that that was a pretty good job at that time for a black man and so he was able to bring in a sufficient amount of money that she was--she did not need to work outside of the home and would be able to be a homemaker. Story_ID: 56516 Speaker 1: My mother [Lilly Mahaley] is--was one of five children. She was the youngest girl. She had a brother who was younger than she was but the amazing thing was that you think about, my grandmother with an eighth grade education but the girls all had some opportunity to have post-secondary education even if it was just two years or some, or additional training or something like this. My mother went to Tuskegee [University] and I guess you would call it normal school at the time, two years of college there to become a teacher. Her background at that time in terms of teaching was home economics. And I used to ask her if--about George Washington Carver since he was there at the time that she was in school and she said she never had a course from him. I mean obviously when you're in Home Ec you do have chemistry but it--she would see him you know kind puttering around campus and so that was really I think a part about the family history that I did you know that I did have some knowledge about. Speaker 2: Okay. Now let me go or did your mother have any interesting stories about growing up that she shared with you? Speaker 1: Well my mother would talk about the fact that at a very early age she was given responsibility in the family for conducting a lot of the business for the family. I indicated that my grandmother did not work outside of the home but my mother would go with her father and do, conduct business and things like that. And I think that that made her quite independent and organized and kind of the one that people turned to in terms of getting things done. Speaker 2: Okay. Oh, and what was your grandfather's name? I didn't get it. Speaker 1: My grandfather's name I--pretty sure, everybody referred to him as Howard Funderburg but I think that it was probably William Howard Funderburg. He died before I was born and so I never knew him. He was--he had a kind of a presence in the sense of everybody talking about him as a strong person who believed in family and took care of his family and things like this but I had no personal knowledge of my grandfather. Speaker 2: Is there any story about the name Funderburg as to--? Speaker 1: No and I have tried to you know look at that and try to research it. There are a lot of Funderburgs around and I don't know whether it is--when I took German I really wondered whether it was an Anglicization of the German von der Burg, you know but I don't know whether that is you know the root or the derivation of it. Speaker 2: Yeah, there are some black Funderburgs around and I guess the most famous is Lawrence Funderburg, the basketball player for Ohio State a few years ago. He's a commentator on CNN, but there--I've heard that name. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 56517 Speaker 1: Okay. Well let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Ben Lee Mahaley. He was born October 10th, 1915 in Birmingham [Alabama]. And his mother again, Ida Harris Mahaley did not work outside of the home and this was I think in large measure because my grandfather, also Ben Lee Mahaley was really quite, I mean he was able to--he had a quite substantial job as like a foreman at the pipe shop. Birmingham was a big steel and manufacturing town and I thought that that was really quite interesting that he was able to rise to that kind of level and so he was able to take care of the family and so she didn't work outside of the home. My father was one of three children. He had an older sister and a younger brother so he was the middle kid and he went to--he finished high school and he once said that no one ever asked him ever about going to college. It was the expectation that when he finished high school he would go to work. And he would have liked to have gone to college. He was a curious person. He was good in math. He could run columns of numbers in his head. He was interested in science, he was interested in technology and all but that was just not in the cards. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a--are there any stories about your father's family that go back to reconstruction or even to emancipation--? Speaker 2: Well when I--I asked my dad, he used to talk about the family's roots in North Alabama and how he would visit with his grandfather and there were--and spend time with him in the country. But it did not go back, you know he didn't say what might have been shared in those walks or those times that he would hang out with his grandfather which would have been about the timing of reconstruction for his grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have a real sense that as I indicated before that people kind of didn't want to go there. They wanted to focus forward and that a lot of the things that had happened in that time they didn't want to dwell on or didn't want to share for fear that it might actually leave some of us jaded about what was possible going forward. Story_ID: 56518 Speaker 1: Okay. So did your father [Ben Lee Mahaley] go to Booker T. Washington High School or--? Speaker 2: My father went to Booker T. Washington Business School after he came back from the war. He had veteran's benefits and was able to get in some amount of time you know at that particular school. So actually when I--he died recently last June and so I found a certificate you know from his time at Booker T. Washington among his things. Speaker 1: Okay, this is a different Booker T. Washington than the high school (unclear)--? Speaker 2: This is Booker T. Washington Business College. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a graduate of Parker High School, I guess it was called Industrial at that time and, as was my mother because there weren't that many high schools for Negro kids. And so he was at Industrial. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any idea as to why so many of the schools are named Industrial Schools for black people? Speaker 2: I think that there was this, I think that they would choose names like that because there was the expectation that you would get a trade and that you would go to work. And there was not necessarily expectation that you would use that as the basis for pre-college, I mean for going on into higher-Ed. Only, for the most part it was only the children of lawyers and doctors and teachers and things like this who went where there was the expectation of going on to college. And I am really amazed by the fact that you know in so few generations you go from people who had a high--who didn't even have a high school education you finished the eighth grade to people who finished doctoral degrees. I mean and I, and that kind of really upward mobility in terms of education is really quite stunning when you think about it. Story_ID: 56519 Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. Now is there a story about how your parents [Lilly and Ben Lee Mahaley] met? Speaker 2: I think--I don't really know how they met. I have the sense that it was a fairly, that the black community in Birmingham [Alabama] were, was like clustered in particular areas and so people, you know like we talk about networking now. I think they did networking then and they knew who people were in different clusters of you know of the city you know in the black clusters of the city. They were-- Speaker 1: Now that's an interesting concept. I just want to focus on that a second. Often in the north we think of like a black side of town or I'm from the west side, it's black. And you go to New York, Harlem you know that's black. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And--but Cincinnati [Ohio] is a city where there's little pockets of black people. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you say Birmingham was like that where--? Speaker 2: Birmingham in a way had pockets. There were, there was a pocket called Collegeville [Alabama] which is where I was raised and where my mother lived. And then there were like whites in Norwood [Alabama] which was right there and then there was a--in North Birmingham. And then there was another pocket you know like right beyond there which is where my dad lived. So there was like this strip of land in between that, where there were largely white families but there were clusters of black neighborhoods. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're saying that they had to kind of learn where the other pockets were and network between them? Speaker 2: Well you knew where the pockets were. I mean you knew where you would go. You knew where you could go and you knew where you couldn't go. And the amazing thing to me was that the transit system in a way was organized to facilitate blacks getting to white areas where they might work as maids or whatever but not necessarily moving within those--across those black areas cause sometimes you'd have to go all the way Downtown and change buses to go to another black area. Story_ID: 56520 Speaker 1: Okay. So that--okay. Now that's interesting to think about, yeah. Okay, so I was asking you how your parents [Lilly and Ben Lee Mahaley] met and so they met--is there a story about--? Speaker 2: I think they met through mutual friends. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have this one woman who's kind of had a presence in our lives and my, and she was a friend of my mother's but she was also a friend of my dad's independently. And I think that she may have facilitated the, you know the introduction. She recently died as well, Audrey Ward Washington. And I, and she taught you know with my mother and went to church with my father. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So she's the link. And are--do they talk about how they felt about each other when they met or how they you know, what--? Speaker 2: Not that much. They do talk about you know Ms. Audrey as we called her but they--actually if you stop and think about it, my mother, it would have been, she would have been older when she married. I mean I married late in my twenties but for her to marry in her mid-twenties was, that was older in that, at that time. You know in 1940, people married when they were quite young, not when they were twenty-five or twenty-six. And so she was as I indicated, she was older. Speaker 1: Okay. So when your parents met, they were right out of high school or they were--? Speaker 2: They were, my mother had finished college, had finished at Tuskegee [University], the two years of normal school. She had been teaching and so they met around that time, but they were both in the workforce. Speaker 1: Okay, so he had graduated? Speaker 2: Yeah. Even though I think that they went to, they may have been in the same high school at the same time, I don't know that they were, that they knew each other at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So now they were married when the war started right? Speaker 2: They were married in, before the war [World War II] in 1940. And my mother became pregnant in '42 [1942]. My sister was born in November of '42 [1942]. But my dad was drafted in, he was still in the states when my sister was born but they didn't let him come back home at the time of her birth. So he didn't see my sister until she was three years old. And there are lots of those stories you know around the war time. Speaker 1: So he never left--did he ever leave the states before the war? Speaker 2: I beg your pardon? Speaker 1: Did he ever leave the United States for the war? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was ready to be shipped out but he was still in the states at the time of her birth. He saw action in the pacific theater, he was in the army and he was in New Guinea and Australia and you know those, that particular part of the war. Story_ID: 56521 Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you think about your parents'[Lilly and Ben Lee Mahaley] personalities and their talents and their looks and their mannerisms and dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Oh that's really hard because I have, I really have aspects of both of my parents. Remember I indicated that my mother you know very early on kind of assumed responsibility for like the business of the family? Well that was my role, I mean even as a very young kid my mother at one time had to have surgery and I think I might have been ten years old and I was the one who went to buy groceries. I mean you know this is, this sounds weird but the idea of sending your ten year old to do the family shopping. But it was--she took me to the bank with her when she went, it was very early on. So you know you're training people to take care of the business of the family. The--my father was a more kind of a don't worry be happy, jovial type of person and had a, and had this kind of joie de vivre, you know this joy of life you know I'm happy to be here kind of a thing. And I think that I get more of that, than my mother's more brood, in a way brooding. I don't know that brooding is the right word but she was more serious and took things a lot more seriously and all and he was a lot more kind of upbeat person. And so I think that I'm upbeat like my dad to a certain extent, but organized and focused on you know work, business, etc., more like my mom. I think I probably look a little bit more like my dad than I do like my mother. My sister looked a lot like my mom and so that was you know that was kind of the difference between us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was the really studious one. I mean in that regard I guess I was much more like my mother because my mother was a very, very focused person. When she decided for example that she needed to go back to school to complete those two years so that she could teach because the rules changed in the interim while she was out, you know. During that time people didn't want you to teach as a pregnant married woman you know and so you had to leave the profession and so she returned to work as a substitute but just couldn't get a regular job without completing those two years so she completed those two years at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama]. And I remember that she would be studying for her health class or whatever and she would be studying things like the circulation of blood and all. And I would hold her book for her and she would be, you know she would tell me about if--she'd ask me to check and make sure that she was getting it right and things like this. So we would work and study together at the dining room table and I very much remember this and it gives you this kind of sense of studiousness and the need to really bear down in terms of working hard in order to learn. Story_ID: 56522 Speaker 1: All right, yeah tell that story again. You were telling the story about how your father [Ben Lee Mahaley] had asked you to--? Speaker 2: Yeah. We had in the kitchen which was the center of life in the house, we had an old L&M calendar on the wall and it had the months January through May running down this side and then at the bottom it had June and July and then it had August through December on the other side. And my dad would do these kind of games, all of the Thursdays on that side of the calendar and you're running these numbers in your head and you're trying to you know to do all of this mental math. And I mean it was kind of like a game after a while. I was a lousy speller until I was in the seventh grade and was challenged by a teacher who said you know why are you satisfied with being good in this and being lousy in this and really challenged me to work harder to improve the skills in the things that I wasn't as good at. Speaker 1: Okay. So well, so your family then--did you continue to stay with your grandmother after your father came back from the war [World War II]? Speaker 2: Yes, they did because by that time she was older and the idea of being in that house by yourself was just, was not really you know very tempting. And so I lived in the house where, with my--we all lived in the house with my grandmother until my--until some while later after my dad had a heart attack that left, led him to go onto disability. And then they bought a house that, a home that was separate because the upkeep, doing, keeping up with that and taking care of my grandmother, my mother couldn't take care of her mother and her husband at the same time. And so it was quite clear that other members of the family really needed to step up so that my mother would have the opportunity to really focus on taking care of my dad. Speaker 1: Okay. So, but--so at what age was it when your father had the heart attack? I mean what age were you? Were you--? Speaker 2: My dad--oh I was as they say grown and gone. Speaker 1: Oh okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So growing up the household was-- Speaker 2: But growing up, my grandmother was in the house. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So the household consisted of your grandmother, your mother and father, you-- Speaker 2: My sister. Speaker 1: --and your sister? Speaker 2: Me and my sister, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So that's the household. And what neighborhood did you live in? Speaker 2: Collegeville [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Collegeville. Speaker 2: That was not the really great section of town. And I think that people kind of looked down on Collegeville, the notion that well when blacks became better off they moved to Honey, what is the--Honeysuckle Hill [Alabama] or I guess they would call it Dynamite Hill which was the other unfortunate name or, or some other area. We remained in Collegeville during the entire time that I grew up in spite of the fact that we were that the family was able you know to move to what looked more like a middle class kind of a situation. Speaker 1: Is there a, is there some reason that the section was called Collegeville? Was it near a college? Speaker 2: I asked my grandmother that and she said that at some point there was a little college there and I had not you know I had not known that or it must have been a long time ago. But she was--but otherwise I, you know I just didn't know. Story_ID: 56523 Speaker 1: And the interesting thing was that during this time there was a great oppress with regard to integration and so the--they built a school in Collegeville, a high school in Collegeville to kind of put down the challenge of blacks who insisted that they needed to go to Phillips High School which was the white high school. Because prior to that time they had to go past Phillips High School to go to Parker High School or the old Industrial which was one that was still being used and it kind of didn't make sense but in the segregated south it made sense to them. And so they built a high school close down the road and so that's where I went to school. My sister went to Parker but by the time I went to school they had built this high school-- Speaker 2: And that's Booker T. Washington? Speaker 1: No, this is George Washington Carver [High School]. Speaker 2: George Washington Carver. Speaker 1: The high school. And they only had the ninth grade, ninth junior, ninth senior and tenth junior because at that time you know you could go to school, you didn't just start in September you could also start in January. And so they had junior and senior because they had graduation twice a year. So the way that I went to school was I started in the ninth junior and by the time I got ready to go into the tenth grade they had built the rest of the school. And so I was able to go to, to stay in the same high school my entire time and go to George Washington Carver. And the interesting-- Speaker 2: So this would be what about 1950--? Speaker 1: This was, I started high school in 1959. Now the reason that I say that this makes a difference is that there were no traditions at this school, at this new school. They didn't have any school colors, they had no mascot, they had no nothing. They had no football team that could win anything because these were ninth and tenth graders, these were not the juniors and seniors that you would have that tend to dominate something like this. The basketball team was short cause the guys hadn't had their growth spurts kind of thing. But all--so if you're, if you don't, if you can't get into sports right, what do you do? You focus on something else. You focus on academics. You focus on your choir, your band or whatever it is and I think that because we were a new school without traditions we weren't bound by the old rules and there was a big focus on academics. Speaker 2: Okay. Now I don't want to get too far into high school right now. We're going to take you back to preschool you know. Speaker 1: Oh preschool was fun. Story_ID: 56524 Speaker 1: So--but before that, before I ask you about that, can you describe what your neighborhood looked like? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The neighborhood were--was largely single family homes. There were a few double tenants down the block. The amazing thing is that you could walk to the store or to wherever and you'd have to speak to people thirty times between your house and the store and everybody knew who you were. And so the whole question about even thought there were concerns and always people were worried about safety during the time largely from the, from whites who might come into the neighborhood. You didn't have those concerns moving around as children because everybody knew you and you were kind of handed off from one house to the other as you would go down the street. You'd go to play--you had a lot of freedom. You had a lot of ability to move around. It was a big ditch on the corner across from the house where somebody had been planning to build something and didn't--and the money fell through. And so we would go and play in that ditch and we would run and it's like they were building a basement. And so you did a lot of climbing and running and you played a lot of hopscotch, you, you know, it--you played ball in that field. I mean it was just a place where the kids in the neighborhood gathered. And I remember being able to you know move around. My sister talked about it, about the, well I guess the, in a way the kind of the cage of the hedges. We had hedges all the way around our house and we tended to play in the yard a lot except when there might be other kids that were out there in the--on the ditch. And then we would go and play on the ditch with the other kids. But I remember spending a lot of time outside. My grandmother grew flower, had flower boxes on the porch, she had a flower garden over in the side and she and my mother [Lilly Mahaley] would plant the--start of summer you knew that they'd basically go and they'd get the petunias and they'd get the flowers and things like this and they'd put them in. And I remember the smells of those flowers and the roses and things like this and the verbena you know down the side. My--we had fig trees and the figs were, I didn't realize figs were such a delicacy. They were no big deal. We'd just go pull them off the bushes there and then take them in the house and wash them and eat them. And my grandmother would make fig preserves and all. When I was very young we had a garden off to the side and they, and we had chickens. And you'd go get the eggs out of the coop and what have you, but after that they passed certain regulations. They didn't want as many animals in the, you know in the city. And my grandmother was getting older so the idea of gardening with a big plot you know of corn and stuff like this, that kind of went by the by and so that got turned into lawn. And I remember this, you know the smell of cut grass and you know things like this from my childhood. Speaker 1: Any particular sounds? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: Any particular sounds? Speaker 2: Well I mean obviously the chickens when I was growing up but after the chickens left just the sounds of the ever present trains. You know one of the things about our neighborhoods was that there were train tracks that basically between us and anyplace else. And you could get caught by trains and sit there for hour-- for an hour. I mean it was like nobody paid any attention to the fact that you night have to go somewhere. And so there were these, the sounds of the trains. It's funny that later on when my dad would visit us, he said he couldn't sleep because it was too quiet and he kind of was wondering, where were the train sounds? Story_ID: 56525 Speaker 1: Okay. Well now what was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: What was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: My first school? Well I don't--let's talk about kindergarten. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because one of the things that I will tell you is that we--my mother [Lilly Mahaley] somehow managed to find and find the money to pay for kindergarten for us cause it--kindergarten was nothing that was offered by the public system. There was a private kindergarten behind the Sipco pipe shop and a man would come and pick a whole bunch of us kids up and we would go to the kindergarten and the teacher was wonderful. And we started learning we learned to read when we were very, very young because we were ready. And we played and we put on plays and we did all kinds of really wonderful things that people would really be quite surprised about. So that was kind of my, that was my first school experience and I just loved it. I just thought this was the most wonderful thing in the world, but that meant that I knew kids who didn't just live on my block or in my particular area. I knew them from further away because they were, had been picked up in the car and we had all been taken to kindergarten. And that becomes important because later on when I was in Hudson School which is where I started school, I knew, already knew those kids even though they lived up by the school because some, in some cases they had been in the same car that had picked us up to take us to kindergarten. When I started school at Hudson I started in the second grade rather than the first. Speaker 1: Is that H-U-D-S-O-N? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: That's H-U-D-S-O-N? Speaker 2: H-U-D-S-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I started in the second grade rather than the first because I already knew all of the first grade material and a lot of the second grade material. So I was the, you know the younger and--kid in all of my classes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I've read that you were really a good student. Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: I've read that you were really a good student. Speaker 2: Yes. I was a good student. I was a veracious reader. I really enjoyed learning. I went ahead of whatever was going on in the class at the time. I, to me it was just, I was a sponge. I decided at some point that I was going to read all of the encyclopedias and I went about that task, I mean basically starting at A and working my way down. My granddad had collected a bunch of--had a bunch of books and after he died, we--the books came to our house and they were like mythology, Greek and Roman mythology and I read those books. And I know that I was very strange. I mean I was a nerd. I mean I was as pure nerd and--but to me this was just wonderful. Speaker 1: Okay. So you read all the encyclopedias. This is--so you started Hudson in 1952, is that right? Did I calculate that right? Speaker 2: That's right, yes I did. I started Hudson in 1952. Speaker 1: 1952. Story_ID: 56526 Speaker 1: And I left Hudson in 1956 I think it was and--I think that's right. Because--and when I was in the sixth grade and I went to-- Speaker 2: There was a, at a new school. Speaker 1: --school, went to Lewis [Elementary] School. Speaker 2: Lewis? Speaker 1: Lewis. Speaker 2: How do you spell that one? Speaker 1: L-E-W-I-S. Speaker 2: L-E-W-I-S. Speaker 1: My mother [Lilly Mahaley] was teaching at Lewis School. I had and I had walked to Hudson on a regular basis and I had gotten you know in the process of walking back and forth to school I always was getting sick and I had pneumonia a couple of times and things like this. And so the idea was well if I could ride to school with her down at Lewis that maybe she could forestall some of this you know some of this stuff and so I was able to transfer to Lewis, got permission to transfer to Lewis. Speaker 2: That's in another neighborhood or--? Speaker 1: That's in another neighborhood, right. But again, when I went to high school I saw a lot of the kids from that neighborhood that I was in high school with so I knew kind of kids from a lot of different neighborhoods because I had been to you know kind of these adjacent pockets. But Lewis School was very different. For example they had a separate science teacher and a separate geography teacher and things like this so that we were able--and a separate music teacher and a separate Home Ec teacher and all and so I was able to be taught by people who were more specialists in their particular areas. I really enjoyed Lewis and that's where I was, where I became really challenged academically. And when I had my science teacher at Lewis School, Mr. Smoot, I'll never forget him. You know and all of this was during the time when Sputnik [1957] when up and so it's like all of a sudden everybody was paying attention to science. And there was--and we would build these you know these rockets and things like this and we were--would get really interested in the stuff and we were putting sweet potatoes in jars and growing them and you know and all these kinds of things that I hadn't done when I was at Hudson. Story_ID: 56527 Speaker 1: Okay, now let's put this in perspective. People are going to be watching this like hundreds of years from now so what was Sputnik [the first artificial Earth satellite launched by the Soviet Union in 1957] and why was that important? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: I said people are going to be watching this a long time from now so please-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --tell us like what Sputnik was and why that was important. Speaker 2: Well when the Soviet Union which was really I guess the political and military rival of the United States launched Sputnik and was able to get a satellite into orbit, it really changed things in the United States. There were--there was real concern because if the Soviets could conquer space and we weren't even up there, we couldn't get anything up into space, they would have, the idea was that they would have some kind of an advantage. Now they had actually undertaken this work in support of international geophysical year so that they could be able to gain insights into the science, the earth sciences. But we were having all kinds of problems with our rockets and they would blow up on the launch pad and things like this. So when Sputnik went up the--all of a sudden we knew we had issues. We had to worry about science and mathematics education. People were worried about whether or not we had the know-how and the people to make all the things happen that we needed to have happen. It's amazing to me given the fact that we can't get anything through congress now that in the space of a year they were able to pass major legislation that set all kinds of things in place, the National Defense Education Act, all of these kinds of huge sums of money that were being invested to try to begin to get at the this particular challenge of--that the space race actually kicked off. So I, and a lot of the people of my age who are in science, we are post-Sputnik scientists. We are the generation who went into science because it was a national imperative, because it was a national security, because it was something that we had to, we needed to do for our country, because there were opportunities that were available and resources. And our teachers had opportunities for training that they hadn't had before. So there were lots of this churn that was going on that brought science and engineering into the spotlight and so that period of time led I think to a lot of us being able to move into science. Story_ID: 56528 Speaker 1: Okay. So Mr. Smoot was able to stir the imagination of the students around science? Speaker 2: Yes, Mr. Smoot was able to spur the imagination of the students and get us all fired up. And we were reading in the newspaper you know on a regular basis about the efforts to try to get a--get something into space and about Sputnik and about all these other kinds of things. You know it was above the fold in the newspaper. And so the--your--what was going on in your class and what was going on in the world were really connected. And so I think that a lot of us got very interested in it. My mathematics was taught by a different teacher and one of the ones that I really think most about is Ms. Goddard. Ms. Goddard was very typically what you would think about as the kind of stereotype teacher, someone who had gone into teaching, never married, devoted herself to her students, was just religious in the sense of kind of pushing and prodding us and things like this. And at one point she had thirty-eight kids in the class okay and she brought some of us who were able to move ahead, she brought us and she said look, I cannot teach all of you at the level that you need so what I'm going to do is I'm going to move all of you to the back of the class. And what you do is you work together, you work as fast as you can, you--don't stop for what's going on in the front of the class. I need to work with this group of students, but you work together and just--if you can finish the math book, all well and good, and that's what we did. So we were working way ahead of the, of a class. We were doing algebra at a time when the rest of the class was still working on very fundamental kind of things, but it was because she gave us responsibility for our own learning. And I think that that idea at that, that early in your schooling is really a powerful idea. The idea of working together as teams, she let us whisper to each other and things like this. And somehow she managed to grade all the papers. I never could figure out how she had multiple lessons going on all the time and she was able to grade everything. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting. So, that your group you know stayed on task and went on and finished the book. Speaker 2: Oh you didn't go off task with Ms. Goddard. She was very, you know she kept rigid discipline you know. But you think about the fact that even within this rigid disciplined environment, she also gave a tremendous amount of freedom so that's really quite amazing. Story_ID: 56529 Speaker 1: Okay. And you know your parents facilitated your studies and your proclivity to do that? Speaker 2: You know my parents were supportive of it. After a while you run out in front of them in a sense of your--their ability to help you. Fortunately when I got to high school my cousin was head of the math department there. So when I got in trouble in terms of like geometry or something like this, I had another source to turn to. But I was a very independent learner and I just puzzled it out. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what else did your family do? I mean was there a television when you were growing up at home? Speaker 2: Well there was a television when we grew up but not until we were maybe, until I was maybe eight or nine. I mean it wasn't a television from the beginning. And, or maybe, yeah eight or nine. And we used to sit around the radio. I mean it's hard for people to imagine but there were like dramas on the radio and soap operas on the radio and things like this and my grandmother would listen to them and I would sit there with her and listen to 'Stella Dallas' and all these kinds of things. But there was a lot of time that was actually spent in food preparation. I tell people this because every--nothing was, came prepackaged. I mean peas had to be shelled, greens had to be washed in--you know you couldn't just go buy things that were already ready. And so you would be shelling peas at the same time that you would be listening to the radio or you would be ironing at the same time that you would be listening to the radio or what have you. And so there were--those are the kinds of things I remember. I remember a lot of discussions in the kitchen. As I said the kitchen was the center place. Later on there was a lot of watching of baseball, big--every, you know I thought about the amount of time that we would spend you know watching baseball and it was really quite amazing but the Dodgers were playing. And there were all these famous people who were you know now icons who were playing at the time and they were active and Roy ["Campy"] Campanella-- Speaker 1: Was that-- Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: Was that sparked by your father [Ben Lee Mahaley] primarily? Speaker 2: No, not necessarily by my dad but kind of like everybody was into it. And I, and well I watched football from a very early age. It's really funny. People--when I, we watch football now and we go into those settings and people think that my husband instigate it. And people don't realize that I'm the one who got my husband into football, you know it's kind, that kind of bass-ackwards way of thinking you know about things. Story_ID: 56530 Speaker 1: But there would be a lot of--the cousins would come in. My aunt would come from down the street. Everybody would assemble in the kitchen but there was also a lot of talk of politics and--because you could not escape it. My grandmother decided that she was going to go and try and register to vote which is--which was really an act of courage at the time and place that this would happen. Speaker 2: So then black people could not-- Speaker 1: They couldn't vote. Speaker 2: --weren't allowed to vote in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: They weren't allowed to vote. And they, and when they went to try they basically had to pass literacy tests and pay poll tax. And my grandmother was--decided she was, wanted to try to pass the literacy test. And they, the--at the church and all they would hand out these, this material for you to study and so again I became the person holding the sheet when my grandmother--I'd ask the questions and she'd give me the answers. And I think back on that and I think back on the amount of time she spent studying so that she could pass this. You know she was like almost seventy years old when she voted for the first time and when she was able to pass her literacy test. Story_ID: 56531 Speaker 1: Now, okay so I want to ask you about the Civil Rights Movement [1955-1968] and what was going on here. Your, I think you told me off camera that your grandmother was a member of and I suppose your whole family was a member of Bethel Baptist [Church]. Speaker 2: No, my mother and my grandmother were, went to Bethel and my dad went to St. Luke AME [African Methodist Episcopal, Church]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Different neighborhoods, remember. Speaker 1: All right, so Bethel Baptist, tell us about Bethel Baptist and what-- Speaker 2: Bethel was really the, became the center of the movement. That's the way they called it, referred to it as the movement in Birmingham [Alabama]. Reverend Shuttlesworth was the pastor there and the movement meetings took place in Bethel and the idea that Bethel kind of became the hub and he became a symbol of, for Birmingham of resistance and a movement, move to attain some civil rights. Speaker 1: I just wanted to point out that this is before Dr. King [Martin Luther King, Jr.] right, really became a key factor. Speaker 2: This was before Dr. King ever came to Birmingham. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You gain ground one step at a time in a situation like this. There were efforts to try to get people to go and vote. I mean that was a central idea. I mean you had this guy Bull Connor who had everybody kind of under his boot heel and the notion is how are you going to ever get him out? You've got to be, you've got to gain some political wherewithal in order to be able to get him out. Speaker 1: Now he was the police chief? Speaker 2: He was--no, he was the commissioner of public safety okay? So he was in charge of not only the police but also the fire department. And it was a commissioner form of government and so there was this thought that we could move, try to move I mean later on this thought of moving from a commission form of government to a mayor council form of government and that that would be a way of defanging him because it was doubtful that he would be able to stand for and be elected as mayor as the black community gathered more clout and as the white community became aware of the fact that Bull Connor was actually bad for business. The 1956 bombing as I indicated changed everything. The Christmas night bombing, all of a sudden people saw a side of this that didn't--that looked anything but benign and I think that it really did spur people okay to get to vote and try to do things like this. So I remember holding the paper for my grandmother and as she would go through all of this stuff that she had to memorize in order to be able to register to vote and the legal size sheet of paper asked about things that I would bet you today you could not answer. Not only you know like who is the president and vice president and things like this, but all the names of the supreme court justices, all the names of the cabinet members, all of the, you know all of this stuff that went on and on and on about the federal, state and local parts of government. And, but she learned it, I learned at the same time. I mean I was holding the sheet. But she learned all of this and she went down and took her test and she passed and she never failed to vote for the rest of her life. And I think that that makes a real impression on you and I think that people take the vote--they're cavalier about the vote. In my lifetime people have died for the vote and so it's something that means a lot and being able to understand how the political process actually can help to change life circumstances is really very important to me and central to the way that I think about the world. Story_ID: 56532 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us about the bombing in 1956. Now this was Fred Shuttlesworth's home that was bombed. Speaker 2: No, this was the parsonage. This was the church's home house that he, that they had for the pastor. Speaker 1: He lived there but it was owned by the church? Speaker 2: He lived there with his family. Speaker 1: It was owned by the church, right. Speaker 2: And very late on Christmas night the whole neighborhood was wake, awakened by a bomb blast, just shook the house. And my--remember my mother [Lilly Mahaley] screaming out oh my goodness, I beet they bombed the church. So then there was a scramble that my parents had to get into their clothes and then go down to the church to see what had happened. Phones started ringing because my aunt lived up the street and then she had had crystals from her chandelier that had fallen and things like this. And there were people whose houses had had windows blown out because of the blast, you know the blast had, it didn't just stay. I mean basically it reverberated through, the sound reverberated. And so my aunt got dressed and so they went up towards my aunt's and they all went to the church. And they--there is a picture of the whole porch collapsed in on the house and Reverend [Fred] Shuttlesworth and his wife slept in the front bedroom and people just knew he had to be dead because the house collapsed on them. And they're, and you think about this. I mean I had gone to school with the kids and I played with the kids and knew the kids and this real sense of well what's going on and you know was anybody killed and things like this. Speaker 1: And you yourself went over there right? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: You went there yourself at age ten to the house right? Speaker 2: I went there to the house at age ten-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --myself on numerous occasions, lots of occasions. Speaker 1: No, on the night of the bombing? Speaker 2: On the night of the bombing-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I wouldn't--I was not there but the next morning I was there. Speaker 1: Oh okay, all right. I'm just trying to get-- Speaker 2: Okay, the next morning. Speaker 1: --you to (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. No, no, no. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: The next morning I went with my grandmother to see what was, what had happened and that's when you know this moment in history as I said was captured with my grandmother hugging Reverend Shuttlesworth. And I first saw that footage in 'Four Little Girls' by Spike Lee and it's, it was encapsulated in that. But it changed things. It changed the set--you became this sense of being unsafe. Remember I talked about being able to walk down the street and you would be passed from house and house and you knew everybody. You became a little bit more hesitant about where you could go in and things like this. And so they put guards at the church to continue to watch over the church because it was quite clear that Reverend Shuttlesworth was being viewed as a threat. And so they eventually, they never rebuilt on that land. When they removed the house that had been bombed they didn't rebuild on that land. They rebuilt across the street where the church had property and there were guards who were, who would watch all the time. There were two other occasions you know with bombings at the church. One where there were kids who were practicing for a program who were in the church with adults and a bomb unexploded was found outside of the door into the basement. And then another time when I was sixteen, when another bomb was set and did go off. I was a senior in high school and I--I mean it was fairly early in the evening. I had been in the kitchen and something like this and making something, I think a snack of some kind. At first you know it was like this boo--I thought well my goodness did the stove blow up, you know. And you realized it got the church again. So there was this bomb-- Speaker 1: Was it Bethel [Baptist Church], in Bethel? Speaker 2: This was Bethel. Speaker 1: Yeah, Bethel. Speaker 2: And it was just like this bombing and the threat of bombing that really kind of removed any kind of sense of security that you might have. You know when I left and I hoped--I hate to get out of sequence but when I left Birmingham [Alabama] to go to college I went to the University of Washington in Seattle [Washington]. I had family there. I was still very young. I was sixteen years old and I, you know I had family there and the notion that I wouldn't be by myself. But kind of like get out of the south in order to be able to concentrate on your schooling, you know things like this. And it was Sept--and, so I was at my aunt and uncles. I hadn't moved over to the dorms yet at the University of Washington. And I heard about the bombing at--of the bombing of the church in September of '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: The Sixteenth Street Baptist [Church] (Unclear). Speaker 2: Sixteenth Street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At first they didn't say which church and then it's like my heart was just racing because I thought that they had bombed Bethel again. And when they said it was Sixteenth Street you felt first relief and then shame. Relief that it wasn't your mother who was, might have been in there and then shame that it was somebody you know that you, that you shouldn't feel guilty about--I mean you feel guilty that you were relieved that it wasn't there. And then in the irony of all ironies, two of the girls who were killed were like connected to the family in very close ways, one, the daughter of a family fried and the other, the daughter of my mother's principal. My aunt was his secretary, Reverend--Mr. Wesley, you know. His daughter was killed in that, their adopted daughter. And so you would never you know like it was only kind of one degree of separation from any of this tragedy that actually hit. So it was a tough time. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something. So you--so from grade school through high school the threat of these bombings was in--was going on. Speaker 2: It was--there were bombings, there were cases of people being kidnapped on the side of the road. I remember one cases, this was--this might have been still grade school of your, of my parents and my aunt and uncle and other relatives talking about a man being picked up by the [Ku Klux] Klan, taken into the woods, castrated and having salt poured in his wounds. And well castrated was not a word that was, that I was familiar with and so I went to the dictionary, curious person that I am and I could not understand how the definition that I found there could relate to a human being you know because that was not the, the definitions that were there. They were there talking about horses or about cattle or things like this, not about people. And so it was a very difficult kind of a time and there were boycotts of stores and things like this. You thought you'd get something new at Easter. You--a boycott was called. You would not get something new, but that was okay because you were helped to understand what this was all about. And so it was an interesting time. Story_ID: 56533 Speaker 1: What was your impression growing up of Reverend [Fred] Shuttlesworth as a pastor? Speaker 2: That he--please, I hope that the people will forgive me but that he was a little crazy, in the sense that he was like fearless. I mean he knew what the, what--that he was, that he could be killed and it's like, okay. I mean that takes a certain kind of a person. I think that a lot of the older people in church worried that he was going to get himself killed and in that regard wishes that he would kind of tone, dial it back as you say. But I think that he only knew one direction and it was forward and it was straight ahead. I think that in a lot of cases it was kind of like, it was kind of brute force, gutting it out, not necessarily perceiving that we have to be strategic or tactical in terms of thinking our way through where we were going to go but you know just full speed ahead. Speaker 1: Right. He described to us you know what happened that night. He said he and his deacon were in the bedroom, his wife was in another--was staying with her mother that night. And he described the blast and you know being blown down to the basement but unarmed, the blast. He went to a rally the next day, just amazing. Speaker 2: I mean you look at those pictures, I mean that's--those are next day pictures so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was an interesting person yeah. Story_ID: 56534 Speaker 1: So, in--with this as a back drop you're going to school and you're excelling in school and-- Speaker 2: Well you're going to school, you're studying, you're trying to figure out who you are and what you're going to be and do and things like this and the world is just going crazy around you. I mean it's like do you get caught up in that, do you get focused, stay focused on the other? I mean it's really a very interesting and difficult time. And this all kind of came to a head in high school because the year I graduated from high school was the year of the children's march. Story_ID: 56535 Speaker 1: Right, now that's the year that Dr. King [Martin Luther King Jr.] came to--right. Speaker 2: Dr. King you know basically--by that time I mean there had been the Freedom Riders, there had been all these other kinds of things. But by--everything kind of came to a head in '63 [1963] and '63 [1963] was ground zero. Everybody focused and lasered in on Birmingham [Alabama] at the notion that if Birmingham falls, we can bring the rest of this craziness down. And it was, you know it's your senior year, you're--but no prom, no--you're living under martial law. Your classmates are in jail. Your--I mean it's just totally chaotic. Speaker 1: I think from what I've read anyway that Bull Connor's strategy was to arrest as many people as possible and put them in as many jails as he could find and people (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, but the thing is that the strategy of the people was fill the jails up. At some point you know he had people everywhere. He had them in the fairgrounds, kids who went to school with me, some of them said that there were so many people in the area that they had to take turns lying down to sleep. All of them could not lie down to sleep at the same time. So some of them would stand up or squat or what have you while they're--and the sanitary conditions and things like this that were just terrible. And it was only that you know that was, that really got, that captured the national attention, that plus the fact that you had pictures of kids being attacked by dogs and fire hoses turned on children and things like this, that people finally began to see that this was not some little disturbance going on but that there was something that was really fundamentally different about this in terms of the efforts of people to gain their civil rights. Speaker 1: Now were you--now from what I understand, you were there though, James Beville of Dr. King's staff is the one that organized the children-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the school children. Did-- Speaker 2: And he basically would go to the schools and tell them to just basically go out of there, come out and you know and participate in the march. I never did. I guess that you, you're torn on the one hand between wanting to do what your classmates are doing and on the other hand, knowing that your parents would be just really, really upset if you were jailed and you don't want to go in that particular direction. I sympathized with them, I supported what they did and what have you but I wasn't that impulsive. And so I guess I thought a lot more about issues of consequence and so I did not, I was not among those who were--was arrested. A lot of my classmates were expelled because they had been arrested and Dr. King went to federal court in Atlanta [Georgia] to have the ruling by the Board of Education set aside so that the kids could graduate so that a number of the people who otherwise would not have graduated with me were able to graduate with me. So it was a tough time. It was as really tough time. Story_ID: 56536 Speaker 1: I was valedictorian of my class. I had my eyes on leaving Birmingham [Alabama], going to Seattle [Washington] to the university. Speaker 2: Now how did that you know hook up take place? Speaker 1: Hmm? Speaker 2: How did that connection take place? Speaker 1: Well I'd--my uncle and aunt lived in Seattle. See when you're applying to school you're driven by a couple of things. One is, what do you want to do? At the time I was, I loved, I liked the science and math and I was good at it and so I thought well I, I'll go into pre-med. That was something everybody understood, that was something I understood that you could do with the science and math. I needed to go to a school where I could get a good grounding in order to be able to do that. That was a challenge because that meant I probably need to leave, needed to leave the south. You could not, at the time that I finished in 1963, I couldn't have gone to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], you know. So you had to go above the Mason-Dixon line you know somewhere in order to be able to do that. I had as I indicated, I was fairly young, I had relatives in Seattle, I had been to Seattle before. I loved it. It was an open city that was accepting of difference and diversity and things like this. And so I only applied to one school. I know I must have been out of my mind. But I got in and then prepared to move to Seattle. Speaker 2: Now was this before the, this is--I'm trying to think was it before or after the Seattle World's Fair? Speaker 1: This was after the fair. The fair was in '62 [1962] and my sister had moved out there. She had gone out to visit during the fair and had decided that she would just stay because she had already finished college and so she would get a job there. One of the other things that I might indicate is because I was a pre-med major, I not only had to think about getting a, getting that first four years but I had to figure out where I might be able to get into medical school. At the time there were quotas on women in medical school. I mean I was really carrying around a heavy load as they say and so the idea of where was I going to go? I needed to go someplace that had a medical school so that the people in the undergraduate side might be able to vouch for me so that I could get one of those coveted slots that they--for women that they-- Story_ID: 56537 Speaker 1: Now I just want to focus on this for a second too that you know most people watching this interview will probably understand that there was discrimination against black people at a certain--for a long time. But women could--there was a quota, you say on the number of women so-- Speaker 2: Yes there was a quota-- Speaker 1: --if you were a white woman you would still be in trouble. Speaker 2: It--I didn't care whether you were black, pink, orange or green if you were a female you--they were unlikely to go above 10 percent in their medical school class. The notion being, well women would get married and maybe quite the profession so why waste a slot on women and this--the thing that is so amazing to me is remembering how much people just kind of signed on to that. You'd look in the newspaper, help wanted ads, were help wanted male ads and help wanted female ads. And I, and this idea that somehow you had a set of things that you were expected to be able to do and a set of things that were basically reserved for others. And so it was not really until the laws were passed you know that guaranteed women that they ought to have a fair shake that women even applied, began to apply in numbers so that they could possibly accept it. Because you think about if somebody tells you only 10 percent of the slots are available to you, aren't you going to hesitate going in that direction? You know I mean this is I think the thing that people don't understand. They talk about the fact that somebody made a choice not to apply or things like this. If you know that you have such a small chance of ever getting this space, that isn't a choice. You're making a rational decision not even to put yourself into that position. And you think about the fact that I was looking at a quota system and today women are 50 percent of those who graduated from medical school. And so, the world has changed a lot but women have had to make major strides, major efforts in order to make that change happen. When I got my first teaching position and I'm sorry I'm moving up and way ahead, faculty position at the University of North Carolina in Wilmington [North Carolina], when I went to apply for a credit card at one of the banks, they said that I needed the signature of a male and family member. So I was supposed to go--here I was an independent woman and I was supposed to go and get my dad's [Ben Lee Mahaley] signature so that I could get a credit card? Now what's wrong with this picture? I'm making more money than he is and yet I'm supposed to go get his signature, you know. And I think that people have to understand that the--we had issues with regard to African Americans' rights and the need to--for civil rights for African Americans but we also had issues with regard to civil rights for women and the need to really move ahead and get the ability to go into fields without having quotas on our participation or lesser expectations on our participation to have credit in our whole name. There was a whole bunch of things that we really had to move on to be able to get to do as women. Speaker 1: Okay. I just wanted to make sure that people understood that point and we didn't pass by it too fast. Okay, thank you. Story_ID: 56538 Speaker 1: So University of Washington, now Seattle [Washington], the fair I mention the fair because it kind of gave Seattle the reputation of being a science forward kind of city right, for the science perspective. Even the name of the basketball team eventually the Supersonics you know and all that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah and I mean the thing is the city was-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: The city was dominated by the University on the one hand and Boeing [The Boeing Company] on the other. And so there was this notion that it was a science and technology kind of a place and now by Microsoft [Corporation]. I mean that whole region, you think about the kinds of things that that region stands for, innovation you know and what have you. And so in a way it was a lucky break that I would go to a place like that. The university was a very different kind of place. One of the things that you immediately know, in Birmingham [Alabama] I had had a life in a black neighborhood where there were few whites that you would see. The University of Washington I was dropped into a totally different environment where there were whites and different Asian populations and almost never saw other blacks. We had a dorm of 800 people where I lived. There were three black women in it and a Haitian male who did not identify. And so one of the other women, one of the women graduated after the first year, the other one didn't do well and left. So it was me you know and I--you think about life in the minority. You know I had gone from a place where the only other people who were around you were African American, at any time, your teachers, your students, the kids, the neighbors, etc., and then went to a place where the culture was total, were totally different. But the university, I gained a lot from the University of Washington. Number one, I stopped looking at the world as black and white because you were needing to look at different kinds of different--different kinds of forms of difference and that was very useful and instructive. But the--but there was a real challenge you know that hit on all of this was that the lack of preparation that, and--that I had had from being educated in an environment where we did not have access to all the things that we needed, I came face to face with that. I was suddenly in a class--I was prepared to work hard. Now you know I was, I had learned how to learn. I knew these kinds of things. I had--I was prepared to do what was necessary in order to stay up. But I go into a chemistry lab and I'm encountering equipment that I've never seen. What do you do with that you know? And I was flunking chemistry lab. I'm just going to be really honest with you, freshman year. And if I had failed then basically I would have gone down in flames and I would have had to seek a different major. I would have did--a lot of things would have been different. So what do you do? I went to my TA who happened the be the only African American graduate student in chemistry in the place and I said to him, I had to convince him that I was not dumb, that I was underprepared, that having to show certain kinds of skills with equipment was just a real problem. And so he helped me and helped me work through it and things like this. And on my first quiz, lab quiz, I got nine out of twenty. On my second one, I had gotten seven out of twenty. That's when I went to see him. On my third I got eighteen out of twenty. He was happier than I was because I had told him you know I have laid aside this, any pride that I might have had and said I'm struggling but I'm struggling for a reason that has nothing to do with the fact that I'm not willing to work on it. And so I was able to get over that. Some of the people said well why didn't you go to your professor? I said well at the time you think, I mean here's a kid coming from Birmingham and I'm supposed to go see the white professor. As far as my history had said to me, there's low expectation for whatever I can become. Don't invest in her, she can't make it. I would, I guess I expected that I would encounter that kind of a reaction there and the last thing I wanted to do was to be reinforcing the kind of stereotype about my capacity with the professor. Had it not been for Ken Maloney, I would never have made it. Story_ID: 56539 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So Dr. [Ken] Maloney is helping you, this like-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he helped me get through that and I think that part of it was his faith in me that in fact I really wasn't dumb. I could do this work. It's just that I needed more help. And it's hard, you know people don't understand what it's like when all of a sudden you're kind of dropped in like an alien from outer space and you're having to keep up and catch up at the same time and that's really, that's difficult and so you learn different kinds of coping skills. Speaker 1: Right. And it said something about the educational system too, the segregated system in the south and the distribution of resources where you never, could never see the kind of apparatus or the-- Speaker 2: And nobody really ever focused on that. I mean they would boldly tell you, I'm spending this on the education of a white kid and I'm spending this on the education of a black kid and those numbers were different. And I think that to a certain extent this idea of separate is inherently unequal, well separate was blatantly unequal. But it was also this notion that segregated schools, they--the resources we're going to put here. We're just not going to put the resources here, that holds everybody back. I think that that really wasn't--people weren't really getting that you know that in fact everybody was really being held back. I think that to a certain extent a large part of the Brown v. Board of Education [1954] decision and what have you and the notion of integrating schools and things like this were--was based on some belief that at least if you could get people in the same schools that they would have access to the same resources. Well we now know that's not true, that you have other ways of segregating even within schools where you have all the different groups together. You can, you put people in different tracks. You have other kinds of mechanisms of being able to separate. In Birmingham [Alabama] there was a real--their version of integration was well we will integrate the teaching core before we try to do anything about the schools. But the way that you do that is you take all the best black teachers and move them to the white schools and you bring in white teachers will less seniority, less familiarity what have you, maybe who are weaker and you put them into the black schools. So you went from a situation where most of the kids who were graduating and just so that you know, there was a loss, a big loss between our freshman year and our senior year. But the kids who were graduating, large numbers of them, and amazingly large numbers of them given the lack of resources were going on to college and they had high aspirations in terms of going on because they were being helped and pushed in that particular direction. And then you lose that momentum when you break apart these teaching core and counseling core and things like this in the name of integration. And so that didn't really help us in Birmingham. Story_ID: 56540 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, this is kind of out of context of the trajectory of the chronology but just in terms of your own opinion. Do you think that most people have the capacity to learn the STEM courses, you know science and technology and--really or should or are the--is the tracking system based more on social or on the actual capacity as human beings? Speaker 2: Well the track-- Speaker 1: What do you think? Speaker 2: You mean the, what is the kind of the origins or the basis of the tracking system, how are we tracked? Speaker 1: No, no. No, I'm just asking you if you think that human beings by and large cannot learn the sci--I mean some can learn the sciences and some cant? Speaker 2: No. I believe it's the opposite. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think that we are all scientists when we come here. I have some colleagues at--are co-authors of the book, "The Scientist and the Crib", the idea that the way that you learn about your environment as a baby as an infant coming up is very much the way that a scientist actually explores the world. So the idea that you would move from something that would be central to what it means to be human and get you to the point where you're really frightened or think of that or think that you can't do that, that to me says that you have to be programmed out of that. You know it's like you learn to not do this. You don't come on that as a natural way. The natural thing is to explore your environment in such a way that scientists explore their environment. Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I was trying to get at. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 56541 Speaker 1: Okay, so University of Seattle [sic, University of Washington] Now you started off-- Speaker 2: Pre-med. Speaker 1: --wanting to be a doctor. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. And-- Speaker 2: I started off as a pre-med major and I had this one advisor who told me that my grades weren't good enough. That I was going to have to be so much better as a woman in order to get one of these slots in medical school and that my--I was carrying like a 3 point, you know or a 3.1, 3.2 out of a--on a 4 point system. And but you know we didn't have anything such as pass/fail, we had to--we got a grade in every class we, that we took and so whether it was German or English or what have you, you know you're basically carrying a grade for this even if your stuff is more about the science side of the house. I ignored her because my feeling was that things other than grades, that admissions committees looked at things other than grades and that they looked at effort and they looked at recommendations and they looked at things like this. And I, once I found a disciplinary home within the Department of Zoology, I began to have people know me as a person and as a student and things like this. And I thought that you know that a lot of that could be overcome by people knowing who you were and what you were willing to do you know in terms of work and effort. My personal narrative basically said that I've had to overcome a lot to get to this point and that in spite of the fact that I'm coming in with a weaker background you look at the trajectory that somebody actually has in their grades and in their performance and things like this. So in my junior year, end of my junior year when the time came to apply to you know thinking about medical school I decided I don't want this. I mean I had been exposed to a number of the pre-meds in my major and I didn't like them. They seemed I don't know, they didn't seem as though they were after, they were in the classes for the right reason. I'm in the classes for the grades versus I'm in the classes for what I can learn. I mean I--that to me seemed that that was not me. I was there for what I could learn. And it was so blatant you know in terms of the kind of person after person after person, I decided I don't want to do this. And I went to my advisor and said I don't, I've decided I don't want to go to medical school. I had already taken the M-CATs [Medical College Admission Test], I mean I didn't know what my scores were. I never knew what my scores were. And my advisor at the time, cause I had moved over into the departmental honors program. My department, the advisor at the time, Alan Cohen said why not academic science? Why not graduate school? And it was such a moment for me because all of a sudden what he was doing was opening up a whole other world of possibilities. Maybe I could become like he was. I thought he was a terrific guy you know and really open and accepting. And so then I had to turn around and take the GREs [Graduate Record Exam] you know and start applying to graduate school. But it was a moment that I realized that I have other kinds of options and I decided to take that. Story_ID: 56542 Speaker 1: Okay. So when you were finishing up your degree in zoology-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --were you looking then to go to grad school for-- Speaker 2: I'm looking to go to grad school for zoology. Speaker 1: --for zoology as well. Now before I leave University of Washington, what was your social life like there? We know this is a time in life when young people socialize and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --join these organizations. Speaker 2: My social life was a little bit meager I mean because at that time it really wasn't that you didn't have a lot of kind of interracial interactions in terms of dating and things like this. And so since there were so few African American males there, dating was not what you did. But you went on group events and things like this that were there. You went to football games. See I'm still in this football thing. But then I started opening up and looking at other kinds of sports. I would go to crew, when they had crew races. I'd never heard of crew but I found it was the most beautiful you know thing these boats going down you know the canal that was there and gymnastics meets and things like this. I got involved in you know like campus service organizations and political things. I was selected for Mortar Board [national honor society recognizing college seniors for achievements in scholarship, leadership and service], I was elected as an officer. I was on Board of Control of the University of Washington which was unusual because a lot of the--you didn't see so many of the African American students on campus period and the ones that were there, you didn't see a lot of them you know really moving out to take on leadership roles. Largely though that was because the, a lot of the kids commuted and it's hard being a commuter and getting involved in a lot of this. But because I lived on campus I was able to kind of get into more of the spirit of the, you know of the dormitory life and things like this and get much more embedded in the, in campus life. So I had--my social life was kind of a group thing rather than a paired off thing and it was sports and service groups and political groups. I pledged a sorority at that time. It was not on campus, it was in the city. Speaker 1: Was this--? Speaker 2: Delta Sigma Theta. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: And the amazing thing was that that chapter you know small mixed chapter had both a founder of the sorority and a person who became a national president in the same chapter with me which is really quite amazing. You are, you're here with this very accomplished you know African American women and you, you're, you move back over to the campus and you don't see anybody, then you come back to sorority meeting and you see people. And then my aunt was always very involved and invested in the community and active and I would go to things with her. And there was an active arts community that was there. I went to some event and--with Jacob Lawrence [American painter known for his work on the Great Migration] was there and I mean it was a very rich kind of an environment though not in terms of what one thinks about typically you know with, that is associated with college life. I did have friends who were in fraternities and sororities on campus but those fraternities and sororities were all white and, but in some cases you know the friendships, I would go to events with them and things like this but nothing in terms of dating. Speaker 1: Okay. So I remember the football game, team was fairly good in those days I believe in the 60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, the football team was-- Speaker 1: University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was good. Speaker 1: Yeah. I can't remember the stars though from that-- Speaker 2: I can't either anymore. Speaker 1: And then--but these are the days when we were still referred to as Negroes and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, and we--there was no Black Student Organization as such was it or was there? Was there any Negro Student Organization (unclear)? Speaker 2: The Negro students were as I said in significant numbers commuting students from Seattle [Washington]. In the dormitory it was one here, two there, you know you just didn't have a, kind of a central core of students who were there. For many years I think I was the only African American female in my dorm. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you socialize in what they call the CD in Seattle? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: Did you socialize in the CD in Seattle, what they call the CD? Speaker 2: You mean the Central District? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: No, I actually, I didn't kind of go and hang in those places but remember, well remember now I was never of legal age while I was at the University of Washington. So going to a club was off the table. They had very strict rules about no drinking and you know for people under the age of twenty-one. I was younger than everyone and so a lot of the things that people would go, you know go to listen to music or things like this, I couldn't even get into those places. Story_ID: 56543 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, well graduation occurs what in 1967? Speaker 2: Seven, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I graduated in '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And went--I was going to go back to Birmingham [Alabama] for the summer and they, and the zoology department asked me if I would stay and be a TA because they, a lot of their students were doing graduate work up at Friday Harbor and so they were short TAs and I had been a TA as a senior. And so in order to do that I actually had to be admitted to graduate school. So I was admitted to graduate school at the University of Washington [Seattle] just for that summer. I mean I was admitted and I went that summer and I took one course and I TA'd the rest of the time. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so you go--you move on to UCLA [University of California in Los Angeles], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is 1967. Now things are heating up in Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 2: Oh yes. You know I don't know what it was. I just seemed to go from one hot spot to the other and things were heating up in Los Angeles. There was a--and things were heating up in the world you know. You were getting anti-war protests, you were getting the heat up between us and the Black Panthers. There was a shoot-out in a Black Student Association or whatever it was meeting. Speaker 1: Were you on campus when that took place, the shoot out? Speaker 2: I was on campus during that time but I was a graduate student and I was--and that was the other thing too and that is that graduate schools didn't hang that much with the undergraduates. And so I spent a lot of time in my department. I wasn't over into the political things of the under--that were dominating in the undergraduate here but it spilled over. It spilled over because I lived in a residence hall that was off campus which was the only one that I could get at the time that I moved which had both graduates and undergrads in it. So you'd hear about everything you know even if you were a graduate student you'd be hearing about and in some cases it would spill over into the, you know the dorm life of what had gone on. But thins were really heating up and it's like kind of everything went a little nuts. After the King [Martin Luther King Jr] assassination in spring of '68 [1968] and the--Los Angeles went wild kind of a thing, the dorm went wild. The black students who were in the dorm came into the dining room all dressed in dashikis and whatever us kind of Afro-centric garb and in a way spoiling for a fight because was angry you know. And for me, again this was one of those cases where I felt I was like an observer of this because I was older. I had been there, done this. We've had our issues in Birmingham [Alabama]. It wasn't like we didn't know, hadn't experienced this. These were in some cases younger people who had come from northern areas or what have you and really had never had to confront the issues in the way that we did in the south. And so to me I felt so old in a way and they felt so young to me-- Speaker 1: There wasn't that much difference in age though. Speaker 2: Yes, I mean there wasn't that--there wasn't a difference in age and yet because I had been through so much more getting to that point I just felt that some of the things that they did you know they act, that it felt like acting out. And I understood acting out and I understood the desire to do it especially since everybody was just raging and seething you know during that time. And then after the Kennedy assassination there in Los Angeles, it's like you start to wonder what in the world is going on? Speaker 1: Okay. So you're there for--until 19--well you get your degree in '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: I got my masters very quickly because I had went to stay with my sister in, she lived in El Cerrito [California] and I went to stay with her during the summer. Her husband was a football player and he'd gone to training camp and so she was there by herself and I went to stay with her and decided that I would go to school. You know I could not imagine being idle and so I went to Berkley [California] for the summer of '68 [1968]. And Berkley was under martial law. It's like okay everywhere I go we're under martial law, you know. It's--so I finished in December of '68 [1968] but I was in a Ph.D. program and so I remained there and I was serving as a TA and things like this. But it was becoming harder and harder to stay focused on the studies when the world was so crazy around us and so in that regard I just felt like I needed to step back and I took a leave of absence and taught, you know taught high school. Story_ID: 56544 Speaker 1: Well before we leave zoology, now what was the state of zoology in those days? I mean what was going on? I mean what were you actually learning about--? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: What were you learning about in college in terms of zoology? Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: And just kind of just talk-- Speaker 2: I was taking courses like natural history. I had never really spent a lot of time in the field. During my last year at the University of Washington I did spend time in the field and taking natural history of marine invertebrates but really never you know out in natural kinds of opportunities. And doing, looking at very naturalistic kinds of expressions and things like ecology which had been much more book based when I was at the University of Washington [Seattle] largely because I made the decision late to go to graduate school okay so I was making up in that regard. But the other thing was that I went in the other exact opposite direction at the same time and that was that all of a sudden this, the new biology was coming up, cellular molecular biology. And I had a whole other area of biology that I had to try to master during that time because it was brand new and to begin to try to understand some of that. And I knew that if I was ever going to be a faculty member I couldn't just in all likelihood just teach in the area that eventually became an area concentration which was more kind of like in the, on the ecology side of things but I was going to have to teach more broadly across the entire sweep of the field. And I, and so I had to dig in hard you know in things like molecular biology, cell biology, endocrinology, physiology, things like that so I was working on that side as well. Less engaged in actual research, couldn't find a research topic which really excited me. The things I was interested in weren't really available there at the school so I was going to have to either shift my area of interest which was behavior I had decided, shift from behavior into something else, or shift schools. Well when you're in that kind of period of uncertainty and the world is going nuts around you, you basically you step back and give yourself a time to really reflect on where you want to go and what you want to do. So that's me, that's where I was at that particular point in time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I was teaching high school. I had decided that you always have to kind of like have something in your back pocket just in case and so I was teaching high school. Speaker 1: Okay, now what high school did you teach at? Speaker 2: Marymount [High School]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's right there on Sunset [Boulevard], right off campus and I had a lot of young women who were there who were only taking science because they had to take it to graduate and to me that was such a waste. My idea was that these young women really needed to find the beauty in the science and that I was determined that I was going to help flip them in terms of the attitudes that they brought versus the attitudes that they left with. Story_ID: 56545 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But my personal life was going a little bit crazy at that time as well. I was there during the period of the huge earthquake [Sylmar Earthquake, 1971] that leveled the wing of the Veterans Hospital. I guess that was in '71 [1971], February of '71 [1971] which is really, I mean you want to talk about shaking you up, it really does. But what happened I guess a week or so after that shook me up more and that was that I kind of ended up in the middle of a murder investigation. My cousin who had lived in the area and his wife, his wife and I had become close friends and she had a little girl and then she became pregnant with a baby, with a boy and so we became close. But in any case, she was murdered by the other woman and that was incredibly traumatic especially given the fact that the other, the person who had murdered her remained at large for years and years and years. And so it was a very, it was a kind of a hurting part of your life. Here are two little, two small children who at least for a period of time between the time of the murder and the time that they went to live with their grandparents who are really partly quite dependent on you. The baby had just been weaned so I would go over and make formula and do everything and trying to hold things together. So you know our lives are a part of history. I mean you don't separate what's going on in your real life and in the world from what you're trying to construct. And all of those things really contribute to who you are but that was a tough time. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were in Los Angeles through--? Speaker 2: Through 1971, through, until summer of '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Okay, summer. Speaker 2: And then I moved back to Birmingham [Alabama]. It was just too difficult and painful. You know it's a lot that you have to get over when something like that happens. And then in '72 [1972], in January of '72 [1972] I mean in the fall of '72 [1972], in '71 [1971], I knew that I needed to get back on track. And so I inquired as to positions that might be open and I went back to the University of Washington in '72 [1972] to become head resident of a dorm. The--I had been a resident advisor when I had been there during my senior year and I became head resident of a dorm because someone who had held that position had needed to move on. Story_ID: 56546 Speaker 1: So you were at the University of Washington [Seattle]. Was that--that was for just a--? Speaker 2: That was in '72 [1972], in January of '72 [1972]. I used that as a time to focus on getting back on track and I decided that I would go back to graduate school and finish because I had left something unfinished. And so I was applying to graduate schools but back on the east coast so that I wasn't so far from home. And then, so in September of '72 [1972], I moved, I went to Birmingham [Alabama] first and then I moved from there to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University] where I had been accepted. I was initially accepted for a Doctor of Arts and teaching program. I knew I wanted to teach. I--you know and so I said well let me at least try to get myself prepared to do that. So I went to Penn State and went there really without a place to live. I stayed in the Nittany Lion Inn [Penn State's on-campus hotel] and figured I could scout out possible places better you know from being there than from at a distance. So I enrolled, I actually went to--we had to register you know in line because you didn't use, there was no computer registration at that time. You think about these things now and it's really bizarre. So I registered in line and I met my husband in the registration line because you registered alphabetically. And so both my married name and my maiden name begin with M-As. So the M-As were at 2:30 on a Friday afternoon and it ended up that he was in the dorm as well. So I went to--there was this one course that I had to take that I wanted to take, seminar in animal behavior but I needed instructor permission to take the course. So I went to the lab of the instructor to get permission to take the course and he saw my background and said why are you in a DAT program? You know you need to be in a Ph.D. program because you could finish very quickly because all you need is research. He says you've taken more courses in animal behavior than we even offer here and that you just need to just focus on a research topic and get out of here. And so I came into his lab, he became my mentor. He--I became a Ph.D. student rather than a DAT student, Ph.D. student in the ecology program at Penn State. He noted the strong ecology background that I was bringing both from the University of Washington you know as well as the work that I had done. He had, he knew a lot of the names of the people that I had worked with in these different places. And so I went into his lab in September of 1972 and defended my dissertation in September of 1974. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Two years. Story_ID: 56547 Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was your dissertation about? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: What was your dissertation about? Speaker 2: My dissertation was on factors that relate to the termination of imprinting in birds. I was looking at this from an ecological perspective. What kinds of things that we know and understand about the education--I mean about the maturation and development, social development of birds and the role that imprinting that kind of rapid learning actually plays and how does the environment actually affect the term--the things around the termination of imprinting, what kind of learning goes on at that time. And he was, and I had always been interested in imprinting, even when I was at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]. That was an area that I had a strong interest in. It so happened that that was an area he was doing research in. He was situated in an Ag department even though he was like associated with biology and an ecology program as well. But that meant that he had access to a lot of the birds and the chicks and other animals and things like this that I would need in order to really do this research. And so I just kind of fell into the right situation to do the research around the thing that I really was interested in doing the research around. So it was fortuitous. I think that he perceived that I was since at that time I was older, I was more, I was a serious student and he was a really important mentor to me and I gained a lot from him. He was only a few years older than I was but I think that it was important that he was--he had been born and raised in Mississippi so he had, as a white guy, he had an understanding of the personal history that I was bringing into his lab and in a way that others had not had. And so I think that that's the reason that we got along, that's the reason that we could relate, that's the reason that I was able to make very rapid progress. Because if I didn't do something, like I'd bring him a chapter or materials written up and it would be really bad, he didn't make the assumption that I didn't, that I couldn't do it. He said, you know he says when I read this, it's like three sentences that are missing between this sentence and that sentence, that your mind, your hand is behind, is lagging behind your brain. And the minute that he said that, I realized it was absolutely what was going on. I went back, I filled in those three sentences in every single case and was able very quickly to produce the kind of dissertation that he felt very proud of and as did I. And so it was like this guy had faith in my capacity and so that gave me faith in my capacity. So when I finished he said to me, he says you know if you choose to really focus on research you'll be really good at it. If you choose to focus on teaching you'll be really good at it. But whatever you choose to do, I'll be proud of you. So by giving me permission essentially to explore whatever came my way, he opened up a pathway for me to make different choices as I needed to in my life subsequent to that time. And I think that's--a lot of people don't have that, you know. They feel as that they are disappointing their mentors and advisors because they don't become clones of them. I never was made to feel that way. And so I could be, I could explore all these other alternatives and options and what can I say? Speaker 1: Now this is Dr. Graves right? Speaker 2: Yes, H.B. Graves. Speaker 1: H.B. Graves. Speaker 2: Great guy. Story_ID: 56548 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now was the football at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University] good when you were there? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: Was the football good there? Speaker 2: Oh football was great. And the thing is I mean this was a big, it was a big deal. I mean you know it was--Happy Valley was all about football. You know don't talk about basketball. When I was at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles], it was all about basketball. Don't talk about football. The football team was [makes sound] you know the only thing we wanted to do is make sure we be SC, but I was there, I was at UCLA during the days of Jabbar [Kareem Abdul-Jabbar (born Ferdinand Lewis Alcindor, Jr.), retired American professional basketball player]. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: You know I mean and some of these guys I mean that I knew at the time because they were around, I mean the Great John Smith you know whose the track coach I mean he was around during the time that I was there. So I wasn't totally oblivious to the sports that was going on. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you were at Penn State, that was--was that past the time of Franco Harris [Hall of Fame football running back] and--? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: Was that past the time of Franco Harris when you were there in '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: Franco was there I think right--Franco as I was, maybe as I was coming in. I can't really remember. Speaker 1: Yeah, Lydell Mitchell, Franco Harris (unclear). Speaker 2: But you know he's a good friend of mine now. Speaker 1: Is he? Okay. Speaker 2: Because we serve together on the Board of the Hines endowments. He's a terrific guy. So-- Speaker 1: Okay, I'm glad I asked that question then. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There is a carryover. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 56549 Speaker 1: Okay. So, got your Ph.D., this is 1972--of-- Speaker 2: '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay, got your Ph.D., now what do you do? Speaker 2: I was at the U--I was teaching at the University of North Carolina at Wilmington [North Carolina] and I was, I think I was the only African American tenure tracked faculty member in the sciences at the time. You know again, it's interesting I go to Wilmington. I don't, I didn't necessarily know about the civil rights history of Wilmington and I step into this place and realize that there is this history that's kind of sitting there. I'll never forget, I spoke at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] gala kind of a thing on Science, Technology and Black America. And I think that that was the first time I had been ever, I had ever been forced to really try to reflect on what it meant to the African American community, what it was going to mean to the African American community to really take hold of science and technology and what would likely happen if we did not. I mean the notion of the empowerment that comes with being able to address some of the central problems that the community was encountering, you know environmental justice. I mean we were living in the center of a major environmental justice issue in Birmingham [Alabama], you know the pollution, the level of illness that people had from working in the pipe shop and things like this and yet we were totally oblivious to the fact of this kind of slow death for a lot of people that was actually happening because of the jobs that we of necessity had to take. So it was a very, it was an interesting time for me but it just shows you kind of like the, not knowing the, kind of the social morays of the community. So I went there in business dress and it was black tie and no one bothered to tell me. But it was really funny because everybody kind of forgives you because you're a scientist and they expect you to be slightly strange or a little different at least. But I was also the coordinator for the environmental studies program and I taught intro-bio, I taught zoology, I taught a seminar in animal behavior. You know I taught you know lots of courses like that. But I got engaged very soon after I was there. And my husband was based here, I mean my then fiance was based here so I was going to have to move so I left after a very short period of time and moved to this area without a job and then trying to find a job at that point meant that I wasn't necessarily going to be able to go into another faculty position. And so that's really how I came to AAAS [American Association for the Advancement of Science] the first time in 1975. Speaker 1: Okay, '75 [1975], all right. Now what field was your husband in? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: What field was your husband in? Speaker 2: My husband had just completed a degree, a Masters degree in computer science. He brought a Masters degree in physics and so he found the job that was essentially perfect for him, found a place that was perfect for him at Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] applied physics lab and he's been there every since. And then--we discussed you know the whole thing of who moves and as far as I was concerned, if you're in the perfect place, you stay put and I can always find something else. You know the--my--I started to understand that a Ph.D. does not close doors, that it opens doors, that there were lots of things that I knew how to do besides being a faculty member. I had learned how to write, I had learned how to communicate, I had learned how to take complicated issues and formulate bite sized questions and try to analyze what possible explanations might be associated with them and how to really pose solutions and those are valuable ideas. And I think that when you come to understand that you know how to do a lot more than you think that you know how to do, that's a moment that you really are beginning to feel empowered. And so I came, I took a job that I probably would have paid someone to be able to do. I was a research assistant. I basically slipped, you know I had to go down in order to come up. But the project that I was working on was an effort to identify programs that had been undertaken to bring more minorities into the sciences and engineering. I had always thought well maybe you know I just chose the wrong school and that's why I was the only one or the one of a handful everywhere I went. And then I began to understand this was a much bigger problem that the scope of underrepresentation was huge and that the reasons that the things that explained them were multi-faceted and that to a certain extent the training that I has received as a system scientist made me, gave me a unique set of tools to think about these different problems. Because it was going to take an eco-systems approach to really understand how people can be so derailed in so many different ways along the pathways to science. And I began that work you know with the efforts here at AAAS [American Association for the Advancement of Science] and then went on to look at similar kinds of issues that relate to women and now, and really engaged in trying to understand how the system of education within these fields actually fails everyone. And some are more vulnerable to the weaknesses than others but that we're not doing a great job with anybody. And so I guess all of those things led to this point in time. Story_ID: 56550 Speaker 1: Okay. Now in '76 [1976] you wrote, you published 'The Double Bind'-- Speaker 2: The Double Bind. Speaker 1: --The Price of Being a Minority Woman in Science. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was, it was interesting how that happened. The person with home, for whom I worked said at that time, what's it like basically to have these two things hitting you at the same time? She had gone to a meeting of people who were writing projects that related to minorities in science. There had been no women there. Then she went to a meeting on women in science projects and there had been no minorities there. And I said to her, I said what it is like is that you're in no person's land because if you--for example you go into a living room and you have a lamp that's there and there's a switch on the lamp and there's a switch on the wall. The switch on the lamp can be on but the wall switch isn't. The wall switch can be on but if the lamp switch isn't on the lamp still won't light. Essentially the light, the wall switch has to work and the lamp has to be on in order for anything to happen. I mean it's similarly that you know this notion of following slavery when the amendment was put in place giving blacks the right to vote, black women couldn't vote. You know so women were arguing at the time that women should, white women should be allowed to vote before these illiterate black men who had been slaves. But until both of those things happened, we weren't going to get the vote. So it didn't matter who you told, who you tossed your hat in with, nothing was going to happen for you until both of those things happened. And that's really the major issue that we began to understand as women of color that early on we might be more affected by the issues of being members of minority groups in terms of our early education. But at some point we were also going to be hit by sexism and the realization that there were certain things that women were expected to do and not do. And that we, until both of those sets of conditions were addressed that we weren't really going to be able to progress. And not having being able to put those ideas, to articulate those ideas and begin to understand what might a pathway be for women of color, I mean that was the first time that that had actually been discussed as an issue. And trying to help people understand what that was like was a really hard thing to do and it was a hard thing to do in terms of putting it to words. One young woman who wrote me at the time kind of--after she found 'The Double Bind', she was looking for something that spoke to her to the situation that she felt at the time. And I was trying to help her sort through it and make suggestions about what she should do as she was trying to map out her life, is now the Dean of the College at Harvard [University], Evelyn Hammonds. She was at Spelman [College] when she wrote to me after that book. And it means a lot that she felt that for the first time that someone understood, someone was articulating her reality. And unfortunately while a lot of things have changed from that reality, a lot of things haven't changed from that reality. There's a recent piece that I did with my daughter for Harvard Educational Review that kind of brings it, this up to date at the thirty-fifth anniversary you know of 'The Double Bind.' And we entitled it, 'The Double Bind-The Next Generation,' you know looking at how now younger women are experiencing some of the same issues that their mothers did and how, what is likely--what we now understand is likely to be necessary in order to really address these things. Speaker 1: Now culturally, did you get more, I mean for those who were aware of what you wrote, did you get more pushback form the black community or the white community? Speaker 2: Did we get pushback? Speaker 1: No, from those who actually read what you wrote, did you get more pushback from the black community or the white community or did it make any difference? Speaker 2: Okay, that's a hard one. We got probably more pushback from black males. White females didn't like it either because in a way when you're kind of in the middle of a women's movement the idea that you're going to call out that our separate needs aren't being addressed. And largely our separate needs weren't being addressed, partly our separate needs weren't being addressed because there was this in some corners kind of a condemnation of what, of the behavior of all men. And what we were trying to say is, hey wait a minute. Our brothers have issues, have had issues trying to move ahead as well. So even though they aren't necessarily being the most supportive people right now by saying we, you know we're calling out things that we need to keep in the family--I mean you think about it. You think about the civil rights movement and you think about the fact that the women in many cases were organizing things and they got pushed to the side. You don't hear about the women who were critical in the civil rights movement. Speaker 1: Like Ella Baker [Ella Josephine Baker, African American civil rights and human rights activist]. Speaker 2: Yeah. You don't hear about Ella Baker. You don't hear about Diane-- Speaker 1: Nash [Diane Nash, student leader and strategist of the 1960s civil rights movement]. Speaker 2: You know, you don't hear about them. You may hear about Dorothy and I think that Dorothy Height [Dorothy Irene Height, administrator, educator, social activist: former head of National Council of Negro Women] who was a great supporter of our work because she understood this science/technology connection to really being able to take hold of one's future moving forward. I think that she, they gave her some props because she was senior to them all you know. And, but you know how that worked. It was, there was the expectation that you provided the coffee, you provided the support, you made the signs, you did whatever, but you were not out in front and that was a part of the reality. Did people like to be called on it? No. And I think that that's just the way it was. Story_ID: 56551 Speaker 1: Okay. So let me see. So you've been at, here at the AAAS [American Association for the Advancement of Science] for-- Speaker 2: Long time. Speaker 1: --a long time. Speaker 2: Yeah, I spent a period of time from '77 [1977] to '79 [1979] at the National Science Foundation as a program officer and that was invaluable because you have to learn how the federal structure works and all these other kinds of things. But since that time I've basically been at AAAS since '79 [1979]. I keep changing my job I tell people because the job keeps, the need--the job--the need to change the job keeps happening. But the issues that we faced in '79 [1979] just weren't the same, aren't the same issues that we face today. And so you are, you're continuing shifting in terms of your focus on policies, you're changing alliances, you're changing partnerships and so on. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you explain, just kind of give us a little as best, explanation of the difference between AAAS and the National Science Foundation (unclear). Speaker 2: National Science Foundation is a federal agency. AAAS is a private, non-profit membership organization. We publish Science Magazine which is really I think the most respected journal of science in the world. And that gives you a big platform, membership of over 120,000 people gives you a big platform. And so you're able to address many of the issues that a federal agency is not necessarily going to take on. AAAS for example has addressed issues of the need to increase the numbers in the--and to support the advancement of women minorities and persons with disabilities in the sciences in all area of the sciences since 1975. AAAS--actually since before then. But AAAS for example held meetings that were accessible to people with disabilities before the laws were changed, you know so, in terms of access to buildings and things like this. So it has been a wonderful platform. This has been a wonderful organization to work with because it's forward moving and forward vision. And so the idea that you are working toward a way of diversifying the enterprise is something that is accepted and the strategies that you are undertaking to try to accomplish that, they are understood whether they are things where you are trying to show in practice how this works, trying to develop models for what this looks like or trying to effect policies and inform policies for what needs to be changed. Story_ID: 56552 Speaker 1: I started at AAAS [American Association for the Advancement of Science] in '79 [1979] again, as head of the office of opportunities in science and the specific mandate of that particular office really did relate to these underrepresented and under-participating groups in science and engineering. And we undertook a lot of programming that was way ahead of its time because we didn't know what else to do to try to make a difference. And I will give you an example. We had a program working with black churches. Well why? Because we, from our own experience you know the staff who came out of these communities, we understood that the most stable things in our communities were often our churches and therefore the idea of offering programs that, for hands on science with kids and churches was not that strange. You might have to convince the minister that, of the need to buy in, but once buy in was gotten, that wasn't a strange thing to do. We had a program for example in Atlanta [Georgia] where we had Atlanta University Center students who were in science or engineering or math or whatever who volunteered as part of their community service kinds of things. We trained them to do hands on science kinds of activities and then they would go in and these college students would work with the kids from the neighborhood. Well the church was a trusted place where the parents would allow the kids to go and the activities that we provided, we knew they were of high quality. The kids who were there had basically been screened by people we knew, faculty and what have you on the campuses so we were able to do and demonstrate things that others you know might not have thought of as being a place to start. We worked with community based organizations to try to help them improve the quality of the work that they were doing around science and technology and actually just improve the amount of the effort that they were exerting towards science and technology. The--when we first started working with the Urban League a number of years ago, there were like twenty something chapters of the League that had some kind of science related programming going. By the time we completed our work with the League, there were--103 of the 106 at that time had something going in science and engineering, the notion being okay, help people understand the relationship between this field and economic and personal empowerment. And then help them identify possible partnerships in whatever location that they might be in and then help to make those marriages so that they can begin to offer more programming to those students. It was a simple idea, build capacity, build linkages, build connections, try to help people find where all these intersections might be possible. We were approached by Apple Computer who wanted to basically give away a lot of machines cause they were moving on to a new model. In our communities at the time there were very few machines at all and so we were able to identify--we, what we did was we identified a lot of places and we said do you want to apply to be able to establish a community center, I mean a computer center in your--for your--that's attached to or associated with your particular organization or group or what have you. Speaker 2: About what time period is this and what generation of computers are we talking about? Speaker 1: Oh that was way back when. That was like the Apple II kinds of things that you would have in the schools. But people didn't have anything you know and so the--getting started on there even if they could just play math games, if they could learn how to do word processing, just basic kinds of things, it was-- Speaker 2: Early 90s [1990s], 2000? Speaker 1: It was more than what they had at the time. Hmm? Story_ID: 56553 Speaker 1: Early 90s [1990s] you're saying--? Speaker 2: Yes, it would be, it would have been kind of the early 90s [1990s]. And so we had a number of places apply and we had independent selection process and the people came here for training cause we wanted them all to do something that related to building math skills, whatever they happened to be. And then we basically sent them computers and they established community computing centers. We were trying some of everything. The notion is that we saw, we found holes we wanted to plug you know. We were trying to help communities, trying to build awareness to start with and then trying to build strategies so that you would get some sense that you weren't at, you know you weren't hanging out there by yourself. I mean there were things that you could do to try to move this. At the same time that you're trying all these projects, you're also trying to establish or support policies that you knew in the long run would likely provide federal resources or something for undertaking these efforts. You were protecting disaggregated data because you know if you lose it you're not going to be able to keep score and know how, know if you're making any kind of difference. So you're working on various fronts you know all at the same time, building, trying to build capacity in organizations, trying to build awareness in the scientific community, trying to get other organizations within the scientific community to take on some of these issues. So you have lots of different stuff going on at any one time. In 1989, there was a reorganization that pulled not only office of opportunities but also the general issues that relate to science education as well as public understanding of science into the same unit and I became the head of that unit. And again this was a situation where you are coming to understand that this is a system's problem and you've got to figure out how to take on different parts of a system be it K-12, be it higher education, be it graduate education, be it community engagement and community literacy that you've got to build partnerships, that you've got to reach out beyond yourself. You have to engage the media, the technology and what have you in order to make a difference. I had the opportunity too to kind of do more in the policy world and around the policy, and the policy area to effect things as well. I served on the National Science Board, the policymaking body of the National Science Foundation and participated in their efforts around strategic planning, around the systemic initiatives that they undertook. I instigated the activity that eventually led to the change in criteria at the foundation that--around broader impacts to try to get people to focus on the fact that it was great to be able to do your research but maybe we should be able to expect that you would do things to support education, do things to support diversity, do things to support other kinds of worthy efforts and initiatives within the sciences and engineering. And I served on President Clinton's counsel of advisors se science and technology at the same time and so trying to lift the discussion to the numerous agencies, trying to help people understand that this was an area of national need. We had once again returned to the Sputnik [1957] moment. It might not look like it but we were there again and that if we didn't really understand that the demographics were headed in one direction but we really weren't capitalizing on the need to build talent out of all those groups that had been marginalized in the past and we had a real problem. And so we were trying to change the discourse and tried to get the science community to own this problem at the same time that we could get the national policies to own all of this as an issue that had to be addressed. And I think that to a very large extent we look at, we look today and we listen to President Obama and his remarks, he's there. He gets that in fact that we--that stem education is critical to being able to move ahead in terms of our national security, our defense, our health, our economics but also that we have to be very smart about talent development and talent utilization. But you, when I think about kind of the odyssey that it has taken to kind of get to that point it's really amazing that we can still be having this conversation this many years later. You know I have these regular moments of deja vu all over again. I was you know I undertake on a--I can get an open slice of time every once in a while to start trying to attack the mess in my office and I'll find a speech that I gave in 1980 something and I read the presentation. I shouldn't, I should just go on and file it. But I read it and I thought oh my goodness this is too fresh. I could have given this speech last week. And I think that as much progress as we have made and the numbers tell us and we have in fact made progress, as much progress as we have made, the movement has been glacial. I mean it's so slow but we have just, we are just not taking hold of these things with the speed and urgency that is really required. Story_ID: 56554 Speaker 1: Okay, we--tell us about your activities with the United Nations internationally. Speaker 2: You know I got introduced to the whole area of international women in science kinds of issues in 1983. Prior to the '85 [1985] big summit you know women's summit in Nairobi [Kenya, Africa], we were asked by the Advisory Committee of Science and Technology for Development to collaborate with them to organize a meeting of the panel of experts and that was a wonderful meeting. And the more I became immersed in the data and in the literature and in, and became engaged with the women who were there, the more I began to see it wasn't just our struggle but this was a global struggle. And so I was the senior author on that report, Science Technology and Women, a World Perspective, you know all of a sudden pushing beyond kind of like the confines of our own cities or whatever to begin to understand this from a much bigger platform. So I went to the Nairobi conference in '85 [1985] and subsequently to the Beijing [China] conference in '95 [1995] and prior to the Beijing conference, began to work with the UN Commission on science and technology for development. That had, the advisory committee that I had worked with previously had turned into the commission. And so we worked with the commission as they established a working group on gender science and technology. And we began to articulate how these things were actually playing out as effecting women's empowerment or women's lack of power and what it was going to take to actually address these issues. So I became a member of the Board, the Gender Advisory Board that then retained, you know kept working to try to move those recommendations forward for the UN Commission and I've subsequently been its co-chair for a number of years. And so we are trying to as I said raise the visibility of--went and gendersized the technology as being something that affects women worldwide. So I, so it--that's one part of it but at the same time I was wearing this other hat over the science community as being a member of the committee on capacity building in science of ICS or the International Council of Science based in Paris [France]. And working through UNESCO [United Nations Education Scientific and Cultural Organization] in that regard around trying to address larger issues of science education and how we were dealing with that on a worldwide basis. Now that was an interesting time because United States had basically given up it's membership in UNESCO and yet here we were working independently trying to see how do we help to bring all of these threads together? Story_ID: 56555 Speaker 1: Now this is during the-- Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: Is this during the [President George] Bush years? Speaker 2: This was during, let me see, I'm trying to remember because I mean this has gone back a ways, this work. Speaker 1: Yeah when you mentioned the U.S.-- Speaker 2: You know it-- Speaker 1: --pulling out of UNESCO-- Speaker 2: This is going back a ways but it, I--but I think that it was heavily, it was during the Bush years but even during the--prior to that time we didn't have membership in the, in UNESCO [United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization], we had dropped our membership. So--because we gained, we regained our membership during the Bush years, okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it would be prior to that time. So it was a matter of how do you try to interact with all of this machinery of the United Nations so that it aligns and works together to address the concerns related to women? I was a public delegate last year to the Commission on the Status of Women, the UN Commission on the Status of Women, the meeting that was held last year. And this was a matter of helping to broker relations between the, what was coming out in the discussions for the Commission and what was going on with this interaction with the UN Commission for Science and Technology for Development. And so sitting as a delegate on the one hand and as co-chair of the junior advisory board on the other, I was able to try to help make those marriages and keep these things aligned as well. So it's been an interesting journey to be able to work at that kind of level to try to pull the pieces together. You know that's really one of the biggest challenges. We have a real challenge of not aligning things that need to be aligned. And we'd get a lot further if we did align things and worked in common purpose toward things that we agree on that are, that--destinations where we really want to go. And so I have been trying to do some of that by putting on and taking off different hats over the years. Story_ID: 56556 Speaker 1: Is religion and culture a big obstacle to women learning science in other countries? I mean in some of the-- Speaker 2: I don't think that it-- Speaker 1: I'm thinking of the-- Speaker 2: I don't, I'm not sure that that--that I would hang things on that. Not--we organized, we are a part of a group that worked with the state department during the [President George] Bush years to organize a meeting of women scientists, a leadership conference in Kuwait looking at women in Muslim countries. And people often say well the women can't do this and women can't do that, but if you look at some of these countries the women are basically getting degrees and to higher rates than the men are in many of the science fields. I think culture can be a barrier to women being educated at all in some countries, the notion that they don't need to. But once you overcome that hurdle I don't think that they're saying well you do this instead of that. I think that is a matter of having access to the kind of education that will allow them to make this a real choice. Remember I talked about the fact that if somebody says well you're only 10 percent of the slots, well guess what you know you're not--that's not a real choice. If you're not going to give women the bursaries, the scholarships to be able to go and pursue, study in these fields then they're not going to be able to make that choice. In many cases going to the highest level of education in the sciences means that they may have to leave their home country and go to study in Europe or in the U.S. or some other place. That may be more of a barrier than the tradition of not going far from home, may be more of a barrier, an impediment than the religion or culture per se. So it's very complex and--but I don't really, I haven't seen a census of where that, where religion per se has been that big of a barrier. Story_ID: 56557 Speaker 1: Okay. Well what are you currently working on or what's your current--? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: What are you currently working on? What project are you-- Speaker 2: What am I working on right now? Speaker 1: --is the most important thing (unclear)? Speaker 2: At this instant oh my goodness, one of the things that I'm working with actually relates to this. Over time a lot of people had begun to think that the problems of getting women into the sciences and engineering have been solved. They see that women are over 50 percent of those in higher education. They see that women have greatly increased their numbers at Bachelors degrees for example in biology and the life sciences and so the assumption is well this is not something that needs to be fixed. There's--so they want to say well we don't need anymore programs that target this as an issue. We don't need anymore whatever and so on. And they're talking about moving to what they call gender mainstreaming which is really a term of art that is heavily pursued in international organizations such as the United Nations and the World Bank. But at the same time that they will use the term, nobody really ever defines for them what it means. What does it mean to think about how this may differentially affect men and women if you're putting a program in place? How do you think about that? How do you make sure that the decision that you make is not going to do harm to the women? And I will give you an example. In Africa for example around agriculture, if you have a heavy focus on commercial farming you're likely to affect men. If you don't have extension workers who can work with women on subsistence farming you're going to affect women but you're also going to affect families because the commercial farming is done often for cash, it's cash crops and subsistence farming becomes the thing that you use for feeding your family. Otherwise you basically have to turn around then and try to find cash in order to buy the goods that you need. So there's been a heavy emphasis on the commercial side without the extension workers on the subsistence side. So you can end up in a very bad place for the continent because you made decisions that had been focusing one direction without looking at how they're operating at another direction. The work that the economists at the bank [World Bank] have said is that money in women's hands gets--more of the money in women's hands gets to the family. That's not the case with men. So you know you're ignoring your own research in terms of laying out your strategies and that's what I mean by you know if you're going to mainstream you've got to have an understanding of the consequences of the different options that you're going to try to put forth. And we're talking about right now how do we develop that know-how? How do you offer people case studies? How do you help them think about mainstreaming and where to look to get the data to help them make the decisions that they have to make? So right now we're talking about developing, just going right at that problem and developing the tools that can be used to help put people in a decision making process into a place where they can have a better understanding about the consequences for men and women differentially on those decisions. And it's not always a matter of it affects the women negatively. In a lot of cases and I think that we can cite some of those cases where males have been affected negatively, for example the structure of schooling in many places where you sit in rows and you work and things like this it may be much more suitable to--I mean women may be much more adaptable to that style. So the lack of opportunities to build things and make things or whatever in--and to be--have more inquiry based things affects the males differentially and negatively but it also affects the females in terms of what they can then choose to do in their comfort with technology and things like this. So that's what I'm talking about and we're talking about building those, some of those tools so that we can really move people's thinking into a different space so that as targeted efforts might go away and they begin to rely on "mainstream" strategies, that there will be a way--that they'll have some of the skills and knowledge that they need in order to be able to do that in a way that's rational. That's one of the things that we're working on, one of many. Story_ID: 56558 Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back at everything you've done to this point, what things would you enumerate as your legacy I guess in this regard? Speaker 2: As a legacy? Speaker 1: Yeah, in this regard? Speaker 2: I think that pushing forward the notion of the systems nature of the problem and helping people to really understand that you can't just do one thing and fix this. It has been very important. We did a report a number of years ago, a system of solutions you know, every school every student. You know this notion that somehow we got to get a handle on this. And I think that even though it hasn't gained a lot of traction yet, I still think that one day people will look at it and say yeah, you know we, we've got to be smarter about this. I think "The Double Bind" really was a turning point. It was a hidden problem that was made visible and while it hadn't solved a lot of things, it at least allows us to have a common conversation about where we need to go with regard to this. I think that our notion of community based strategies that we've got to get partnerships with lots of different groups and help them to understand the issues. I think that that's been a major piece, focus on capacity building, teaching people how to undertake these programs on their own and really you know build on this. And a focus on learning in an out of school setting and how one actually connects that and helps that be a part of the solution to the challenges that we address. I think that those have been the key areas along with some sense about where the policies need to be shifted in order to continue to make progress. Story_ID: 56559 Speaker 1: Okay. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I am concerned that we are still so focused on celebrity that we lose the opportunity to really bring our real heroes and sheroes who are trying to solve the everyday problems that we face as a community and as a planet. They aren't available to young people as models for the way that their lives can unfold. There are only a small number of people who will ever be able to make a lot of money playing basketball. There's only a small number of people who are ever going to be able to make a lot of money singing. But there's lots of people who can make a living wage and a decent wage as an engineer or as a scientist. There's lots of people who can make a decent wage and really build wealth for the community as an innovator and an entrepreneur who becomes kind of the next Bill Gates or the next Sergey Brin [Sergey Mikhaylovich Brin, Soviet-born American computer scientist and Internet entrepreneur: co-founder of Google] or whatever it is. And there's lots of opportunity for that and that doesn't necessarily, that's not what gets held up. It's where the opportunities actually lie. Story_ID: 56560 Speaker 1: Yeah, you were just mentioning a celebrity and I was just thinking that not many people know about Dr. Shirley Jackson [American physicist and the 18th president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute; first African American woman to earn a doctorate from MIT in nuclear physics] who we were talking about. Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: And they know much more about a singer like Rihanna or something like that or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Whitney Houston. Speaker 2: They, you know they don't know Shirley Jackson, they don't know Warren Washington. You know here's a person who has been absolutely pivotal in terms of helping us to understand the climate models for the earth you know and who is it? You know they don't, they have no idea. And that's what I'm talking about. I mean that's the real sadness of it. Speaker 1: Yeah I was thinking here, I've had conversations with a number of physicists who, whose own perceptions of themselves are so--that are just you know--but the public is not really aware of what they do. Speaker 2: They have no idea. You know it was interesting to me at a time I think I was looking at Ebony's kind of list of whatever it is, you know how they have these lists and-- Speaker 1: One Hundred Most (unclear). Speaker 2: And at the time that I was looking at it I remember that Walter Massey was head of the National Science Foundation and there was an African American who was the acting director at NIH [National Institute of Health] and I thought they're not even on the radar you know. I mean here you--and they're not even on anybody's radar in terms-- Speaker 1: That's the list of the 100 Most Influential Black People in every-- Speaker 2: You know and they didn't even make the list, okay. They were in charge of agencies that were giving out billions of dollars that--and had major responsibility for the, for basic research and health re--and biomedical research in the United States and nobody knew who they were and that's what I'm--you know that's the kind of thing that kind of makes you say, oh my goodness you know where are we? Speaker 1: Well I think that's pretty much true across the board isn't it? Speaker 2: Yes it is. Speaker 1: For--yeah, not just for us. Speaker 2: Yes, I mean occasionally there will be, there would be people who will--I mean the kind of Katy Perry Want-To-Bes or the Lady Gaga Want-To-Bes and things like this. But what I'm talking about is it's one thing to have celebrity here but you're not necessarily aspiring to think that you're going to be this person. You will focus on them but you're not necessarily saying that's who I'm going to become. I think that the real difficulty is when that's the model that's available to you in terms of how you can pursue your future. And these are not things that are even available to you. Story_ID: 56561 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you look if you look back again on your life is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you go back and change it? Speaker 2: Well first of all I can't go back and change them. Secondly, I guess that who I am today has been shaped by them and so I don't know that I would want to change them because the skill sets and the difficulties and the challenges have led me to this point. And so we all have our regrets but I can't focus there you know. I--it's a matter of okay, I am who I am. I did what I did. I had these experiences. I have to use them to go forward. Learning from them or building on them, that's the way that it is. Story_ID: 56562 Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell us a little bit about your family. Do you have children? Speaker 2: I have children. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have two daughters. We have two daughters. One is a writer at a health non-profit, "translating" research material into plain language that regular people can understand cause so much of the research stuff is written for other researchers. And real people need access to some of this as well. So she's been on the kind of interpreting and translating science side. My other daughter who is married and has made me a grandmother, I have a two month and two week old grandson, is now on the faculty at GW [George Washington University]. She's on parental leave right now but she started off in, heavily on the stem side. She has a degree, Bachelors from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], masters from Cal-Tech [California Institute of Technology] and then she's basically shifted fields. And she's doing a lot of the work now looking at pathways to stem for minorities. She's done a lot of work looking at Latinos and community colleges as a route to stem fields for Latinos but she's--we've published together a couple of times now because she's interested in a lot of the areas about access and success in stem that I have spent my career on. And so it's really great fun for me being able to collaborate with my daughter. My, as I said my grandson is perfect. Everyone's grandchildren, you know everyone's grandchild is perfect and so this is a new role that I'm having to learn how you do. He was born on Christmas Eve and so this is, as I say this is new. Speaker 1: Okay. I know your oldest sister passed away right a few years ago. Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: Your older sister passed away a few years ago. Speaker 2: Yes, my older sister passed away a couple of weeks ago-- Speaker 1: And your-- Speaker 2: --and my dad [Ben Lee Mahaley] passed away in June. So that kind of loss from your immediate family within a very, very short period of time is very difficult. So I'm still struggling you know with a lot of this. Speaker 1: They got a chance to see you become successful and-- Speaker 2: They got a chance to see me and what I have tried to do going forward. Story_ID: 56563 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Is there anything we need to raise before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I think I've kind of gotten through a whole bunch haven't I? Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I said to someone one time, somebody asked me you know what would you want on your head stone? And at the time I said I think I want, "She stirred the pot." I don't know that I would want that anymore because at that point in time I was thinking that challenging the system as it is and asking that it be some other way was a major legacy that I brought. But now I think that I would want to be remembered as someone who tried to the best that I could with the skills I had been given and the time that I had and the places from which I was positioned to make a difference. To bring a different view to the world of what it meant to understand how the world worked and to use the tools of science to service society. Speaker 1: Okay. Well thank you...