 Story_ID: 321213 Speaker 1: My name is Shawn Wilson, I am the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. We're with Scott Stearns, the videographer for The HistoryMakers and if you will state your name for the camera and spell it out for me. Speaker 2: Randolph McLaughlin [HistoryMaker Randolph Michael McLaughlin], R-A-N-D-O-L-P-H, M-C-L-A-U-G-H-L-I-N. Speaker 1: Date Of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Six, nine, fifty-three [June 9, 1953], New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Six, eight, o'five [June 8, 2005]. Speaker 1: The location of this interview? Speaker 2: Hale House Center in Manhattan, Harlem, New York [New York]. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a law professor, lawyer and the executive director of Hale House. Story_ID: 321214 Speaker 1: Okay, we'll start the interview with some very basic pop culture type questions, easy. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Curry goat. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Your favorite vacation destination. Speaker 1: Hawaii. Speaker 2: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: You're killing me, (laughter). Story_ID: 321215 Speaker 1: So let's start by talking about your mother. If you could state your mother's name and spell it out for me. Speaker 2: Mae, M-A-E, Rodrigues, R-O-D-R-I-G-U-E-S [Mae Rodrigues]. It was originally May, M-A-Y, but she didn't like that so she named herself, Mae, M-A-E. Actually her full name was Alma Mae Rodrigues, but she didn't like her first name either, so she called herself May. Speaker 1: Where was she born? Speaker 2: Kingston, Jamaica. Speaker 1: What year? Do you know? Speaker 2: I think about 1904. There is some dispute about that. I think she told my father [Joseph McLaughlin] that she was born, that she was--was younger than she was, so she always told him the wrong date. And later in life, when I was a young man, he learned what her real birthday was, year, so I was never really sure. I think it was 1906, but I don't remember. Speaker 1: Where did she grow up? Speaker 2: Well, she came to the United States when she was about twelve or thirteen I think and grew up from that point on in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: So her name was Rodrigues. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So what was her background? Speaker 2: Her father, my mother's father was a descendent of Portuguese Jews and the Rodrigues spelling is with an s, as opposed to the z that folks from Spanish-speaking countries use. The s is the Portuguese spelling and her family--her father's family--we're not sure how- when they came over but they came over from Portugal, and set up a store in Kingston eventually called the People's Bazaar on East Queen Street and since, you know, when the children of immigrants, it's very hard to maintain a written history. So whenever I meet people from Jamaica, I always mentioned to them where my family is from to try and get some history, some scent of who we were. I think it's important to know who you are to know who you're going to be and who you can be. So through my various reaching out, if you will, as I went along life, the People's Bazaar, as I'm told, was the Macy's of Jamaica. It was--if you wanted to get a fancy suit or a fancy dress, you went to the People's Bazaar, and you got the best clothes, the best shoes. And that's what that store was--that was her father's store in East Queen Street. Speaker 1: So let's talk about her parents, your mother's grandparents [sic.]. What were their names? Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Pauline. Her maiden name was Pommels. And we're told she had Scotch-Irish. Speaker 1: Can you spell those names for me? Speaker 2: P-O-M-M-E-L-S, Pauline, P-A-U-L-I-N-E [Pauline Pommels Rodrigues]. Story_ID: 321216 Speaker 1: We're rolling again, so we will start talking about your mother's [Mae Rodrigues] parents and you were spelling your grandmother's name for me. Speaker 2: Pauline Pommels [Pauline Pommels Rodrigues] was her maiden name. P-A-U-L-I-N-E P-O-M-M-E-L-S. She was from Mandeville, Jamaica which is up in the country, the hills, mountains actually and her family is still there. We still have family in that area. And she worked for my grandfather in the store as a young woman. I think she was about twenty-five when she married my grandfather, who was about fifty as I recall. It was his second marriage. His first ma- wife had died and he married her and then he died. He died not long after that. My mother had a brother, with two children by that marriage and a number of stepbrothers and sisters. And my grandfather died from what I think was probably prostate cancer. They said he had a problem with urinating and they didn't have a lot of technology in those days. We're talking 1910, 1915 in Jamaica and in those days when the husband died, there was nothing for the wife to do. And since she was the second wife, the her- his family, his brothers took over the business and froze her out. So she said, rather than stay in Jamaica, I'm going to come to the United States and make my way. So she left my mother in Jamaica and came to the United States with her son and they worked here for about a year until she was able to bring my mother over and my mother came on a boat, and landed in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and that's where they were raised. Speaker 1: So do you know anything else about the People's Bazaar [Kingston, Jamaica], the store? Speaker 2: No, everything else there is very sketchy. They never talked about-you know, it's very interesting, here I am, a person who loves to talk about my family, my history, and try to pass that on, they very rarely talked about those kinds of things. Story_ID: 321217 Speaker 1: So what do you about your father? What's his name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a colorful fellow (laughter) to put it mildly. Speaker 1: Can you spell his name? Speaker 2: Sure. His name is Joseph McLaughlin. He comes from a little island off the coast of Honduras called, Roatan. R-O-A-T-A-N and if you go on the website and plug in Honduras, which I recently did, the island pops up. Roatan is one of the world's renowned coral shel- coral reef area. It's like divers from all over the world--scuba divers go to Roatan to see the coral. I mean the water is spectacular. I had never been to Honduras and the first time I had ever seen the island was when I went online just about two weeks and I saw this beautiful tropical paradise. It's the only way I can describe it, lush green sky as blue as--as the ocean, blue as the sky, just beautiful, and here--but again, he never told me about these things. I had to kind of pe- snatch pieces of it as he was growing--as I was growing up. He is from the capital of Roatan, Coxen Hole C-O-X-E-N H-O-L-E and I thought as a kid, this is some little back water place. It was the capital of the island. Now, the island is a fascinating story. I love the story of the island. Just recently, the way-- I'll first tell you the way it was told to me. My father's grandfather left Ireland in the 1840s, right around the time of the famine and they went to Grand Cayman--the Cayman Islands. They settled there and then one of the sons left the great Cayman Island and moved to Roatan. Roatan, at the time, was owned by the British in 1860 I think [sic.]. This is what I saw on the website. It was ceded, the British ceded the island, to Spanish Honduras. The way my family told the story, my grandfather and other resident of the island, who were Irish descendants, hated the British because of what they had done in Ireland and they led a rebellion against the British and took the island from the British and seized it, if you will, to the Spanish in Honduras because it was British--it was part of British Honduras. And they married local people. Wherever my folks went, they married local people. So we were mixed if you will. And he lived there until like the '30s [1930] and then he came to the [United] States, but beautiful place, interesting island. Speaker 1: So what else do you know about your father? Speaker 2: He was a jack of all trades. He was a seaman. He was a policeman in Belize, he was a- had a colorful history in Roatan. He worked on boats all across--in the Caribbean. He was--what's the word--lost at sea for over a month with no food in a raft of some sort, and he said the only thing he had was water, and he said, "Look, you can live on water. You don't need food. You can live on water along for at least thirty days." I learned that from him. Then he did whatever he had to do. He was a man who believed that as long as you had two good hands, you could find work and he would do whatever he had to do to support his family, and that's what he did. Story_ID: 321218 Speaker 1: So let's just clarify--I want to clarify their origin--so your father [Joseph McLaughlin] was part Irish and his mother--? Speaker 2: His mother we bel- I've seen pictures of her and I believe she was part Central American Indian [Native American]-- Speaker 1: But living in Honduras at the time? Speaker 2: In Honduras. Speaker 1: But she was Indian? Speaker 2: Central American. Speaker 1: So then your mother [Mae Rodrigues] was, your mother's origin is from Jamaica (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. My grandmother [Pauline Pommels Rodrigues] was mulatto and her husband married--had some mixture--there was some African in the mix--I'm not sure how much or where it comes from, but we come from a mixed group. So I've always said, and I told people--I can't hate anybody because I've got all strands in me, Irish, Jewish, African, Scotch-Irish, Indian. Speaker 1: So were there any slaves in the history? Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure there were. The way the story was told to me, we owned slaves, and given the color of my family and the mulattos that were there, I'm sure that's true. There is one story told of a plantation owner in Mandeville [Jamaica], in Manchester [Parish, Jamaica] and he's my grandmother's father on my maternal side and his name was Backra Buddy. That's the only name I know for him. Speaker 1: Can you spell that name for us? Speaker 2: Backra--B-U-C-K-R-A [sic.], I think. Speaker 1: Backra. Speaker 2: Buddy, B-U-D-D-Y and years later--that's the name I heard and he owned a plantation. He owned like property in Manchester, which he left to various members of the family throughout the years, you know. Who knows? I learned later what Backra meant. Backra is white man. So he was a Backra Buddy. That's what the Jamaicans called him. He was a friendly, a good white man. And that was my grand--that was my great-grandfather. Story_ID: 321219 Speaker 1: So, I just--I mean I'm going to ask this--but now you identify as an African American? Speaker 2: Well, I identify with a lot of things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There is a concept called phenotype and genotype. Genotype is what you are genetically in terms of your gene pool and phenotype is what you appear to be. So that's a funny question you ask. When I am with--in an environment where there are West Indians, the folks in the Caribbean, they see me as one of their own. They talk to me like I'm from the Caribbean. They ask me "You're from the Caribbean. Where you from, brother?" And I can talk just like they talk. When I'm in a Latino community and they see me, they say, "Habla Espanol?" And I can talk Spanish. I say, "Si, yo puedo hablar," you know. And we talk--and when black Americans see me, they don't see any of that, they see a black American. So I--(laughter). So some would say and they said about me, "I'm a chameleon" depending where I am, I'll go with the flow because I recognize all aspects of my personality and my personhood. When I'm in the South, I have a southern accent. When I'm in Boston [Massachusetts], I have a Boston accent. I pick up whatever is around me and in that way, I guess I'm a chameleon. Speaker 1: Do you feel more comfortable in certain of those characteristics more than others? Are you more comfortable being Spanish, black or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I'm probably most--if you were to sit me down and ask me which of the various strands of my diverse family tree I recognize or feel most comfortable with, I was born and raised in the United States. I was born and raised in New York City [New York, New York]. I'm a native New Yorker So I'm a black New Yorker in that sense and that's the environment I know best. Probably the environment that I know least is the Latino because my father's people, remember--oh, you should know this--Roatan, many of the people in Roatan, they don't have Spanish names. My father's name is Joseph [McLaughlin]. His brother's name was John. They had English names and English is the language spoken there. They called the folks in Roatan--they called the people in Honduras, Spaniards. Yeah, that's what the called them, Spaniards--even to this very day. And the people on the mainland, called the folks in Roatan, extranjeros, which means strangers. Yeah, so it's very interesting. So the Latino roots, it's kind of--I'm Honduran, yes, but it's very complicated, but I recognize that as part of my background because that's the environment. So, yeah, I would say I'm--I would identify most as an African American. Story_ID: 321220 Speaker 1: So can you think of any other special stories that you were told as a kid about your ancestors or about growing up that you feel would be an important part of your oral history? Speaker 2: Well, my father [Joseph McLaughlin] watched a lot of Westerns when I was a kid on TV, and I became a Western fan myself. I love Westerns partly because of him. And he would say to me, as we were watching these movies, these TV shows, "That's what it was like when I was a kid." I said, "What?" He said, "Oh, yeah, that's exactly the way it was when I was a child when I was growing up. We had horse and the whole thing." He would rid his horse. One of the interesting stories that he told me, he was playing cards with Augostino Sandino [sic. Augusto Sandino], founder of the rebellion in Nicaragua, and Sandino was playing cards with him in Roatan because Nicaragua is very close to Honduras, and Augostino said to him, "I'm going back to Nicaragua. I've got to make the revolution," whatever he was going to do. My father said, "You must be crazy. They're gonna kill you. Don't do that, they'll kill you." And Sandino said, "No, I must go." And they killed him. He was eventually killed in Nicaragua. And the Sandinistas, how took over Nicaragua many, many years later from Somoza [Anastasio Somoza Debayle] in the rebellion, they took their name from this man, Augostino Sandino who was the compatriot of my father, and my father when I got involved in political work as a radical lawyer, that's how I describe it, he always warned me. He said, "Doing the work you're doing is dangerous. People get killed doing this work because it's just not safe. You shouldn't--." He told me, "You shouldn't do it." He didn't want me to do this work. Fascinating guy. Story_ID: 321221 Speaker 1: Now, is your father [Joseph McLaughlin] still alive? Speaker 2: No, both my parents are dead. Speaker 1: And--do you remember--can you remember what years they passed away? Speaker 2: My mother [Mae Rodrigues] died my, fall of my second year of law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so that would be--I started law school in 1978--no, no, I started law school in 1975, so that would be in 1976, yeah, in the winter. Speaker 1: And your father? Speaker 2: He died in 1989, I believe, in Christmastime. Story_ID: 321222 Speaker 1: So how--how--what type of relationship did you have, or how would you describe your grandparents, the ones you grew up with (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandmother came to live with us. She lived with us all my life as far as we can remember, Pauline [Pommels Rodrigues]. We call her Gram. She was elderly, and she took care of us. That's what she did. We didn't have babysitter or help if you will. It was my grandmother. Speaker 1: Pauline was your mother's mother? Speaker 2: My mother's mother and she lived with us my entire life until she died. Funny story (laughter), one day, my mother [May Rodrigues] was home. She worked--both my parents worked, and my mother is home and she sees her- my grandmother putting her on her coat, going outside, going someplace and she said--because she called her Gram too--, "Gram, where you going?" She said, "I'm going to buy a pony." My mother said, "What?" She said, "I'm going to buy a pony." She said, "Why do you need a pony?" Victor [McLaughlin] is my brother. She said, "Victor wants a pony. I'm going to buy him a pony." She said, "Where you going to put it?" "I'll put it in the garage." Needless to say, he never got that pony. She was a great lady. I mean I have vague memories of her. One of my strongest memories of her was cooking--not that I ever saw her cook, but there was one situation. My mother was at work. It was the summer time, my brother and I were home. So she baked an apple pie--homemade from scratch--none of this store-bought nonsense, no, no. She rolled out the dough and everything, cutting the apples up. She baked us a pie. She knows you put the apple pie in the window to cool, so my brother goes over to her and says, "Mom, Grandma--Gram, you got a pie." "Yeah, I got a pie." "Can I have a piece?" "Sure, you can have a piece." She puts it down for us. And my brother and I were gluttonous to say to the least. We ate the whole pie, boom, polished it right off. She said, "You ate the pie?" I said--we said, "Yeah, we loved it. Can you make another one?" She said, "I'll make you pies until you can't eat anymore." So she made a second pie and we ate it. She said, "You ate the second pie." She made a third pie. We ate it. My memory is she made five pies and she stopped making pies before we stopped eating them. They were that good. That was my strongest memory of her alive. And then, she must have had Alzheimer's. She was very, very old and my mother took care of her, and she stopped working to take care of her. So my other memories were of literally taking care of her. She was old and elderly and the notion of we don't put our old people in homes. So my mother would tell me, "Look, that's not what we do. We take care of our family. And she has a right to die with dignity in our home." And I would one day do the same thing for my father [Joseph McLaughlin]. He died in my home after a year-long battle with cancer. Speaker 1: So what years was your grandmother in the home with you? Speaker 2: Up until I was in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were the years? Speaker 2: My entire life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She died when I was in elementary school. So I really don't remember. Story_ID: 321223 Speaker 1: So what are your earliest memories of your own childhood? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I had to think in the sense of some of that. Probably my earliest memory of childhood is going to Jamaica, yeah. I was maybe four or five maybe. And we took the train. My [maternal] grandmother [Pauline Pommels Rodrigues]--you're probably asking, how can you take a train to Jamaica? I'll explain--my grandmother, my mother [Mae Rodrigues], my brother [Victor McLaughlin] and me took the train from New York [New York] to Miami [Florida] and then a plane or a boat--I'm not sure how we got there now, but we took a boat or a plane from Miami, Florida, to Jamaica. It was probably cheaper. I remember my first memories of riding that train--I haven't thought this in years, my first memories of riding this train with my mother and my grandmother, going south, and they had lunches and that kind of thing. So I went to Jamaica with them and I spent about a year down there, yeah. My father [Joseph McLaughlin] stayed behind and interestingly I came back with a Jamaican accent. I probably learned how to speak in Jamaican, so to this day, I find myself mispronouncing a word because I'm putting the accent in the wrong place than Americans do. And then traveling--I guess my most vivid memory of Jamaica--you've seen the movie, 'The Silence of the Lambs,' and she talks about the screaming of these lambs when they're being apparently castrated and how she couldn't get that sound out of head. Well, one day, I'm in the countryside and I hear this pig and he's screaming, I mean just screaming and you could hear it all over the village. I came out and said, "(Unclear) Ma," whatever, "what's going on? What's happening?" And I saw these men holding down this pig and they were castrating him. Yeah, that's my most vivid memory. The other memory I have of Jamaica is taking a bath in one of these outhouses kind of places and my brother coming over and making fun of me as I was sitting in this tub. I was loving it. Like this is great, you know. So those are my earliest memories. And then we would shoot birds, pigeons, or some sort of bird, with sling shots and cook the birds at night. I'm not sure I shot one, but my brother did I think, or some of our relatives did. It was a great--I mean just vague memories, but it was a great time. Story_ID: 321224 Speaker 1: We should go back and talk about your brother because I forgot to ask you about your siblings, although we talked before, you had one brother. Speaker 2: One brother, Victor McLaughlin--V-I-C-T-O-R, McLaughlin, M-C--like my name. He is the first born. And the reason his name is Victor is because my mother [Mae Rodrigues] had--she was--when she had me, she was forty-four, and my father [Joseph McLaughlin] was in his fifties. I think she had my brother--she got married when she was thirty--and we're talking 1948, '49 [1949], '47 [1947] that era and for a woman beyond her thirties having a baby was highly irregular. It wasn't done. It wasn't very hard and she had a very difficult pregnancy, and she had a number of miscarriages. I'm not sure if it was one or more. He was the first born after all these miscarriages. She really wanted a child. She was a great mother, and she called him, Victor because he was the victory. Me, I was named after my brother--my uncles, her brothers--she never called them brothers and stepbrothers--they were brothers to her--very interesting, same father, different mothers. Speaker 1: Now, were you close to them when you were growing up? Speaker 2: My uncles? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I was close to my Uncle Rani. We called him Rani. His name is Randolph Rodrigues. He had green eyes and straight red hair and was lighter than I was in color. Yeah. Speaker 1: What was his background because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was--you mean background? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was Irish? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the same as my mother's, but interestingly, my mother was brown-skinned, darker than I am, and my uncle was basically a mulatto, yeah. Speaker 1: And they shared the same mother [McLaughlin's maternal grandmother, Pauline Pommel Rodrigues] and different fathers? Speaker 2: Same mother, different fathers--no, strike that--no, they shared the same parents--biological parents, but my grandmother was mulatto on my mother's side. My grandfather, who I've seen pictures of, was brown-skinned even though he had Jewish decen- you know, antecedents, he was brown-skinned, so that when the colors mixed, if you will, my uncle was closer to the mulatto side and my mother was closer to the brown side, if you will, or the African side. And he had--my grandfather had straight hair though. Story_ID: 321225 Speaker 1: I guess a good place to start is you were describing your earliest memories and being in Jamaica, but can you now talk about like your family life, holidays, special events, your birthdays, your birthday, Victor's [McLaughlin's brother, Victor McLaughlin] birthday, your parents' [Mae Rodrigues and Joseph McLaughlin] birthdays--what were holidays like in the household? Speaker 2: I guess Christmastime and Thanksgiving were the big holidays. We had a three-bedroom house and holidays came. Families would come from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], from Salem, Mass [Salem, Massachusetts] and they literally just camp out in the entire house. Sometimes we had twenty people living in the house. We had ten of us in one room, all piled up on beds and whatever, whatever, but it was a great time. Food was cooked, turkey and stuffing, and rice and peas, whatever. My mother was like--so my home was the center of family in that sense. She was the matriarch in that sense. Everyone came to--we never went anywhere for Than- for the holidays. Everybody came to us. That's the way it was. Speaker 1: So being that you have so many different cultures, or so many different aspects in your makeup, what were the traditions during the holidays? Were they basic American? Like what type of food was made? Speaker 2: Basic American food--my mother, as far as I can recall, never cooked any Jamaican food for us. I had to discover my Jamaican roots on my own. The only thing she ever cooked that was Jamaican, that I can recall, and this was very rare were beef patties. And they were delicious. There were no Jamaican bakeries in those days. So like every six months, she would make beef patties for us and they were spectacular. I wish I had the recipe. I wanted to make it. The other one my--she's a cousin, but she's much, much older than I am, so we called her aunt. My aunt from Salem would come down and she'd make Jamaican buns, I mean fresh buns. Years later, when I'd go visit her in Salem, and her children--whenever I arrived--they knew I was coming, they'd bake buns for me and they're unbelievable with a line of butter right in them. Just spectacular. Story_ID: 321226 Speaker 1: So Ella Fitzgerald, Malcolm X, Louis Armstrong, the list goes on. Speaker 2: Yeah, we're all from East Elmhurst--East Elmhurst, Queens [New York, New York]--not Elmhurst, we're east of Elmhurst. Speaker 1: What street in East Elmhurst? Speaker 2: Okay, I was on 95th Street, between 23rd Avenue. East Elmhurst runs--it depends on who you ask, but it certainly starts-- we consider it starting at 94th Street, but it goes a little bit further, but not too far over 94th Street technically in my mind over to Ditmars Boulevard and then down to Astoria Boulevard, but really it goes all the way to Northern Boulevard. It's a very small community. It was growing up in the village. I live in Westchester [Westchester County, New York]--in a small village in Westchester now--it's the same thing. When my step kids leave the house, before they get back home, if they're doing anything they shouldn't, either I'll see them do it, or someone else will come and let us know. It was the same thing when I was a kid. There was a home of three-line streets and two-story buildings, some three-stories, private homes, attached, detached. The New York Times recently called it the Black Beverly Hills because of all the people who lived there. And it was, looking back on it, it was a special place. We didn't realize it. It was just home what we knew, but East Elmhurst, unlike other sections of Queens--I mean the majority of the black population in Queens, live in Southeast Queens, which is way far away from us. So we were this little enclave in the north, right near LaGuardia Airport, and we were bounded by Flushing [Queens, New York, New York] that was a white community, Corona [Queens, New York, New York] that, at the time, northern Corona [Queens, New York, New York], was a white community, Italian and then Jackson Heights [Queens, New York, New York], which was a white community. So the only section of our area that had black folks was East Elmhurst and a small piece of Corona, southern Corona. And we moved in, we had a lot of whites on the block. It was a very mixed block, but as we moved in, they moved out. But we still maintained the homes. It was a lovely, lovely place to grow up. Speaker 1: Describe that neighborhood. Describe your block. Speaker 2: Our block had mostly attached and detached homes. There was an African American lawyer in the block. Speaker 1: Who was he? Speaker 2: I don't know his name--Mr. McNorton [ph.] as I recall. And he was the first lawyer I knew. Story_ID: 321227 Speaker 1: We're talking about East Elmhurst [Queens] New York [New York]. You were talking about the first black lawyer that you had contact with (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you know there's a concept of what you see, you can be. And seeing him, I knew I could be a lawyer. I knew that there were black lawyers. There was a black doctor in the community. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Emerson Graham--Dr. Graham. Speaker 1: Can you spell that out for me? Speaker 2: G--as in George--R-A-H-A-M. He lived in Westchester [County, New York], but he was originally from East Elmhurst and he moved to Westchester just like I did. He's a great guy. He was like the community doctor. So you saw these people growing up. It was an African American community when I was a kid. Speaker 1: So you had a black doctor in the neighborhood, a black lawyer. What else did that neighborhood have? Speaker 2: Malcolm X lived on 97th Street between 23rd [Avenue] and 24th Avenues. Louis Armstrong lived in Corona [Queens, New York, New York]. I remember when he died, they had a huge funeral in the church [Corona Congregational Church, Queens, New York, New York] in the area and they actually cut the grass on the street for the first time as I can remember. That's Corona. We're from East Elmhurst. We thought there was--there really wasn't, but, you know. Speaker 1: Malcolm X. Speaker 2: Yeah, Malcolm X--I didn't know who he was. I was too young at the time. But the day his house--the night--the day after his house was fire-bombed, I was walking my dog. My dog's name was Mike, I named her after me. I was walking my dog, Mike, and we were on 97th Street and 23rd Avenue, and we see these fire trucks--well I see these fire trucks--I'm not sure what Mike saw, but we see these fire trucks and these police cars and I'm curious. So I kind of walked over to see what was going on. This crowd gathering. So I walked my dog by the house--didn't know it was Malcolm X's house--and I see this man standing--strike that--a man in his car. He had this flaming red beard--to me, it was red and red hair and looking really angry. I didn't know who he was, but, later, when I saw pictures of Malcolm X, I realized that was Malcolm X. He was sitting in a car in front of his house. And later [HistoryMaker Minister] Louis Farrakhan would move into that house, yeah, years later. And my good friend lived down the street. And we'd be in the street--this man who was out in TV cameras, breathing fire at people would be in the back--in the street talking to us about running track and playing violins, you know. We had a different image of the man--interesting community. Story_ID: 321228 Speaker 1: I lived on 95th Street between 23rd and 24th Avenues. I went to Columbia College [Columbia University, New York, New York] and Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. The next block over, between 23rd and 24th Avenues, another man lived who went to Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvard Law School. Two blocks over, 97 Street, where Malcolm X lived, same two blocks, 23rd and 24th Avenues, another gentleman lived there who went to Harvard Law School--three people within three blocks, all went to Harvard Law School. I would dare say there's not another black community in the country where that kind of percentage, that number of people went to a school of that nature and that was not unique in terms of East Elmhurst [Queens, New York, New York]. I mean the whole community--I'm not saying we all like went to Columbia and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]--some of us did drugs and did stupid things, but we were real high achievers. There were also a lot of West Indians in the communities. I didn't realize it at the time, growing up, but looking back, it was a very immigrant community. Speaker 2: What do you think mades- what do you think made that community what it was? Speaker 1: Well, I think--we had homeowners. It was middle class, and people bought their homes and took care of their homes and they worked. It was stable. People lived there for twenty and thirty years. There wasn't a lot of transition and we had good schools. I went to Newtown High School [Queens, New York, New York] and it was a great school. I loved it. I mean was a class president; I ran track; I was in the Honor Society, Res Gestae and that kind of stuff. Speaker 2: Were there any other community leaders that you can think of, Malcolm X, [HistoryMaker Minister] Louis Farrakhan, there was Ella Fitzgerald? She was before your time. Speaker 1: Yeah, way before, but Louis [Armstrong] was there when I was coming up. Speaker 2: What was he like? What do you remember of him? Speaker 1: I didn't know him. But I have read and he would like hang out in front of the house, blowing his horn, yeah, with the neighborhood kids. But I never really--he lived in Corona [Queens, New York, New York], which is much further away from me. Speaker 2: So you saw these people and you lived in this neighborhood. Did you think you were, did you think at the time that it was special--that this community was perhaps different than other black communities? Speaker 1: No, honestly I didn't. I thought that whole world looked like this. Wasn't until I grew up and went south or went to southern Queens [New York, New York], then I saw other sections of Queens. You see the difference between East Elmhurst and the other sections of Queens, where black folks lived, it was a small environment. It was a very small area. Whereas, Cambria Heights [Queens, New York, New York], St. Albans [Queens, New York, New York], Jamaica [Queens, New York, New York] had big, large, massive homes that scrolls across thirty, forty, fifty blocks. It's a very big area. So you didn't have that same village concept. This was a very--we all knew each other. You know. Weekends would come--you ever see the movie 'Cooley High'? That's the way it was back when I was a kid. Weekends would come, we would go to house parties. We'd hang out. We'd go to the local church. You knew people. You know your neighbors. It was very different than growing up in other parts of the city. And it was just a really special place. Story_ID: 321229 Speaker 1: So in your life today, what sounds, and smells or sights remind you of growing up in East Elmhurst [Queens, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Probably living where I live, in a sense. I mean it's a different area, obviously. Different ethnic groups live there than when I was a kid, but it's very similar. You know. I can walk to the stores and the restaurants. I know the shop owners. I wave at people. I know the local garbage guy. Yesterday, he knows my car. "Hey, how you doing?" I see the police officers. They know me. I know them. It's just--it's similar. When I walk in Harlem [New York, New York]--I'm in Harlem every day now. I love Harlem. I mean--this is a magical place. I'm in Harlem now. I--whenever I pass by a restaurant that has curry goat coming out of it, just the smell reminds me of home--even though my mom [Mae Rodrigues] never cooked curry goat. I had to learn that on my own. The only thing that she cooked that was West Indies was rice and peas on Sundays. She had to cook rice and peas on Sundays, otherwise we wouldn't eat dinner. That's what we'd say-tell her. My father [Joseph McLaughlin] wanted to eat potatoes--that Irish thing. I was like, not interested. It had to be rice every day. Speaker 1: You came up with something for sights and smells. Are there any sounds you can think of? Speaker 2: No, not really except for baseball games. My father watched baseball games every night, all summer long. I hated it because there was one TV in the house, and if he's watching his baseball game, there was nothing for us to do. I was outside with nothing to do. I hated the summers because there was nothing to do. Story_ID: 321230 Speaker 1: I wanted to be back at school because school was exciting. I mean I can practically tell you almost every one of my teachers from grade school--from second, third, fourth grade. Speaker 2: Where did you go to elementary school? Speaker 1: I went to P.S. 127 in East Elmhurst, Queens [New York, New York], three blocks from my house. Here is a funny story--it was a neighborhood school and I went there up until my third grade, and that year, they gave us a test and they brought my mother [Mae Rodrigues] in after I--they gave the whole class this test, and they told her that I had done very well and they were going to put me in a special class, but there were no special classes that I could go into in the school I was in. It was a black school, yeah--we're in a black community. And they were going to send me to mostly white school [P.S. 148] in another section of the town called, Jackson Heights [Queens, New York, New York]. And I'd have to take the bus, but not a school bus--a public bus and I was like, "What, they're taking me out of my school?" They literally ripped me out of my school, and the reason was we had placed well--we had done well on this IQ test and we were quote--this group of us, about six of us, and we were intellectually gifted children, IGC and they were going to track us and put us in another class, but they had no class for us in this school. The only classes were in the white school, so I to go to this white school out of my community. Here I am this little kid going to fourth grade on the bus, on a regular city bus. I made some friends. The funniest thing--I go to this school and the teacher's name is Mrs. Harris [ph.], and parent-teacher conference comes along. She says to me--to my parents, "He may have been gifted in the school he was in, but he's not gifted here," and I hated this woman. I mean I really hated her. She would embarrass me in class. And the next year, they put me out of the class. The funny thing is--see you figure, they're going to send me back to my black school--uhn-uh, they kept me in that school. Story_ID: 321231 Speaker 1: So now I'm in a regular school [P.S. 148, Queens, New York, New York], regular class with regular kids, if you will, not the intellectual kids. I'm in the dummy--not the dummy classes, if you will, but they were grades, like 8-1 was the smart kids--8-2 and 8-3, and I forgot what number I was in, but I wasn't in the intellectual class anymore. This had a tremendous effect on my self-esteem of course. One minute, I'm smart and the next minute, I'm stupid. How could this be? So anyway--so I'm in this class, but, interestingly, you know, fate, karma, God, whatever the term one uses to describe the forces that affect our lives or chance had a plan for me because now I was in fifth grade and the teacher who I had was Mrs. Olivieri, an Italian woman, a great, great woman. I loved her. And had Mrs. Harris [ph.] not pushed me out of the intellectual class, I never would have met this woman and my life might have been completely different. So I had her in fifth and she once did a play about civil rights and it started with slavery. These are mostly white kids now, and it came all the way to the Civil Rights Movement, the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK], Jim Crow, so I never heard of these things growing up. My parents [Mae Rodrigues and Joseph McLaughlin] aren't from the South, so I had no contacts with this stuff and it came up all the way to the Civil Rights, the Civil Rights Movement, my first real contact with this thing. My teacher asked me, Ms. Olivieri to be [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and I had to memorize major pieces of his I Have a Dream speech. I did. And I would give this speech in this civil rights little class, in this play at school in fifth grade. I will never forget my father came to see me. Old guy, he hardly ever came out to see me. He was like sixty at this time and it was like being raised by grandparents so he comes there, and I'm giving the speech, "One day in the hills of-in the mole hills of Mississippi" or whatever it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you remember the speech? Speaker 1: Pieces of it--, "I have a dream that one day my four children will be judged by the content of their character, not the color of their skin. One day, justice will roll down like water from the, from the Mississippi River," something to that effect. I've forgot. Anyway, I had to give the speech and my father was in the audience and I hear him cry out, "That's my boy." (Laughter) That was the first time--he came from the school that you didn't tell your kids they were doing anything special. My mother never told me that I was intellectually gifted. You wouldn't tell the child that because it would go to his head. The way they would describe it, it would spoil him, so they never told me that I was doing anything special. One day, I overheard my father on the phone--I'm much older and he says to this fellow on the phone, "I think my son's really smart but I could never tell him that. It would spoil him. It'd go to his head, he'd be," whatever, "swell headed." So I'm like--he thinks that because I never knew. He never complimented me at all, never--we never hugged. We never embraced. We never shook hands, nothing, never. He was from the old school. Children are seen and not heard. That's it. Do what you're told. Story_ID: 321232 Speaker 1: (Laughter) My brother [Victor McLaughlin] would tell a funny story that he would eat really fast. To this very day, he eats fast. Why? Because when we sat down for dinner--my mother [Mae Rodrigues] called dinner, boom--you came down for dinner and if you didn't come down, oh, you'd have hell to pay. One day, my brother and I, we didn't come down to dinner fast enough for my father [Joseph McLaughlin], he comes up--this old man lumbers up the steps--we were watching this television program--the one TV in the house upstairs in the first floor. The kitchen was in the basement, comes up to the television and he has this knife and he cuts the cord, slices it. And I'm like--I'm freaking out. This is the te- I said, "This man's lost his mind. What's the matter with you?" "I told you to come to dinner. You didn't come. Come now!" So we're mad as--we're mad as hell. We're downstairs. Little did I know. My father was a smart guy--he wanted to watch TV too. He knew how to fix it. He had a plug. He'd just redo it--just reconnected it again but he was teaching us a lesson. Let me tell you this, he never had to cut that cord again. He called, we came. Simple--so we're at the dinner table, according to my brother--so what I would do--my brother told me this story recently--I would make him laugh and if you laughed at dinner, according to my brother, you'd be sent to your room (laughter), so he would eat quickly because he knew sooner or later, I was going to make him laugh. And my father, "Victor, go to your room," and he would be off to his room starving and in those days, you didn't have Xboxes and MTVs and none of that. You would go to your room and there'd be four walls to look at and maybe a book if you were lucky, and that was it. So that was my father. Story_ID: 321233 Speaker 1: So Ms. Olivieri-- Speaker 2: Can you spell her name for me just before you go on (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) O-L-I-V-I-E-R-I. So she was my fifth grade teacher--I mean like my mother [Mae Rodrigues]--she looked like my mother. She was big. My mother was a big woman and she reminds me of my mother--just so, so special. That's my fifth grade. Here's what happens now. Housing patterns in New York City [New York, New York] were segregated. They are still segregated in large measure, and the city, I'm not sure if it was a lawsuit or voluntarily, they were going to integrate the schools, and the way they did that--in Queens [New York, New York] at any rate--was to pair schools. So they paired--I was in P.S. 148, so that's in Jackson Heights [Queens, New York, New York], the white community and my neighborhood school was P.S. 127 [Queens, New York, New York], so they were going to pair the schools. Here's what that meant--grades from one, kindergarten to fourth grade, let's say, would go to P.S. 127-- no 148, so whether you lived in Jackson Heights or East Elmhurst [Queens, New York, New York], you would to that school, 148. So the kids from East Elmhurst were going to be bussed into 148. The white kids who were going to fifth, sixth and seventh grade were going to be bussed into the black community in East Elmhurst. That's why they called it paired the schools. So instead of one school, a neighborhood school from kindergarten to sixth grade, it'd be two schools, one school for kindergarten to whatever and another school for the higher grades, so interestingly now, I'm being, quote, sent back to my black school because that's my neighborhood school, which is fine for me. I'm back home again. I'm like, "Great, I'm home." Here's the thing though--some of the very same kids that went to school with me in that white school, they and their parents were on television saying, "I'll never send my child to that black school in that black neighborhood." They would never do it and some of the kids were literally pulled out. These were people who I sat next to every day, and now all of sudden, in their own, in their minds, they were going to some ghetto school. It was a beautiful school and it still is. It's a beautiful neighborhood. In some ways, it was a better neighborhood than they were in because we had more space, more trees and more grass and less traffic than they had, but they didn't give it a chance. So we went back to the school. Now, all of sudden, strange things are happening. I'm being placed-- they don't have an IGC [intellectually gifted children] program here, but I'm like in 5-2, the second score or 5-1 whatever it is. Mrs. Olivieri, we're in sixth grade now, comes back. She comes back to my school in East Elmhurst and teaches there. I'm not in her class, but she's there and she does that same play again in the black school now with kids. She asked me again to play [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] even though I'm not in her class, and technically I shouldn't have done it, but I agreed to do-I a- I was thrilled, I loved her so I did it. So, again, I'm playing Martin Luther King, but now I'm back in my community and I truly believe that her effect on me and that play's effect on me carried over for my entire life because I had not even heard Martin Luther King speak so when I did the play, I had to kind of imagine what he sounded--not to say, he was alive obviously, but my parents [Mae Rodrigues and Joseph McLaughlin] weren't involved in the civil rights or any of these kinds of issues. They weren't--we never watched the news together. I never listened to the radio. My mother was deaf. She could speak and you wouldn't know she couldn't hear because she grew deaf as she grew older, so she didn't have any speech impediments. She could read lips and read them so well that you wouldn't know that she couldn't hear because she could communicate with you and have a conversation, just like I'm talking to you. So that profoundly affected me and that's where I learned about civil rights and segregation and Jim Crow and Ku Klux Klan [KKK]. I never had heard of these people before, so it was really an education. It definitely affected me. I think it had a large, large role to play in the path that I would future lead. Story_ID: 321234 Speaker 1: So at the time, this is your--when they were going to bus the kids. Did you see--did you--as that kid, being one of the kids, did you know that they were trying to integrate this school [P.S. 127, Queens, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Oh definitely. Speaker 1: It was talked about? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: At home, at the school? How did you know? Speaker 2: TV--now I'm watching the news. And it was on the TV. My mother [Mae Rodrigues] was talking about it. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: Oh, geez, you'd have to do the math. I was born in 1953, this is in sixth grade--I don't know, but it was definitely talked about. It may have been done over the summer because I don't remember being talked about when I was in school. But I certainly remember it being talked about when I was home. I remember seeing these people on the news, the ones I went to school with, and saying they'd never go back- they'd never go to that school. Speaker 1: How did you feel about it because you had gone to Jackson Heights [Queens, New York, New York] and now you were going back to East Elmhurst [Queens, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: I was thrilled--you know, I'd left my friends. These were people I grew up with. This was my community. It was--now a days, kids get on school buses all the time but at East Elmhurst, nobody got on the school bus. There were no school buses. So I'm like one of these few kids getting on this public bus, this regular, with adults, you know, I'm a little guy. Who am I to travel around? I shouldn't have done that. I should have stayed where I was. What, they couldn't have intellectually gifted class in East Elmhurst for the nine of us? They could have done that, but, you know, it wasn't cost effective. So I didn't like going- I didn't like going there. I wanted to stay where I was. I liked my neighborhood. I was happy to come back, but there was a little issue because I hadn't seen a lot of my friends and I was in this white school, and how are they are going to see me or accept me? So I had to get my props. I had to get a little street with them. (Laughter) Not too street, though. Story_ID: 321235 Speaker 1: What type of child were you? Speaker 2: I was a strange child. I hated childhood. Yeah, I didn't like being a child. I didn't like being told what to do, and I had a very strict upbringing. My father [Joseph McLaughlin] was very, very strict and I couldn't stand it. I hated it. He was mean, difficult, tough. You know. I couldn't leave Queens [New York, New York] to go to Manhattan [New York, New York]. I couldn't leave [East] Elmhurst [Queens, New York, New York] until I was well into high school [Newton High School, Queens, New York, New York]. My junior year in high school, they wouldn't let me out of the neighborhood. The way I would describe it, I led a sheltered life. They literally kept me in a box like I was some delicate little flower and I was going to break, but they were from the island, they were from the Caribbean they didn't want anything to happen to their little boy. And New York [New York] was a dangerous place, so I led a sheltered life. You know. I read a lot of books. I loved books. I was comic book collector, Marvel comics. I'm comic book collecting again. 'The Black Panther' is coming out--it's one of the Hudlin brothers [HistoryMaker Reginald Hudlin] is writing the story line and Marvel is putting it out. So I had, I go to these comic book stores now. I had all of the original comics from first to whatever, all the series of Marvel. I go to these comic books stores. Some of the comics that I lost, they're going for $500 a piece and maybe they wouldn't been, you know, whatever, but I was a collector and I treasured them, and I sold them to buy a pair of sneakers. My mother [Mae Rodrigues] told me she wasn't going to buy me any Converses for $20 or whatever it was. So I sold my entire collection to get these Converse--these Converse sneakers. Story_ID: 321236 Speaker 1: What were your dreams and aspirations at the time? What (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's funny. That's easy. (Laughter) I don't think I've told anyone this. I could remember my youngest memories. I was always thinking about the future because I wanted to grow up. You know, I mean I wanted to be on my own. I wanted to be independent. I didn't like being dependent on anyone. So I was always thinking, well, what was I going to do? And I knew--as early as I can remember, I knew I wanted to be a lawyer from like--I can't remember wanting to do anything else but be a lawyer. And I'm--don't ask me why. There's a lawyer in my family in Jamaica. I didn't know him very well. I saw him once or twice, but I watched a lot of law shows on TV and lawyer shows, 'Perry Mason,' 'Judd for [the] Defense' and I liked what these guys did. Then, as I'm coming up, I'm watching Bill Kunstler [William Kunstler], you know, in the Chicago Seven trials and the radical lawyers in the South, and anti-war movement, Thurgood Marshall. So I was gonna be a lawyer. But the funny thing was my earliest memory, am on my stoop--we have stoops in East Elmhurst [Queens, New York, New York], not steps--it's steps, but it's a stoop, so there was a stoop. And I would always sit on the stoop. That was like my thinking place. It was quiet. I would sit on the stoop and I'd think about things. So I'm thinking to myself, what do I want when I'm older, when I grow up? I said, do I want fame or fortune? That's what I said. I said, I want fame. I said, if I got fame, I can get the fortune. I said, I want people to know me, to know who I am when I walk down the street. I want folks to know my name, yeah. Now, when I walk down the streets in New York [New York], my staff when I'm walking--I've been there all my life and I've taught a lot of students since 1988 at Pace [University, New York, New York]--I walk down the streets now in New York, I go to places, I meet people and they know me. So I guess I've achieved my goal. I certainly didn't get the fortune, but people know me and that's nice. Story_ID: 321237 Speaker 1: So let's talk about your high school. What was high school life like? (Unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I loved high school. It was 'Cooley High.' If you ever watched that movie 'Cooley High,' that's what high school was for me. But after I left 127 [P.S. 127, Queens, New York, New York], I went to junior high--we called it junior high then. And now, all of sudden, I'm in the SP classes. These are the special people classes, special persons, it's the older version of the IGC [intellectually gifted children] class that Mrs. Harris [ph.] had put me out of. Now, I'm in the three-year program, not the two-year program because my math scores were never that strong. I wasn't--to this day, I don't like math except when I'm figuring my attorney's fees. I can do it then or grades. So I'm back in the special classes. Funny thing--they're still doing these IQ tests, like pre-SATs, whatever they were called--some type of IQ type test and there was one kid in the class, he scores lower than me on the IQ test, whatever the test was, the standardized test, but he is doing better on his grades. Yeah. So I said to myself, well, wait a minute now, if I'm scoring better than he is, I should be doing as well as he's doing, if not better. So I realized what was going on. He was working harder than I am. This was coming easy to me and things that didn't come easy to me, I didn't like and I didn't do well at those things, so I realized being smart wasn't enough, I had to do wel- I had to work hard. If I worked hard and I was smart, I could get places. I knew that in junior high. It taught me a valuable lesson. So I get to high school. I'm at Newtown High School [Queens, New York, New York] and I'm in honor classes. Here again, my life is very strange. I leave this SP program at the junior high and now I'm in the high school, and I'm in honors history I think and I'm in a regular English class and I'm in a regular math class, and I forget what else. So I'm going between these two worlds. I'm in this honors history class and all these smart kids are there, mostly white kids, and then I go to this regular English class, there are mostly black kids in this class, yeah. And they're misbehaving--white kids too, and it's quite clear no one is paying attention to the teacher. So I'm in these two classes. One class is like college prep and the other class is just like taking up space. So one day this teacher in the regular English class pulls me into the hallway. And I'm like--I thought I was in trouble because I'm quiet. I'm in the hallway. She said, "You don't belong here." I said, "Excuse me." She said, "You're in the wrong class. You should be in the Honor English class." I said, "I should?" She said, "Yes, you should." She said, "I'm going to put you there." I said, "Okay, if that's what you want, that's good for me." So I'm now, I'm in this Honor English class and I'm loving it again because they're smart kids, they're black, they're white, they're Asians, you know, it's a mixed group, but mostly white. But I'm in Honor English class and it's a lovely teacher, red-headed teacher, short, kind of cute and I'm loving it again. So I'm saying to myself, "How come one minute I'm smart and the next minute, I'm not?" It keeps happening to me. I keep getting bumped down, but it was a good thing because this is what I think it did for me. It taught me humility. That's what it taught me. You can say, "Well, maybe it was racism." Well, it may have been a bit of that. I don't know. It could be. But it taught me to be humble. That not to--had I just gone through these IGC classes and just had these smart kids all around me, I would have been a very different person. I would have been egotistical, it knocks your ego down and you have to work to get back to where you want to be, so it taught me to work hard--just like I learned in elem--in junior high. Work hard and you can get where you want to be. The other thing was people throughout my life--white and black have seen something in me, and placed me where I needed to be. That's what happened. You know. That's the story, and I've been fortunate, lucky, blessed, whatever you want to call it. Story_ID: 321238 Speaker 1: My parents [Mae Rodrigues and Joseph McLaughlin] were working class. My father was a member of the Local 1199, the hospitals' worker's union [1199SEIU, United Healthcare Workers East]. My first memory of going to his workplace was going to Flushing Hospital [Flushing Hospital Medical Center, New York, New York] with him when the hospital workers were on a strike--the first strike of the hospital workers ever. And they were being castigated in the media because now I'm reading the papers. They're being castigated, "How can people strike a hospital? It's not a factory." And he said--he took me. He didn't say a lot, my father. He didn't talk a lot, but he wanted me to see what the workers were doing and my first memory of going anywhere with him was going to the picket line at 1199. He didn't march the line, but he wanted me to see what it was. He said to me, "I never want you to do what I do. I never want you to work with your hands. You--there are other things you have to do with your life." When I worked as a cab driver for a summer, just for like six weeks, he's like, "This is not for you. I don't want you to do this." I said, "Dad, I gotta make some money." He said, "Yes, but this is not what you're supposed to do." I said, "Okay, I won't do it, don't worry, just for a couple of months, okay?" So it was fine. My mother was a member of the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union. She was a seamstress. She worked in factories in midtown Manhattan [New York, New York], stitching stuff up in huge factories, sewing. Story_ID: 321239 Speaker 1: So I'm in high school [Newton High School, Queens, New York, New York], and now I'm in these intellectually gifted classes again. I'm smart again. And this time, I stay smart, you know (laughter). I realize I better work hard and stop slacking off because that was probably what was going on. I'll be frank with you. I'm a little lazy. I could just as soon do nothing as do something. I work because I like to work or whatever, but I could just as soon sit around the house and do absolutely nothing. So I think that that's what it was. I just wasn't working to my full potential. I needed a challenge. That's what I need. I need challenge. If I don't have a challenge, I get lackadaisical and I get bored, and when I get bored, you know, I do stupid things, I suppose. So, high school, I'm running track. I'm the school president of the G.O. [ph.], and I'm in the history honors club. And I go to this thing called, Boys State with the American Legion of (unclear). It was boys from all the State of New York. It was like a little boys state and we did that. Speaker 2: What was Boys State? What did you do? Speaker 1: I was the parliamentarian for congress and we ran this candidate for president of Boys State and he was a black guy. And I was his parliamentarian for the congressional, for the convention, whatever it was and it was a great moment, kids from all over. My first memory as a young man of being outside of East Elmhurst [Queens, New York, New York] or the city, I was way upstate--I can't even remember where it was, some college campus, close to Canada, it felt like. And I remember looking out every day at this mountain. I never had seen a mountain before. I thought it was like a postcard. I couldn't believe it was real. I would look at this mountain every day and say, is--, "Are there people really out there on this mountain?" I see a house, no one was moving, just this mountain. I was in this dreamland. My roommate, white kid from someplace upstate, never seen a black kid, certainly not room with one. He said to me, "Can I touch your hair?" I said, "Excuse me?" He said, "I've never touched a black's person hair. Can I touch your hair?" I said, "Fine, touch my hair." So he did. He said, "How do you comb it?" (Laughter) You know, this guy was like--but he wasn't--he was innocent. It wasn't like he was a racist or some, or a redneck, whatever. He was honest and I respected that, so we had a good time at Boys State. Speaker 2: What did that teach you about yourself? That experience. Speaker 1: That there were people who were--well, now, looking back on it, there were people being raised, maybe even then, in an environment where they didn't see people like me, and that the world was not East Elmhurst, Corona [Queens, New York, New York], or New York City [New York, New York]. In New York City, we grew up with everybody. We may not have lived with everybody but we grew up with everybody. They were always around us--everyone--you saw every type and because of cities like L.A. [Los Angeles, California] where you get in a car and drive places or even in the suburb, you get in the car and drive places, in New York, you're moving in the streets. You're walking, you go in the subways--people are rubbing shoulders, so you have contact with people constantly. Story_ID: 321240 Speaker 1: Funny thing--I'm in honors history in my junior year [at Newton High School, Queens, New York, New York], and there are maybe three black kids in the class, myself, my good, good friend--my--to this very day--a Jamaican fellow--and the teacher is giving out the midterm exam--they're giving back the grades. In those days, they would tell you what grade you got publicly. So she says--teacher--she said, "There is a student who did very well on the midterm exam, one of the highest grades in the class. He got a 97 [percent]. And she gives it to my friend, Trevor [ph.] yeah, the only other black kid. And she said, "And there is one other student who did even better than that and he got a 99 [percent]," whatever. (Laughter) To this day, he says, "I felt so proud I got the highest grade. Then you come along and get the highest grade." But here we are these two black kids in this mostly white class and we're like the top of the heap. So I learned in high school, I could compete with anybody and do well and do better. I don't care what your race was, what your background was. But here's the other thing--I'm in these classes with these--I'm getting straight A's pretty much. Ninety-fives, nineties, whatever, and I'm running track and the kids in the track team, they're not getting those kind of grades. They're barely in school. They didn't have any academic requirements to run track in those days. So I'm learning, even in my community, how to relate to everybody not just the kids who are doing well, the upper middle class, middle class, whatever. I'm relating to everybody. Then one day, I'm going to school and one of my track friends--he comes over to me, and he goes, "You know why we like you?" I said, "No." He said, "We like you because you don't boast about what grades you get. You never tell us that you get nineties and ninety-fives." He said, "If we didn't ask you" because they'd be like, "Hey, how did you do?" "Oh I got--" "If we didn't ask you," he said to me, "we'd never know what you were doing in school, and I respect that about you. You don't brag about what you're doing. You just do what you gotta do." And that taught me, again, a lesson--that a) was the right thing to do, but b) it showed me what people perceived of me by how I related. And to this day, I still try to function that way--not to be boastful. I mean you have to toot your own horn sometimes depending on the situation but when you're in an environment where people have different abilities, different interests, different things, just not to be boastful. You know, I learned that by my father [Joseph McLaughlin] too--not by he taught to me, but that you had to respect people not for what they do but for who they are, and all work has value. I'm the executive director of Hale House [New York, New York] now and I tell my staff this. I've had staff meetings. And it's-- this is the way I've always been--at the law school, wherever it is. I speak to everybody. I come into the building and the secretarial staff, the janitor, whoever it is--I stop and speak to everybody. I was coming to work today, and I saw one of the childcare workers on the street, I said, "Hey, how are you?" I speak to everybody. We're all human beings. We're all working because we need to make an income to take care of our families or do to what we find interesting. But I don't respect people based on what they do. I respect them on who they are. That's the way I was raised. Story_ID: 321241 Speaker 1: Did well in high school [Newton High School, Queens, New York, New York]. You went to Columbia [University, New York, New York]. How did that come about? What was the experience like? Speaker 2: Funny thing. My mother [Mae Rodrigues] wanted me to go to University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so I applied early admission to the University of Pennsylvania and the only school I visited actually and I liked it. I was going to go. Then I got a Regent scholarship, New York State Regents scholarship, and a New York State Regents scholarship could only be used in New York State so I couldn't carry that money with me elsewhere. So I then said to myself--my parents couldn't afford to send me to school. That was money in the bank. I also got a United Federation of Teachers [UFT] scholarship to go to college. So I said, I should stay in New York because the second year I worried that Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or some other school would take money away from me or not give me the same award or whatever. I was worried. I figured if I stay in New York, I could keep the Regents scholarship and keep the UFT scholarship and I'd be guaranteed the money. So I pulled out of the early admission there and got into Columbia and went. Speaker 1: Why Columbia? Speaker 2: For a couple of reasons, one, it was the [University of California] Berkeley [Berkeley, California] of the East Coast. I was--high school politicized me. I was really political in high school. Story_ID: 321242 Speaker 1: I was involved in the anti-war movement. Not like an activist leader type. One of my teachers, Ms. Nash [ph.], who I would later see, many, many years later--like within the last few years, and she's teaching in a school in Lawrence [New York] in the Five Towns end--I think it's an Orthodox Jewish school and she invited me to come speak on Black History day--month, and I did. I loved it. She said, white woman--she said to me in high school [Newton High School, Queens, New York, New York], she pulled Trevor [ph.] and me out--she said, "Listen, you two guys are going places. You're gonna be leaders. And they like to cut black leaders down before they stand up." I'm like, "Why are you telling me this?" This is deep. And she said, "You have to keep your head down. Don't distinguish yourself until you're ready to come out. Stay below the radar or else they will stop you before you get a chance to stand up." I said, "Okay. Cool, no problem. I get it." You know. I said, "Thank you." Until I was ready, I stayed below the radar screen. I didn't--I wasn't actively involved, but I did a couple of anti-war marches. I did that kind of stuff because I was still in high school. This may have been before she told me that, you know. So I never forgot I was in, there was a moratorium rally in Bryant Park on 42nd Street and 6th Avenue [New York, New York]--and lots of kids, high school kids, college kids marching, demonstrating against the war at Vietnam [Vietnam War] and these hard hats, they were construction workers were beating up demonstrators. I mean they were literally beating them up. That's what they did in those days because there were buildings going up and these guys just resented us. So they were beating these kids up. And there were cops in blue uniform police officers just standing around, watching these guys attacking the demonstrators, like a group of them, just like pummeling them. So I walk over to the cops and I said, "Can't you guys do anything about this?" They said, "What do want us to do?" I said, "Who's in charge?" I'm not involved. I said, "Who's in charge?" "He's over there somewhere." So I go over to the sergeant and I know I'm dealing with an authority figure and I can get arrested if I get out of line with this guy. I said, "Excuse me, sergeant, can you help these gentlemen up there. They're getting attacked by the--." "Where is it? No, I can't leave my post." So I see a guy with bars on his shoulders. He is the captain. I said, "Excuse me, are you in charge?" "Yes, I'm in charge." I said, "Up the steps here" because you couldn't see it from where I was talking to these guys--they were up the steps in the park. We were down in the street, so you couldn't see what was going on. I said, "There are some young men up there getting beaten by hard hats and I think you should do something about it." Captain said-- to the same sergeant, "Go handle that." And he went and dealt with it. I learned then, early on, that you gotta step up if you see abuse like that, but you gotta know how to handle it properly. If I just mouthed off and jumped in the face of these cops, they would've have beaten me up maybe. Who knows but I learned how to deal with these people and you can affect power. You can change power, you can fight power and you can win. And you can get power to do what you want it to do if you know how to appeal to it properly, and go to the authority, and that's what we did. Story_ID: 321243 Speaker 1: I'm in college [Columbia University, New York, New York] and working like a dog (laughter). I was an African history/history major. I had dual major, and the African history was in the international school of--international affairs school, the African history, African history department of African studies and we took political science, history. My first contact with Africa--my first contact with Africans--one of my teachers was Ofonagoro, Mr.--Professor [Walter] Ofonagoro. Speaker 2: Can you spell that for me? Speaker 1: Oh gosh, O-F-O-N-O-G-A-R-O [sic.]. He would later become an official in the Nigerian government under one of the leaders. I read Chinua Achebe's novels, 'Things Fall Apart,' 'No Longer at Ease.' I studied Kiswahili. I wanted to learn--I was thirsting for this knowledge of Africa because I knew nothing about it. I was gathering the Jamaican knowledge from friends and colleagues of mine, people I grew up with and just bombarding, learning, you know, learning and listening to the music. My mother [Mae Rodrigues]--you said sounds, we didn't have sounds in my house. Music wasn't played. My mother couldn't hear, so we didn't play music. Um, but I wanted to absorb this thing because it had because denied to me. I'd never heard this stuff. I mean history began in America--in America schools with slavery. And I said there must be --and one teacher--one teacher alluded to this thing in high school [at Newton High School, Queens, New York, New York]. He said, "There were African empires. There were three--this white teacher--Mali, Sanghi, and Ghana and they were destroyed. But they were three African empires." I was like, "What, African empires?" So I was--when I got to college, I wanted to go find out about these people and who they were and what their story was and that's what I did. I became an African history major. The only part of American History that I studied, not the Revolutionary War, I wasn't interested in that, Civil War. I wanted to learn about slavery and the opposition to slavery and the fight against slavery. That's the only period of American history I studied. In Africa, there was everything else, literature, history, political science. Interestingly, one of the books that Achebe writes, he talks about you can't get palm wine in the west. You have to go to Africa to get it. Years later, I would go to Africa, Liberia, and have palm wine and it was spectacular. It was just spectacular. Speaker 2: What did he write about it and then what was the experience of having it? Speaker 1: He wrote about it as a ceremonial drink. It was--especially in 'Things Fall Apart,' which is a story of an African village and this African leader, Okonkwo and what happened to him when the Europeans came and how his whole society got twisted and destroyed and his way of life got twisted and destroyed by the introduction of the European and their religion, especially their religion, and in the end, this great, great man, proud African leader committed suicide. And that was, you know--things fall apart. The next book was 'No Longer at Ease.' It's the story of one of his descendants [Obi Okonkwo] who goes to England to become a lawyer and comes back and he's no longer at ease with his own people--his own country because he's inherited these English ways and he can't accept his people and they don't accept him, and he gets arrested for corruption and convicted. Interesting, Achebe's novels. Story_ID: 321244 Speaker 1: What did those books ['Things Fall Apart' and 'No Longer at Ease,' Chinua Achebe] do to your dreams of being a lawyer at the time? Did the--were you still thinking of becoming a lawyer at that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thin--always, constantly. Speaker 1: Then why were you a history, African history major if you--? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Good point. I had a choice of political science or history--that's what pre-law folks did, political science, history. Political science had all these prerequisite courses that I had to take that I didn't like. And at Columbia [University, New York, New York], we had a core curriculum--two years of required courses and in the '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s] now, that just wasn't going on. People just took whatever they wanted to take and go study your (unclear) or whatever. There was no majors everything was kind of loose, but Columbia was very rigid, two years, I had to take humanities, which was the study of European literature, [Francois] Rabelais and [Rene] Descartes and contemporary civilization where we had [Jean-Jacques] Rousseau and [John] Locke and all the stuff that I had no interest in, and art history, language, stuff. I hated it. I mean, positively, I hated Columbia as a student, but, now, looking back on it, that was a classical education that I got. That was a great education because I can converse with anybody about practically anything and you have knowledge. That says--I say I was classically trained. You have a base of knowledge about a lot of different that if you just became a political science and that was the track you were on, you wouldn't have that base. It was liberal arts education in the highest form. I know there's been a lot of opposition to that method of education--you know, they call it studying dead white men. Well, you know, sometimes they got something to teach us and you gotta study everybody. I mean, [Nelson] Mandela said when the students were rebelling in South Africa about learning South Africans, he said you have to learn that language. Are you crazy? You gotta read what their writing, so you have to read everybody's stuff. These were great thinkers. They weren't knuckle heads. So I read those people and I read the Africans. That's why I went to history. It was in history, in my junior year, I didn't have to take any required courses. I could just focus on what I wanted to learn and I wasn't going for another year of required courses. Forget about it, I took so many history courses that I had to get special permission from the dean to take any more because I loved history. It was my first love. I just love it. To this day, I love history. I thought about becoming a history professor, but I remember as a freshman, there were some reports that said there weren't going to be any jobs in the history field as college--if I went to become a history professor, I was gonna be- to teach college level. I wasn't going to teach high school level. I like college. And they said, there wouldn't be jobs for thirty years and I couldn't wait that long. I had to get work. I couldn't wait that long, so I figured law school was three years in and out, and I did love law. And I did like the concept, but I took no pre-law classes. I figured I'd learn law in law school and I did. But I didn't very- I didn't do very much else. I just worked and studied and hung out in New York City [New York, New York]. That's my town and I applied to law school and I got into Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I got into every law school I applied to practically except for one, which didn't make much sense. I guess for comic- remember Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I didn't accept their early admission? They accepted me in school--well, Penn was the only one that didn't accept me, University of Pennsylvania. I think it was like pay back or they figured, he's not coming here; he's going to Harvard or Columbia or wherever. At the time, I applied to law schools, I wanted to go to Columbia. I mean that was my dream to go to Columbia because you know, it's a great law school. In New York City. I'm a city kid. I applied late. I told you I'm lazy. I'm lackadaisical. So Harvard had a rolling admission process where every month they were accepting people. Okay, so I applied to Harvard in like December, this is late. And January, I go to my mailbox and I pull out the mail and I see this envelope from Harvard Law School and I wasn't aware of the thick envelope, thin envelope, all that drama. It wasn't in my consciousness. So I open the envelope, and I rip it open. I see this stuff in there. I see forms. Forms? I gotta fill out more--I'm literally thinking this. I gotta fill out more forms? Come on, I've already--I applied to seven or eight schools. That's a lot of paperwork. I'm doing it all myself. My father [Joseph McLaughlin], my mother [Mae Rodrigues]--they didn't fill out a college application or law school application for me. I did it all. That was the way it was. Story_ID: 322019 Speaker 1: --Still at Columbia [University, New York, New York]. I get this envelope with all these forms in it; and I'm looking through these forms and I'm like really ticked off because I think it's more paperwork. And I'm not happy, so going through it and I see this one form that says residential. I say, "Residential." Residence hall, residence hall, I say, "Wait a minute, you're not gonna get a residence hall unless you're accepted." Now, I'm furiously going through the papers. I said, "Oh, my God, I got accepted to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]!" I'm like beside myself. I couldn't believe. I swear to God. It was like, this is--because when I applied, one of my professors he was friends with the dean, only black dean at the school. He went to Harvard Law School and he said, "You can get it. Apply." I said, "Harvard, me? You gotta be kidding." He said, "No, apply to Harvard. I think you can get in." Okay, whatever. It was a lark to me. I'm going to Columbia [Law School, New York, New York] as far as I was concerned. I get this Harvard thing. I'm like skipping up steps. But here's my drama--one of the reasons I wanted to go to Columbia, I wanted to stay in New York [New York], and I wanted to stay in New York for a couple of reasons. One of the reasons was my mother [Mae Rodrigues]. She was very sick. She had all sorts of diseases, problems, she was overweight, diabetes, angina, everything. She was very ill, and my father [Joseph McLaughlin] was old too, so I was the one who would come home and take her to the doctors and I was worried. I said to myself, I said if I go to Harvard, I'm away, who's going to take care of her? My father couldn't do it. So I left school and I went home, and we were in the kitchen in the basement. She couldn't hear so I had to go to her, couldn't talk to her on the phone. So I said to her, I showed her the letter. I said, "Mom, I got into Harvard." And she's ecstatic, "My son!" These people had came over in a boat with suitcases in their hands. They didn't have any money and their son is going to Harvard, so said--she's ecstatic. I said, "But mom I'm not so sure I wanna go." "What do you mean you don't want to go?" I said, "Who's going to take care of you?" She said, "Don't worry about me. You go. You're going to Harvard. That's all there is to it." I said, "I might wanna go to Yale [Law School, New Haven, Connecticut]." "I don't care about Yale. You're going to Harvard." And I did--without her blessing, I might have gone to Columbia because I was worried about her. My, you know, my brother [Victor McLaughlin] picked up. He helped. A year after I got there, in the beginning of my second year, she died, but I always knew that she knew that I was going to make it. And my father lived to see it come to fruition. So it's bittersweet, you know. It's not all easy. Story_ID: 322020 Speaker 1: So I go to Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. (Laughter) And one of my friends from Columbia [University, New York, New York] is there. And I didn't have a lot of friends at Columbia. I was a loner. I kept to myself a lot, books and things. And he said to me, "What's important here,"--black student--"is functional anonymity." "What?" "Functional anonymity," he said. "You shouldn't reveal yourself. You should basically fit into the woodwork. You should fade into the woodwork. Don't stand out." Same message I had heard years before. Well, I got to Harvard and I said to myself--my first time living outside of New York City [New York, New York]--and I said, "I have to change my personality." And I'm making this conscious decision. I was shy. I was painfully shy. When I was going to high school [Newtown High School, New York, New York], if I got in the public school bus, again, no school bus, public bus, like a regular Triboro Coach Company [Triboro Coach Corporation]. I get on the bus--and it was about half an hour to get to high school and I'd sit in the seat--I'm in the front--I'm in the beginning of the bus line; and if someone--I would pray that someone--that no one would sit next to me because if they did, I'd have to talk to them and I wouldn't know what to say. I was like shy. I didn't like to talk to people, my friends okay, but not to some random person sitting next to me. I was like, please, God, don't let anyone sit next to me. And sometimes I would sit on the outside just so no one would sit there, you know. That's how shy I was. And I get to college. I didn't make many friends. I went to my thirtieth aniver- reunion the other day and I didn't know anybody. As a matter of fact, when I went to my senior year, I went to the pre-law society meeting of some sort. I didn't join that either. I didn't join any clubs at Columbia, unlike high school, was very active. I go to the pre-law society meeting. I come to the meeting and the president of the society says, "Excuse me, do you go to school here?" I said, "Yeah, I'm a senior," but you know, I just wasn't involved. I was below the radar. So I'm at Harvard and I said, "If I don't come out of myself and get aggressive and be outgoing, no one will know who I am. I'll have no friends and I'll be a lonely soul for three years and I can't--I don't know anybody here. So I can't,"--in New York, I didn't need to meet people of color at Columbia because I had my New York. I'm from New York, I didn't need these people. But now I'm in Cambridge [Massachusetts], I'm in Boston [Massachusetts] and I can't live this existence without any friends at all, so I have to like change my personality and become more outgoing and I did. I just walked up to you, "Hey, how you doing?" And just start talking to people. Story_ID: 322021 Speaker 1: It's my first year and law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is taught on a Socratic method basis, which means you're asked--the professor asks you questions and you have to answer the questions, and you have to answer all the questions the professor has. That's what he does. He grills you. He'll slap you around. I had seen 'The Paper Chase,' which was the movie. So I went to him, this professor, this dean who went to Columbia [University, New York, New York], to Harvard Law [School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I said to him, "Is that the way it is? Because if that's the way it is, I ain't going. I'm not going through that." Because it was like, Mr. [Charles] Kingsfield! He said, "No, no, maybe you have one professor like that. There's this guy, Arthur [R.] Miller, he's like that but most of them aren't like that at all." Who do I get my first year? Arthur Miller--they had patterned Kingsfield after Miller. He was an animal, a brute, a vicious, vile person but I loved him. (Laughter) Here's why. I get to--I see him in his class and I say, okay, here's the thing. You're going to work really hard and you're going to make your name in this class. That's where you going to make it. You're gonna make your mark here and you know what you're going to do? I'm talking to myself like this--I said, you're going to raise your hand and speak out in his class before he calls on you because then, you'll be accustomed to the class and how to be engaged and if you make your mark here, everything else will be easy. I said, okay. I'm having this conversation with myself. So I get to class, and I'm working really hard. I'm working harder than I've ever worked in my life, and sure enough I'd watch what he would do. He'd call on one student and he'd grill that student. And you'd have to--and he'd slap you around. And then when the student stumbled or couldn't answer the question, other students would raise their hand and he'd call on them. If he would call on you, you would answer the question that you were prepared to answer because you thought you had the answer anyway and then he'd move on. I said, oh, okay. That's what I'll do. I'll do just that. I'll do just that. I'll get comfortable. So as soon as someone stumbled, I had the answer. My hand was up, zoom. You know, and one day in the classroom--and he'd call me and I'd bang, hit it. And he'd move on, but I'm making a mark because there were only like seven or eight black kids in the class in this particular class. There are 150 of us in the room. There were 550 in the whole school first year, big class. And the other black students in the class, they're not saying anything. They're keeping their heads down. They don't want to get called on. Functional anonymity--and I'm saying, oh, no, I'm through with that. That ain't me anymore. I'm going to be the man. I'm coming out. So, plus grades are anonymous. Yeah, they grade you anonymously. In other words, you all submit your exam with numbers on them. They don't know who you are. You're anonymous just by the way the grades are cut. So I'm raising my hand and in one particular day, a student stumbled and Miller is slicing him up, and I knew I had the right answer. And I like shot my hand up because I wanted to slice this kid myself. I wanted to get him. It was a competition. Yeah, I got the answer. You don't have it. And I sliced him and it felt good. I got this kid. But then I said, what's the matter with you? Why are you doing that to him? That's not the right way to be. That's not the way you were raised. What kind of person are you turning into? Cut that out! I never did it again. I never did-- I would raise my hand but not to slice up a student like that. He wouldn't get me to do that again. I had taken the bait. Story_ID: 322022 Speaker 1: It was a great class and years later, I would teach the same subject matter he taught me. I still teach it to this very day with the same case book he wrote. And some of my students tell me they think, I think, I'm Arthur [R.] Miller, (laughter) which I'm not, but I'm hard. I'm tough on them. I slap them around and I have the same rules he had. If a student comes to class unprepared--it happened once, Arthur Miller. He has rules. Slam the books down, "Here are my rules," and he'd bark them at you. "The word pass does not exist in my class. You come to class, be prepared! If you're not prepared, let my secretary know before you come in here. Do not waste my time." Now everybody is like freaking out. We know he's like this horror. So who's going to call the secretary because we figure, oh my God, I'm going to tell Miller I'm not prepared. He's gonna really slap me around! I'm sitting behind this kid and Miller calls him, student says, "P-p-professor, I haven't read that case." You hear a pin drop in the room, a pin drop because we're all wondering what he's going to do to this kid and he says, "Mr. Jones"--whatever his name was--"how many hours are there in a day? Do you know your college is depending on you to be prepared? That's inexcusable." And he slams this kid. He's ripping him to shreds and I'm right behind him and I could feel this venom coming right back at me through the kid to me. I'm feeling this kid's pain. So after he's mauled this kid for about ten minutes--it felt like an eternity--he turns to this kid in the back, another student, "Mr. Jones, Mr. Smith, state the case!" So the guy is like--he's fumbling, but he's trying to make some words come out of his mouth. One student in the front said, "I can't hear him Professor Miller." "Don't worry, he hasn't said anything worth hearing yet." This is the kind of thing he would do. He would just slam you around, but there's a reason for it. For what he's doing. You can't come to court and tell a judge, I'm not prepared. If you're there, you better be prepared. That's what he's telling them--us. So, now I have the same rules--same rules--I tell the students no pass in my class. You come to class, you're prepared. If you're not prepared, tell my secretary in advanced and you'll be excused. Simple. One particular year, a student, she comes to me and says, "Look, I'm having problems. I'm not ready." Okay, fine. I'm not an animal. No problem, I won't call on you. When you're ready, you let me know. So time goes by and the semester goes on, and she comes to me and she say, "I think I'm ready now--I'm ready now." I said, "Okay, fine." I still give her a couple of weeks--I call on her and she says, "I'm not prepared." Now, the same thing happens again--students in the room, stone cold of silence. A pin could drop and I'm debating how should I handle this? This is not the first time that it's happened. I turn to a student--one of my go-to students and I said, "Ms. Smith,"--no, no, I forget, I turned to this student and I said, "Do you know the rules? Were you here the first day of class?" "Yes." "Do you know the rules?" "No." Oh, now, I'm really ticked off. Now you're playing me. I gave you the break, you came to me--I'm saying this in my head. You come into class, telling me you're ready and you're not ready--then you shouldn't have said that. Then I turn to one of my go-to students and I said, "Ms. Jones, do you know the rules?" "Yes, professor, I know the rules." "Tell Ms. Smith what the rules are!" She goes through the rules. I said, "Ms. Smith, the next time you come to class, I don't expect you to say that again." She dropped out. She should've dropped out, you know why? Because she couldn't handle it. She wasn't ready. She needed to take and get her life in order. That is what it was about. I didn't feel good that she dropped and I don't think she dropped out because of what happened in that class but she must have realized, I'm not ready. Let me tell you, law is a jealous mistress. You can't play with her. Either you're married to her or you're not. There is no half way about it. I'm serious about this stuff because you're putting people's lives in your hands--their careers, their futures, their homes, everything. When people come to lawyers--they don't come to lawyers because they want to have a nice walk in the park. They've got problems that they can't solve and they're depending on you to solve their problem for them and no one is going to be looking over shoulder and if you screw it up, guess what? You're not losing your license. You can go on to screw up the next person's life. My job, first year, weed out the people. Those who shouldn't be there, they're out. I make--that's my job--and I just weed them out. That's what I gotta do. Like Miller. Story_ID: 322023 Speaker 1: So I'm back in law school now. That's a little fast forward--back to law school, and (laughter) I'm raising my hand, right. I'm very aggressive in all my classes. So a group of students--black students come up to me and they say, "We're forming a study group, and we'd like you to join it." I said, "Oh, okay." I never formed a study group before, never was in one, but you know, no problem. A study group is cool. So we go to our first meeting. There were very pompous, arrogant people, and we have to start taking--it's like October. We haven't even learned anything. "We have to start taking practice exams, so we'll be ready for the exam, and," blah, blah. I said, "Practice exams? Why we're taking that? We haven't learned law yet?" I said, "Once, we learn the law, I understand what you're saying but this doesn't make any sense to me." So we're having this argument and they're like, "Oh, no, we must." Then later on, about a week or so later, one of them comes up to me and says, "We've disbanded the study group. Things weren't working out." I said, "Oh, okay, whatever." I later believe that they just threw me out. But you know I was a rugged individualist. I didn't need groups. I believed in studying on my own. What did am I going to need to talk to these people for? What do they know? They know more than I do? How do I know that? Why should I trust what they know? They're not upper class students. They're in the same boat that I'm in. I'm going to sit and argue with these people? No. I'm going to learn the law on my own and I'm going to make it on my own. That's what I did. But it's a difficult time at Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. The DeFunis [v. Odegaard, 1974] and [Regents of the University of California v.] Bakke [1978] cases are raging in the country and my second semester and I have one professor who is this liberal, allegedly. He is teaching constitutional law. I was sitting in the back of the room at that time. I liked always being--the rooms at Harvard are tiered, so when you sit in the bottom, you got to look up to see people, and it's a lower position. I'm not a feng shui kind of person but I believe that rooms have power, the position to have power. They didn't fight over the peace table at Vietnam or the peace conference in Paris [France] for almost six months for nothing because the way you sit depends on how--measures on how you feel and how you project and how others perceive you. So when I come into a room, depending on the situation, I'll sometimes take the power position. There are power positions in every room depending on how they're set up. Sometimes I'll see the power position through someone else depending on how my objective is because I think everything is scientific. Everything is scientific. You know I don't just--someone said to me about me once that I don't ever do anything without planning, without thinking it through--sometimes I do actually but that's good that they think that at any rate. So I sat at the top of the tier. I always liked sitting at the top because then when I speak, people look up to me and I look down on them, and I'm in the power position. Professor (unclear) he said to me--he said it to the group--well, "You know, there's a lot of affirmative action cases raging in the country now, and one of the arguments is that white students will feel that black students don't deserve to be here, that they're here under false pretenses, that they've gotten in with lower grades and lower LSAT scores and they're not qualified." I am sitting in the back. I've been to Columbia [University, New York, New York]; I've gotten good grades; I was on the dean's list six out of eight semesters there or whatever it was. You're saying this to me? So I raised my hand. "You know what, I don't really care what the white students think about me. It doesn't mean a thing to me what you think. There are no affirmative action grades here and there are no affirmative action law licenses here or anywhere else and when you meet me in a court room one day and I grind you into dust, you tell me about affirmative action then." And I sat down. I was done. I was like--I can't say it on camera, but I was like, forget you people, I ain't here for you. I'm here to steal knowledge. That's what I'm here to do, to steal knowledge and bring it back down like Prometheus did but they ain't going to bind me into some rock and have the birds pick at me. But that's what I was doing. I was deliberate. It was clear to me why I was there. Story_ID: 322024 Speaker 1: I wasn't there--oh I almost got seduced. Very dangerous place when they go to those places. You better know who you are because if you don't know who you are, they'll turn you into something you're not. So I'm there and I don't have anything from my--from my life. All I have is this. This is a dorm room and all I have are law books, I have no posters, I have nothing. It's just law and a little television, and Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is everywhere around me and the thing you're hearing constantly is this drum beat, it can march off like lemming to go to these corporate law firms. That's what the whole mindset is of the place. I didn't know before I got there. I went to Harvard because I figured wherever I was going to go in life, that place would help open up doors for me because it was the number one law school in the country. I wasn't wrong about that. I didn't know what the life was going to be like there. So for a moment, I'm starting to think about--because they're telling me how much money these people are making at these firms. I don't know what they're doing but the money sounds great and I'm tempted, tempted to go there. It was like that story that's told in the Bible about Jesus going up on the mountain and he's going out to the desert for forty days and the devil is tempting him, saying basically, "Look over at the valley, this can be yours if you just forget those folks down there. Just don't go back." And you know, I could have done that. I went back home for Thanksgiving and I got a suitcase, biggest suitcase I could find, and I put it in every political book, every African book, every history book, every book I had from college, big, big suitcase, and I dragged it up to Colo- to Harvard, dragged it, opened it up and every day, I would have my law books out and when I was studying. And when I was through for the night, I'd take the law books down and put them in a suitcase and I had all my African books, my history books, my political science books, my [Karl] Marx, my [Vladimir Ilyich] Lenin, that's what was on my shelves because I wanted every day when I woke up, when I lived in that place to remember who I was because that was important to me to remember who I was, where I came from, what I've studied, what I'd learned and where I was going because if I didn't have that, something to hold on to, I felt like I would lose it. I'd just be lost. So I kept the stuff and the story that people kept telling me--I thought about it today as I was coming to home--I was--one of my friends would say, "When I first met Randy [HistoryMaker Randolph Michael McLaughlin], he was walking on campus with jeans, a pair of sandals and dashiki, carrying a book, not a law book, how--Walter Rodney's, 'How Europe Underdeveloped Africa.'" You know, I was this radical guy. I was smart. It was obvious because I was always getting good grades and whatever, but I was marching to a different drummer and I knew from then--once I had gotten past that pull, that tug to go the straight way, I knew I was okay. I didn't know what I was going to do. I knew what I didn't want to do. I knew what path I wasn't going to take. It was kind of like Robert Frost's poem "Two roads--," 'The Road Not Taken.' Two roads that verged in the woods, one beaten and clear, one overgrown--I never understood the poem when I was a kid reading it. I said, "Why wouldn't people go through a path that's clear? It's much easier to walk in that path--," but that's it's exactly the point. It's much easier to go that way. It's much more dangerous to go the other because there's no path. You gotta make your own path. Oh that's a concept. Story_ID: 322025 Speaker 1: My first year out of law school--no my first year after--after my first year in law school, I go back and work in the community. I worked in one of these community-based programs and I taught community law to high school students about how to be a --how to function. It was great. I was back in the community and I met my first communist. She was one of the first teachers in the class. She was out and out communist. She said, "I'm a communist." I was like, "What, you're a communist? I never met one before." So she was just open about it. It was heavy to actually meet somebody who was so open about their politics because I was always told keep yourself--my mother [Mae Rodrigues] would say, "Don't wear your heart on your shirt sleeve." Keep it covered. Keep a low profile. It was a great summer. I was in the community. I was back home in the community, loving it. Speaker 2: Did she influence you at the time? Did she have any influence on you? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: What did you think about her politics? Speaker 1: I thought it was a little extreme, you know. I mean this is America. Speaker 2: How did you find yourself? How did you know that you wanted to go into--because you said you knew you didn't want to go to the straight road. You didn't want to go into some corporate like Paul, Wiess [Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP]. Speaker 1: [Cravath] Swaine and Moore [LLP]. Speaker 2: When did you realize or when was it revealed to you and yourself that you wanted to do civil rights law? Speaker 1: I think--I wasn't sure--I thought I was going to do either legal services, work for the poor, or civil rights because that's--remember from the civil rights plays and all that and studying the civil right era, not studying as such, but being aware of the Civil Rights Movement, of the anti-war movement. I wanted to be a radical lawyer. Ah this is the thing. When I was at Columbia [University, New York, New York], 1971 September, the Attica rebellion [Attica Prison riot] took place and William Kunstler was one of the lawyers and I had been following his career when he was in Chicago [Illinois]. He was like a great lawyer. He was out there and radical, and progressive, and outspoken. I wanted to be Bill Kunstler from high- from college days. Yeah, I wanted to be like Bill Kunstler. And I got to college in 1971. So I'm in high school [Newton High School, Queens, New York, New York] when Chicago Seven is going on, and I'm an anti-war kind of guy. I'm following-- I'm not following Thurgood Marshall. I'm following Bill Kunstler. And I get to Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and in the first orientation, there's a movie playing of the Chicago Seven trial. And when I see the movie the first week, I said, "This is where I'm supposed to be. This is where I'm supposed to be." So my first summer after--but I don't know how to get there. My first summer after law school--after the first year I do the thing with community law, my second year, I attend a lecture at the Harvard Law School forum and William Kunstler is speaking. He's my hero. I gotta get to see this guy. And I'm late. The room is full--packed. I'm sitting--it's like an amphitheater. I'm sitting way in the back, last--I'm against the wall, and Bill is up there, doing his thing, talking about how all white people are racist. I was like, what? Bill is saying this? You're racist? He said that we drink it in with our mother's milk. Heavy stuff. He said, "I need black lawyers to do this work with me. I can't do it by myself." And I swear to God, I don't remember anything else that man said that night, but whatever he was saying, he was talking just to me. It was as if he reached in and just pulled me? It said about Bessie Smith that she could pull a man out of the audience and walk him to the stage and walk him back down by the power of her voice, even though he never knew he got up from his chair. That's the way I felt about Bill. Somehow or other, at the end of the night, I found myself on the stage. I don't know how I got there. I don't know. I honestly don't know. I'm just--I'm there and there are all these people there. I mean--it was a crowd of people. There were Native Americans with full headdress and the whole thing, young radicals. Everybody is there. And I'm just patiently waiting because I knew that when I was in my first year that the path I was on, if I just sat in my room, I'd never get there. I had to be aggressive. And if an opportunity arose, I had to seize it. Story_ID: 321252 Speaker 1: Hello, my name is Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers and this is Neculai Burghelea. And Nick is new, Nick wasn't here the last time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nick wasn't here, unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. And today is July 28th? Speaker 2: If you say so. Speaker 1: And we-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): 29th [July 29, 2005]. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, July 29th, we're continuing our interview from previously. We are on tape five. Story_ID: 321253 Speaker 1: Just to catch us up, you were about to meet Bill Kunstler [William Kunstler] on stage at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], but before we get to that story something I want you to elaborate on a little bit is the Chicago Seven, because that was the case you mentioned prior, and we didn't talk about it at all. But the Chicago Seven was big for you and Bill because it was your, I guess, your introduction to him as a big civil rights attorney. So the Chicago Seven, who were they, what year was it? Speaker 2: It was nineteen--well, the Chicago Seven was originally the Chicago Eight. The Chicago Seven case emerged out of the events of 1968, the Democratic Convention [Democratic National Convention] in Chicago [Illinois] where the Democratic Party was prepared to nominate a candidate for the presidency for that coming year, '69 [1969] forward. And there had been a major conflagration all over the country because President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was a real big supporter of the war [Vietnam War] and, and people in the community, all over the country saw him as a, as having expanded the war in a really disastrous way and so people came from all over the country, maybe even all over the world to demonstrate in Chicago. And then Mayor Richard Daley [Richard J. Daley] decided that he wasn't gonna allow his city to be overrun by these, you know, unwashed, hippie types. And there were literally pitched battles in the streets. I mean, it was like the world had completely gone mad, cops were beaten up, you know, work, the activists, and activists were fighting back against the cops, it was like an army had descended, two armies in, in, in combat. And after that the, Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] gets elected, and I think in large measure Nixon got elected because of what happened in Chicago 'cause the, not only were we in the community, young folks and the activist types upset about Chicago but the so called silent majority saw this as the nation's going to, you know, hell in a hand basket and they reacted to that, and put Nixon in to kind of bring about law and order, that was his, his motto. So the first thing he did when he gets in office he decides to prosecute the activists who had come out against, come out in Chicago. And he arrested, he had the U.S. attorney [John Mitchell] in Chicago arrest eight activists, and the two most famous were Bobby Seale, one of the leaders of the Black Panther Party, and Abbie Hoffman who was the leader of the, what, what they called the Yippie Movement, the Youth International Party, it wasn't really a party but they had a lot of parties (laughter). But they were like, you know, street performers and that kind of thing. But he was a great activist but, you know, Abbie had some issues but anyway, so do we all. So the, they, they brought in Bill Kunstler to be their lawyer for most of them. But Bobby Seale refused to have Bill represent him, not 'cause he didn't like Bill but the Black Panther Party had historically used a lawyer out of, out of California which is where they were from named Charles Garry. And Charles Garry was incapacitated, he was in the hospital so Bobby was saying quite clearly, "I don't have counsel, either you let me get my attorney from California or I'm gonna represent myself," and Judge Julius Hoffman refused. He said, "No, Mr. Kunstler is your lawyer and he's gonna represent you." So eventually, the, the, the interchange in the courtroom got so heated between Judge Hoffman and Bobby Seale that Hoffman had Seale removed from the courtroom at one point and he was brought back into the courtroom bound and gagged, that's the only way I can describe it, he was literally in a chair, they had tied him to the chair with ropes and they had a piece of masking tape across his mouth and his head was literally, he was just strapped into the chair like it was an, like it was an electric chair and he was set in the courtroom. I mean, everyone gasped. It was at that point we knew the country had totally turned into a dictatorship as far as we were concerned and if you can bind and gag a defendant in an open courtroom in America then what, what kind of country is this. So Kunstler was at his best. He was flailing and arguing and dramatic and he was all the things that I, (laughter) I wanted to be. So they, he was actually held in contempt of court during the course of that trial. Speaker 1: Kunstler or-- Speaker 2: Kunstler was, everyone was, the entire, the entire courthouse was, I mean, practically, but certainly all the defendants, all the lawyers, had hundreds and hundreds of counts of contempt, they were all reversed eventually except for maybe one or two. And the, I don't think any of 'em saw a day in jail for what the, what had happened there. There really was no case it was just, it was basically Nixon's opportunity, excuse to crush the movement after, 'cause he knew they were gonna come for him next, and he figured I'll cut the heads off and then you will have nothing. But that didn't happen, I mean the country was really, we think the country is divided now, it was even more divided then because they had a draft and now, now, you know, there may be opposition to the war in Iraq [Iraq War], but it's a little different when you have, quote, volunteer [U.S.] Army folk going over there as opposed to just your neighbors and your friends and maybe you yourself, when you've gotta go because the government's telling you to take, 'cause they're gonna take your body and put it some place where the people are shooting guns at it? You know, that, that, that makes you really come awake real fast, like whoa, hold it, this ain't for me. And honestly, you know, I'm a native New Yorker so to me, civil rights issues, those were things that were happening down South. And now I'm not from the South, my family's not from the South, so I didn't really see that as personal, it was something in another country almost, you know, Mississippi and Alabama that didn't have a meaning for me on a personal level, but the war in Vietnam, that had real meaning for me on a personal level because simply, you know, they might have taken my body and made me go shoot people or get shot at and that was a real profound awakening for me as, in terms of what the power of the government over, over individuals. But it also showed me, I, I think the kind of lawyer I wanted to be. Story_ID: 321254 Speaker 1: So continuing where we left off, you move forward, you're at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], he's [William Kunstler] given this rousing speech, you're standing on stage, waiting to meet him. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I walk up to this icon, 'cause to me he was like an icon, as I said, I don't even know how I got on that stage. And, you know, normally it's so out of my character just to kind of boom, put yourself out there like that but I knew that if I wanted to get where I wanted to go, wherever that was, that I needed to be aggressive. If I just, I mean, opportunities were not gonna come to me, I had to seize them when I saw them. So I'm standing next to the stage and all these Native Americans in the beautiful, you know, outfits and the feathers and, you know, Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] with the hair, I don't know where these folks came from, but here, here we are in Cambridge [Massachusetts] at Harvard Law School and folks are like, it, it was like a, like a scene, you know, it was like a hootenanny or something. Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, let me think now. I got to law school in '75 [1975], it must have been '76 [1976], '77 [1977]. And he's already done Wounded Knee [United States v. Banks and Means, 1974] and that's why the Native Americans are there with him because he was a major lawyer with the Native American Movement, the American Indian party which was AIM [American Indian Movement] which was a very radical party, like the Black Panthers for Native Americans. You know, Bill was just, if there was a movement, if there was a cause, he was there, you know. I only later learned that he was really, had been active as an attorney for Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in the southern movement years before he got involved in the anti-war movement but that's when he really hit his stride. So I walk up to Bill and he's sitting there doing his thing, you know, being gracious to people, blah de blah. And I think he had a gray suit on. And I said to him, "Mr. Kunstler, I have been following your career since I was a child and I've, and I wanna do what you do." He looks over at me, and he says, "Oh." I might have mentioned I went to law school there, I'm not sure but he looked at me and said, "Here's my card, look me up when you get back to New York." I said, "Great." And I took the card (laughter) like I'm, I probably put it in a frame and put it on the wall, I didn't do that. But I kept it. So that summer, it was my second year in law school and I'm looking for a summer position and I write, I write him and it gets sent to the Center for Constitutional Rights [New York, New York] which is the organization that he founded, he and Mort Stavis [Morton Stavis] and Arthur Kinoy, two other progressive lawyers from the southern movement as well as the anti-war movement. And they responded they weren't hiring that summer and so on and so forth, okay, fine. So I put in it a, just put it in a, in a folder this, 'cause I had a folder. Story_ID: 321255 Speaker 1: And then I went to work for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], which was a great thing to do. I mean, it was a phenomenal opportunity for me. I was thrilled. And I had a chance to work directly with Jack Greenberg. And Jack Greenberg was one of the lawyers who, who had argued or fought for the Brown case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] with Thurgood Marshall, so it was an honor and a privilege to actually work in this organization. And at that time that summer the, the, the fund, the Defense Fund, they were winning case after case, so we had a party every Friday afternoon for a case we had just won in [U.S.] Supreme Court. And it was just, again it was an opportunity for me to be some place and learn and work with these great civil rights lawyers. But at the same time I kind of felt this wasn't the place for me, it's a great organization, I love what they do, but there, you know, my own feeling, I was a little too radical for them, you know. And I felt it, and I never, I didn't apply to go back when I was a third year graduating. So I'm now, my third year and I'm graduating and I'm back at the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. (Laughter) It's now April, I don't have a job, all my friends are going to corporate, Wall Street law firms gonna make hundreds of thousands of dollars, I don't have a job (laughter). And I write again, I go to my folder and I write again, Center for Constitutional Rights [New York, New York], blah de blah, you know, so on and so forth (unclear). I get back a letter this time, "Thank you for your, your letter. We are interested in interviewing you 'cause we're looking to hire a lawyer this year." I'm like, wow, (laughter) you know. I mean, it was, it was, I had no idea, you know, my peop- my family, they're not connected with lawyers, and if my kids wanna, my daughter wants to be a lawyer now, so I said to her the other day, I said, "Look, you know, with the connections that we've got in the city, you know, we'll find you a job, don't worry about that." I didn't have a father who I could go to like that, so I was gonna come back to New York [New York] and literally stay in my family home and just figure it out, you know, whatever. I didn't have a lot of expectations. So we go through a process and summer comes, I come back and I go to the interviews and so on and so forth, and they've made, they've made no decision but I come back to New York anyway. So I'm taking the bar exam, living at home. My dad [Joseph McLaughlin], we're hanging out, you know, doing my thing getting re-acclimated. Lo and behold, I get a letter, a call, and they said, "We'd like to hire you." And I was the first, I was the second African American lawyer that CCR, the Center for Constitutional Rights had ever hired. And it just so happens I didn't know at the time there had been a major fight within the organization to, there was a sense that they needed to, to have an affirmative action program and bring some African American lawyers of color because, you know, you just couldn't have an all-white organization working with the National Conference of Black Lawyers and doing southern work, you had to, you know, I mean, what, there are no black lawyers in the country that can work for you? (Laughter) You know, as we would say in New York. So I went to work for them. Story_ID: 321256 Speaker 1: Now, again, it's the Center for Constitutional Rights [New York, New York], it's not Bill Kunstler [William Kunstler], but he's the vice president. So, and I didn't even meet Bill during the interviewing process. But one day I'm in the office, I'm just a young whippersnapper and Kunstler comes in and he's, you know, doing his thing. And I walked up to him, I don't even know if I mentioned, I'm sure I told him years later, but I don't think I ever mentioned that I had met him at the thing, he had probably forgotten me, I mean, I don't really think he said, "Oh, yeah, you're that kid I met at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]." Unh-uh. But I'm working there now. And I walk up to him in his office and I said, "Mr. Kunstler," I said, "Bill," 'cause everyone called him Bill, I said, "Bill, you owe me something." He says, "Like what? I, I owe you something, like what, what, do I owe you money?" (Laughter) I said, "No." I said, "You're one of the best"-- not one of 'em, I said, "You're the best trial lawyer in the country and you owe me the obligation to teach me what you know so someone else can do what you do." And, you know, he was like, "Well, thank you." And he said, "Okay, fine. When you're ready, you come to me and we'll work together, just like that." Now, there was another lawyer there named Mort Stavis [Morton Stavis] and Morty was, he was Bill's lawyer, when Bill got in trouble, he hired Mort. And Mort was the president of the Center for Constitutional Rights. And interestingly Morty was handling a case called Dellinger vs. Mitchell [Dellinger v. Mitchell, 1971] and that was a case where the activists from the Chicago Seven trial sued the attorney general [John Mitchell] and other FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] officials for violation of their constitutional rights back in '68 [1968]. So one of the first cases I was assigned to work on was Dellinger vs. Mitchell so it's like, almost like a complete circle. And I was in contact with the remnants then of the Black Panther Party, 'cause they were a part of the case also. So I'm now working for the, you know, for the Chicago Seven, it was like this is where I'm supposed to be. So I work with Mort, and Morty was a, I figured if Kunstler used Stavis as his lawyer when he got in trouble, that was the man I needed to learn from. So what I always say, I came to CCR [Center for Constitutional Rights] to work for Bill but I stayed to work for Morty 'cause that old man, and he was an old man at the time, he taught me more about litigation and approaches and courtroom tactics, he wasn't a, a, you know, a consummate trial lawyer, that wasn't what Morty's skill was, Morty's skill was he could manipulate the law, that's what he could do. He would, he always said, if you think a problem through long enough, you keep turning it over in your head, you'll find a way around the problem. The problem is most folks don't turn it over, they just, they hit the wall and then move, and, and they forget about it. He said but you just keep trying. He would say to me, "I don't care how big the law firm is that we're up against, it doesn't make a difference to me; if you're willing to work, you can beat the largest law firm in the country. There are only twenty-four hours in a day, you just have to work harder than they do." And he was just, so I, I learned litigation from him. So I spent a few years doing that with, with Morty. Story_ID: 321257 Speaker 1: And then Bill [William Kunstler] had a-- Speaker 2: Before you move away from this, can you talk about-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --you, what happened with that trial [Dellinger v. Mitchell, 1971] and the, the Chicago Eight that (unclear) their trial that you were working with them now? Speaker 1: We, those are difficult cases to win. And it's very hard to sue the government in that situation and the cases were unsuccessful. It was, it was, they, well, they sued to make a point, they didn't sue to, to get money, you know. And I learned that that was one of the techniques of movement lawyering, you sue to raise consciousness, not, not necessarily to win in the courtroom as a matter of fact you thought many times you would not win in the courtroom because the cards were stacked against you but you sued to make a point and we did, you know, so we did that. Where was I? Speaker 2: You were talking about Morty [Morton Stavis] and what he had taught you and-- Speaker 1: Oh, Bill. Bill had this case, it was a, two American Indian Movement [AIM] activists out in Nebraska, Whiteclay, Nebraska, a little small one horse town, literally there was only one horse in the town. And they had been accused of murder, of murdering some, an individual who had been accused by the, by the, by the nation, when I say the nation, the Native American nation the Lakota, these were the Lakota Sioux, had been accused of, of raping a young girl. And they chased, well somebody, a group of cars chased him, as they say five cars went, left the reservation, drove into Nebraska, four cars came back, you know, because the fifth car that man was dead, yeah, he was, there is no question the guy is dead, he's dead, dead as dead. So Bill had the case and he asked me to help him work on the case out in Whiteclay, Nebraska. So he and I go out there and we represent these two Native American activists against this prosecution. We were so aggressive that one of the cases got dropped and the other case got settled. Story_ID: 321258 Speaker 1: And then from that case we [McLaughlin and William Kunstler] would work on a case together in Queens County [Queens, New York], my home county where I'm from, it was really fascinating. It was called the State of New York vs. Bashir Hameed and Abdul Majid [People of the State of New York vs. Bashir Hameed and Abdul Majid], formerly known, now these, these weren't, quote, Muslim terrorists, these were former Black Panther Party's members. They were, their, their English names were James Dixon York and oh, I'm trying to remember his real, his other name. James Dixon York and Anthony LaBorde, those were the two, two individuals. So they're, they're being tried for murder, another murder case and they, they were accused of murdering a New York City [New York, New York] police officer in Queens and brutally assaulting the other one. The way the case, the facts of the case briefly, these two New York City cops in Queens-- Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-one [1981]. They're following a white van and they pulled the white van over and these two men without warning jump out the van, two black men and run back on either side of the police car and with 9 millimeters just pumped about thirty, forty rounds into the car, killing one of the officers, seriously wounding the other. They get back in the van, take off. And then there's a massive manhunt. Dixon, and Dixon is caught, I forgot where, but he's caught maybe in North Carolina [sic. South Carolina]. And LaBorde is picked up in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], that's right, walking in the streets of Philadelphia. Anthony LaBorde prior to this incident had been a paralegal in the Bronx [New York] at Bronx Legal Services. York, I'm not sure what he was doing before then. So anyway, they get indicted, they get arrested, and the trial is starting. Bill [William Kunstler] asks me, or maybe I asked Bill, I'm not sure which, to participate in the trial. That was my career criminal case. And here I am, it's my, I think it was my second or third, we had other cases but this was the big one. And for the first trial, there were three trials but they kept getting hung juries. So Bill had a client, York or Laborde, I can't remember which one now, and he and I shared the client. And then Vernon Mason [C. Vernon Mason] who was a civil rights lawyer of some renown, he had the other client, so there were three of us together. And there's this great picture, actually I would later see it in the office of the district attorney who prosecuted the case against us, it was a great picture that came out in The New York Times at the time with Bill, Vernon, and me on the wall and sitting on a bench, in, in Queens in the courthouse. And everybody is looking at Bill, (laughter) it's really funny, you know, like he's the great, the great white father, you know. But he was a great lawyer and we all learned from him. And I learned from Vernon also. Vernon was this, you know, country boy, he had this very country style, "Hello, hi, hi, hi, Randy [HistoryMaker Randolph Michael McLaughlin] how you doing?" You know, (laughter) he was just very, he never lost his accent, he's from, I think, he's from Arkansas, some place down south. And he and Vernon had a loose partnership at the time, Vernon and Bill. Story_ID: 321259 Speaker 1: So anyway, so Bill [William Kunstler] and I are trying this case [People of the State of New York vs. Bashir Hameed and Abdul Majid], the first time and we have a client and Mason [C. Vernon Mason] has the other one. So Vernon is pushing me to do more in the trial. And Bill, you know, he's the, he's the man, who am I to say anything? So I'm pushing and he lets me do a cross-examination of a witness, of a, of an eyewitness which is a major thing, right. So I'm standing at the podium and there's a, the jury box and the witness sits at one end next to the judge, the end of the jury box, and the lawyer sits at the other end as far aways, right at the edge of the jury box and you stand at a podium and you ask questions. You can't approach the witness, you have to ask permission that kind of thing. So I'm cross-examining this witness and I'm just messing it up, I don't know what I'm doing, I'm doing the best I can, I think I'm doing great, and the judge, it was an African American judge, and for some reason, I was the whipping boy, he just didn't like me. I'm not sure he didn't like me but it certainly felt that way 'cause he always, you know, mauling me in the courtroom, any time he could get, he'd slap me around. I was the youngest one on the team so he figured, you know, it's kind of like the law of the jungle, I'm not gonna mess with Kunstler, though he did, but Kunstler could give it back to him and Mason would also give it back to him but this young kid oh, I can push him around he doesn't know what he's doing, so I was the guy, which will lead to another story. His name was Ken Browne, Kenneth Browne, good judge overall and really decent guy but in the course of this case, it was really heated. I mean, it was major, the murder of a police officer by former members of the Black Panther Party that were alleged to be members of the Black Liberation Army. And the Black Liberation Army, Joanne Chesimard, Assata Shakur, that crew. And it was, it was alleged that Assata Shakur had been in that white van and that's why they killed the cops, all this stuff, I mean it was really heated. And we had more cops in that, they would bring these guys back and forth from Brooklyn [New York] in a twenty-car caravan with, in chains with shotguns and helicopters, I mean it was like they were moving some big Mafiosi back and forth. They were kept under, under tight lock down 'cause they were deemed to be escape risks, but I would meet 'em every day; they were nice guys, we chatted along, you know, I didn't have any problem with them. Anyway, so I'm doing this cross-examination and I'm not doing a very good job. So the judge drags me up to the bench, "Mr. McLaughlin [HistoryMaker Randolph Michael McLaughlin], come up here." So I go up and he's slapping me around, "(Unclear) proper and (unclear)." So I'm walking from the judge's bench back to the, to the podium, it's about maybe twelve feet. Kunstler comes as close as he can to me and he starts slapping me around, he says, "Don't you know how to do this? There are three ways you cross-examine a person, okay, with a document, you do it one," and he explains to me, "two," he explains to me, "three, now do it." So I get back and I swear to god, I have never forgotten that lesson, that's the only time he ever actually taught me something and said this is the way to do it but that was the way to do it. He literally gave me that instruction and from that point on, I was cool. I knew what to do 'cause I had gotten the, from, from, from Moses and his name was William Moses Kunstler, Moses had come down from the mountaintop and given me the tablets, now, here you go, this is what you gotta do. So I'm doing my thing. And we had a great trial. Story_ID: 321260 Speaker 1: Now, the judge [Kenneth Browne], (laughter) we decided or someone decided, I'm not sure who it was, that I was the one that was gonna get him to go ballistic, that I was the one that was gonna get him to make a reversible error basically. Just (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What makes-- Speaker 1: Reversible error, get him to make mistakes. Just like Kunstler [William Kunstler] and the others had done in Chicago [Illinois] with Judge Hoffman [Judge Julius Hoffman], they made him just, you know, they would do crazy things with this guy, and make him blast 'em, 'cause the one thing, every one's trying to win over the hearts and minds of the jurors and so it's a struggle for power and control and dominance, that's what the courtroom is, you know. I teach law school and it's very rare you talk about, you know, justice and truth, and no, no, you're talking about dominance, power, and control, (laughter) okay, 'cause that's what it's about. It's, a courtroom is a struggle for dominance, power, and control, and he or she who exerts the most influence over the, the players, generally the jurors, generally wins because they trust you and they do what, they, they'll side the way you want them to, lots of other issues but, you know, still, that's the basic thesis. All right. So the judge presumably has the most dominance, power, and control, he sits the highest, he has a black robe, he tells everybody what to do. But lawyers in a courtroom are the only people who have the power of movement and that by, by, by learning how to use your physical presence and your body and your voice and your proximity to people, especially jurors, you can exert tremendous influence over the process and over the people because you, you know, you have that power of movement. Everyone else is stationary. And at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] they brought in an actress to teach us how to manipulate and dominate people with the power of our voice and our bodies and our physical presence. And I said it, as I'm learning these techniques, I don't know if any other schools did this but they did it for us, and I said this is a dirty business we're in, you know. And it is, it's a very, you know, I only take cases where I think I'm on the right side, because the techniques they teach us, they've got nothing to do with truth, justice, or the American way; it's about winning, you know, it's all about winning. Okay. So I'm the whipping boy to this judge. And every day I'd get up and make a, we call it the lunch [ph.] application, with our guys are Muslims, "Well, your Honor, Mr. Majid [Anthony LaBorde; Abdul Majid] informs me that he's being given cheese to eat for breakfast and the cheese has an enzyme that we believe that has pork and he cannot eat the pork so Mr., we are requesting that you order the corrections department to give him turkey," (laughter) yeah. And he's like, "What Mr. (unclear) sit down, sit down." Okay. I would do things like this to this judge, I had to get up and cross-examine a witness and so there'd be a, the prosecutor would have a long direct examination, question, question, question back and forth. And the judge would get up and say, say, say to me, Mr. McLaughlin [HistoryMaker Randolph Michael McLaughlin], okay, you can examine now. So my bench, my, my table is on the opposite side of the courtroom. If you face the courtroom, the judge is in the middle, and to my left or his, to his right would be the jury, they're sitting close to him, and on the other side as far away from the jury as you can get them would be the defendants and their lawyers. So I'm all the way on the other side. I've gotta cross the courtroom to go to where the jury is sitting to examine the witness, to question them. This judge would say frequently, "Mr. McLaughlin, your turn to examine the witness." I would get up right and I'd stand right at the, and at the table I wouldn't move, I'd just stand up, I would say, "Your Honor, it's been a very long examination and, and I have an extensive questioning to, to, to engage in with this witness, and perhaps the jury would like a break before I begin" (laughter). And he would say, "Mr. McLaughlin, I decide when the jury has a break, not you." And the jurors are sitting there, they gotta pee too. And they're like, man, what's the matter with this guy? You know, this, and I'm like a choir boy, this young, young man he wants to get, what's his problem? (Laughter) So, so I said what, "It's whatever you please." And just as soft and, you know, very gentle, and I start walking very slowly over to the jury box and I'm like raising my eyebrows. And (laughter) they're looking at me 'cause I make a lot of eye contact with the jurors. And then before I could question the judge says this little punk kid he's got me again. He said, "(Unclear), the jurors, take a break." And as they're filing out, they're looking at me thinking like thank you, thank you very much (laughter). Now, here's one when I really got that judge to go completely insane. Story_ID: 322026 Speaker 1: This judge [Kenneth Browne] and I, we had a fiery relationship to say the least. I'm doing jury selection, before the, while the, at the beginning of the trial and when you're doing voir dire which is questioning the jurors and behind this rail in a box, you can't yell at them, you know, you have to, you know, you want, you want them to reveal, just like you're a interviewer, you want them to reveal personal things about themselves in an open courtroom where people are watching and these are folks who were, you know, they didn't wanna do that, so you have to talk to them and modulate your voice in a way that they feel that you're the only one talking to them, it's just you and me. So I'm doing this with this, with the jurors and I'm questioning them, and I'm, you know, "Mr. Jones [ph.], can you please tell me," the judge has a microphone, a big microphone, "Mr. McLaughlin [HistoryMaker Randolph Michael McLaughlin], I can't hear you, keep up your voice. So I hear him, and I'm, I'm facing the jury, just like I'm facing you, he's over to my right, kind of behind me but over to my right, so he really can't see me watching. So I said okay. And I didn't say anything. I decided to raise my voice just a little, just a little. "Mr. McLaughlin, I've already told you, I can't hear you." So I, now I'm looking at the jury and they're like why is he yelling that, 'cause he's yelling. And I kind of raise, shrug my eyebrows, 'cause it was, there's a trick you learned that one learns if you pay attention in courtrooms, that when you're facing the jury, you're looking directly at them, nobody can see what's on your face, I can't say stupid things but I can communicate nonverbally exactly, rolling your eyes, shrug your shoulders, all sorts of nonverbal communication skills. So and I learned a lot of nonverbal communication skills, I'm picking up verbal, nonverbal cues, my mother [Mae Rodrigues] was deaf, and she learned that technique and she could pick up stuff in my face and I wouldn't even know she did it. She'd say, "What's wrong with you?" And I, "What, what do you mean, I haven't said anything." "Yeah, I can look at your face and tell." So I learned to use your face and I would also use when I was talking to her, she could read lips, when I was talking to her, I was expressive with my motions and, and the whole thing so it would give context to what I'm saying even now I use my hands to, you know, it would add meaning so if she couldn't read the words she could see the word, so I learned to do that. And I did it in front of jurors all the time. I'd raise my eyebrows, I'd, you know, and no one could see it, what are they gonna say, "Mr. Laughlin raised his eyebrows." "Oh, I wasn't even aware of that" (laughter). So back to the story. I raise my voice a little bit more and I shrug to the jurors like, (shrugs) 'cause they're looking at me. "Mr. McLaughlin, I said I can't hear you." And now I put my hands on (unclear) and I got this saddest face, and I don't even look at him, I'm, maybe I turned slightly but my body is still facing them. I said, "Your Honor, I'm doing the best I can, I don't have the benefit of a microphone." Oh, my god. This guy goes ballistic. He gets up on his hind legs, that's the way I (laughter) describe it, and he's bellowing, "Oh, you need a microphone?" And the jurors are like, oh, my god, what's going on here? You know, why is this nut yelling at this kid? And I just sat and said, didn't say anything. I was just hmm, hmm, hmm, ain't this a shame. And at that point he lost that jury. And the jurors, it happened three times, those jurors, yep, after there was a hung jury in that case [People of the State of New York vs. Bashir Hameed and Abdul Majid], they convicted on the assault case, now this doesn't make any sense, two guys are accused of murdering an officer and shooting the other one, they were in the same car now, they convict on the assault case, they hung on the murder count. Now, how could you do that? That doesn't make any sense. What the hell, I'm, I'm trying to remember now. Yeah, they convicted on one, not the other, so it's an inconsistent verdict, how can you do that? It's impossible. Either they killed the, killed the guy and shot the other, or they didn't do either, you can't have that. Story_ID: 322027 Speaker 1: So the jurors contacted us and came to my house, a group of about six or seven of 'em, and they wanted to sign affidavits to say that they, they there was some problem in the jury room and they were complaining about a juror, I mean, they literally wanted to continue to deliberate and they were prevented, so they signed affidavits. Now, Bill [William Kunstler] and I now have that same trial again, same case, only Vernon [C. Vernon Mason] has dropped off, and I have my own client, York [James Dixon York; Bashir Hameed] or was it Laborde [Anthony Laborde; Abdul Majid] one or the other, I forget, it's been many years, so I have a client and Bill has a client. And the beauty of that was this, now without having to ask Bill's permission to handle a witness I've gotta, I, I'm up after every, for every witness, I'm on my feet all the time. And while we're doing joint things together, we're thinking and strategy together through, still I've tried the case once, I've got my sea legs, I know how to do it. And it was probably the best experience I've ever had in, in, in life 'cause I would get a chance to watch him work. I don't know, I went first or he went first, I don't remember but either way, I knew I had to cross-examine and he had to cross-examine. So I'd watch his technique and how, it was like, it was like playing, like being John Coltrane playing with Miles Davis, you know, you learn from the guy you're playing with and it was a tremendous experience for me. I learned like, it was, I can't even describe it. And then we had, we were doing closing arguments to the jury. So I go to Bill's house to this, to prepare. So he's got these folders, "Well, Randy [HistoryMaker Randolph Michael McLaughlin], I've got these folders, and this is how I do it," you know. I've written out a fifty page closing argument, fifty pages, about this thick. He's got six pages, "Well (unclear) this is what I do (unclear)." I said, "Man, I can't go up there with a fifty page argument. I'm sitting there, what do I read off fifty pages?" I said okay, fine. Here's what I do. Saying this to myself. "I'm going home to Queens [New York], well, I'm in Brooklyn [New York], then. So I take the fifty pages, I reduce it to ten. Ten sheets and there's like a table right in front of the jury box and I lay out the ten sheets but I study the fifty. So I've got it in my head. And I gave a two and a half hour summation and just did my thing. And I must admit, I say to myself, "I was good that day," (laughter). And we got another hung jury. Story_ID: 322028 Speaker 1: Two hung juries. This particular hung jury, let me think now. Yeah, this case, this time, the judge threw out the jury before they could reach a verdict. Why? Because the jury had sent a note in my opinion, the jury had sent a note saying they were, they were deadlocked, nine to three for acquittal on the murder case. "What? Are you kidding me? These Black Panther [Black Panther Party], BLA [Black Liberation Army] types are gonna walk a murder case? Oh, no, not under my watch," this judge was saying to himself. So nine to three. They've gotta have a unanimous verdict either way, acquittal or conviction, they're not get--we're not getting a conviction, no way, they're moving nine guys. So we go to lunch or dinner, we come back and the judge, I'm gonna collapse this story, the judge calls us in the back and he said--and we had had this conversation before dinner about this particular juror--he said, "I spoke with the juror." "Excuse me? You spoke with the juror?" "Yes, yes, she was on the phone, had to call her doctor." I said, "What kind of doctor?" "A psychiatrist." I said, "What?" "Yeah," say, "Wait," I said, "Hold, hold up, you let the juror call a psychiatrist?" "Oh, yes, yes. And I was, you know, present, you know, on the phone or present when the conversation occurred to make sure there was no tainting of the process." And I'm like, "But, Your Honor, why didn't you call us? You know, we have a right to be at the call." "Well, yeah, this, it was, it was a serious situation. And she is on the verge of a psychotic episode." Why? Because she was one of the three who was holding out for conviction and her family allegedly had told her, "You better not come home here unless those boys are convicted," that's the allegation. So the judge then says, and we've got alternate jurors now, who if she can't serve, we'll put one in. He says, "And I've decided to dismiss the jury." I said, "Excuse me, Judge, you mean the juror don't you?" "No, no, no, I'm dismissing the jury." I said, "Your Honor, we have eleven jurors and we've got alternates who are able to serve, they've been here all this time, there's no reason to dismiss this jury." He says, "No, no, no, this has gone on too long and blady, blady, blah and I'm gonna dismiss it, and I order you not to say anything to the press about this. Don't say anything in the open court, 'cause I don't want this particular juror to be embarrassed or humiliated or any questions about her." I'm like, "Yeah, fine. We'll see what happens when we get outside." Now, the press is like, I mean, they, we've got, you know, the, the, the, they had satellite trucks sitting outside, every station in, in New York City (New York, New York), and the world is sitting out waiting for the feed 'cause they know it's a jury watch, it's a verdict watch. And the courtroom is packed. Kunstler [William Kunstler] was off doing something else so it's just me left behind and my colleague, Mark Abiner [ph.], a very nice guy but not Bill Kunstler but I'm the guy gotta carry the weight. So I get up and the jurors coming, the judge is coming in, jury's sitting down. Judge comes in and before he could sit down, I said, "Your Honor, I moved, I move that the court replace the juror who's having an episode with an alternate juror and I demand on behalf of my client that this jury be allowed to reach a verdict." He's, he's livid, livid. And I'm like this, I gotta do my job, okay. And I'm not part of your, you know, your process, I'm in it but I'm not of it. And, and I'm ticked off, I'm really angry, for a couple of reasons. One, I can see it's just like Chicago [Illinois], you know, when they taped this guy's [Bobby Seale] mouth shut, I could see that the system wasn't playing fair. Okay, look, you wanna indict my boys, fine, indict them. But give me a fair trial, a fair shake. You wanna talk about fairness and democracy, great. Then when I come in the process we all should have the same opportunities and don't manipulate the process 'cause you're upset about the result, and that's what was going on in my opinion that day. 'Cause if this guy had gotten an acquittal of, of, of a cop killers, quote unquote, he would be, his next courtroom would have been a bathroom in Kew Gardens [Queens, New York], okay. As it turned out he never sat in that courtroom again. He was a great judge up until that point but that night, he flipped. I mean, he literally flipped. My guys had asked me before the jury recessed for verdict, to, to deliberate, to tell him that they would, they would, to thank him, for giving them a fair trial, and he had up 'til that point, but when he saw what was going on, I mean, literally the man was like, his hair was all disheveled, he was flipping out. Nevertheless, he dismisses the jury, the entire jury, and we have a third trial. Story_ID: 322029 Speaker 1: And these trials were going for four, five, six months. And Bill [William Kunstler] and I called it the annual rite of spring. But here's the thing that happened to me, even though I'm, you know, it was unfortunate it went on so long, but because of it I got, I became closer to him than, than any other lawyer, you know, because we would ride the trains together, we would talk together, we'd have lunch together, it was just the two of us, you know, so it was like a dream in that sense, a dream come true, you know. And how many people can actually say that something that they wanted to happen, happened like that. I mean, what are the chances of me some little kid from Queens County [Queens, New York], you know, parents [Mae Rodrigues and Joseph McLaughlin] are immigrants, going to work with the most radical and high profiled criminal civil rights lawyer of his time, chances are zero to, zero to zero. So I did that. And I guess the other thing that I did when I worked for CCR [Center for Constitutional Rights, New York, New York] that probably was equally exciting, traveled all over the country. I think the cases that I really found exhilarating were the anti-Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] cases, we were fighting the Klan in, in, down south which I'm not southerner, it was my first time being down south. And-- Speaker 2: But before we get to the Klan, wrap up for me what happened with the third trial-- Speaker 1: Oh, the third trial. Speaker 2: --and these defendants [Bashir Hameed and Abdul Majid]-- Speaker 1: The third trial-- Speaker 2: --this, the conclusion. Speaker 1: --they bring this judge in who was, had a lot of policemen in his family, and it was clear his job was to make sure this didn't happen again. And everything that we were able to do in the prior trials he stopped us from doing it. He, everything, any ruling he could make, he ruled against us. So eventually the men got convicted on that third trial. Speaker 2: And what, where are they now? What happened to them? Speaker 1: They're upstate doing twenty, twenty-five to life. Speaker 2: And what happened to the third defendant, the-- Speaker 1: Only two defendants. Speaker 2: Only two defendants, okay. Speaker 1: Both got convicted and are still in jail for many, many years, twenty-five years, you know. Story_ID: 322030 Speaker 1: Moving on to the Klan [Ku Klux Klan (KKK)]. Speaker 2: --Klan. This is back in the, it's going on at the same time, back in the '80s [1980s], the Klan for some reason, I'm not sure why, but they're reemerging in the country. Bill Wilkinson is one of the big Klansmen, it was later, revealed that he was an FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] informant. He worked for the, worked for the FBI being the head of the Klan, that kind of hurt the movement. So they're, they're shooting people, they're not lynching them yet, but they're certainly beating up black people, my first time seeing the Klan was when we're marching, CCR [Center for Constitutional Rights, New York, New York] had got, formed a, a coalition with other groups with they, it called itself the National Anti-Klan Network [Center for Democratic Renewal] and I was one of the legal directors of the group, like a legal coordinator. And we marched in Decatur, Alabama, first time, ever being down in Alabama against the Klan (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) what year? Speaker 2: Oh, '79 [1979], '80 [1980], we marched against the Klan. And I'll never forget seeing these Klansmen in these robes, you know, like there were, we'd go to this church before we'd start the march, and the Klan had, had beaten up some people in the previous march before so we came down in massive numbers. And the nonviolence was the message. So everyone, all the men are asked to come into a church before the march begins, and they tell us if you have any weapons, leave them here, no questions asked, just leave your weapons. So all of a sudden, guns, knives, things start (laughter) coming out of pockets click, click, click, click (making sounds). So we start the march and there are troopers on the buildings with guns and rifles, it's, it's like, you know, it's like the civil rights days, it's just that bad. And we march down, I see these people with these sticks and these clubs and, you know, the Klan outfits, I'm like who are these people? Like they're like cartoon characters to me. So that was the first time. And then North Carolina was where I really kind of cut my teeth on the thing. The Klan had in '80 [1980], I think, it was '80 [1980], '79 [1979] or '80 [1980] had, well, let me back up. There was a group called the Communist Workers' Party [CWP], and they were a radical group, okay. But they were doing work down in, in North Carolina, in Greensboro [North Carolina], organizing against the Klan, and it was all over the place and they were part of the coalition too. We, you know, we weren't, we didn't discriminate. So they were preparing for a demonstration in Greensboro, this CWP Party, and they were, you know, they were radical, one of the problems is you can't go down south calling folks out, okay, because they got guns down there, this is not like New York, and it's kind of like the, the, the rappers today, you know, they got guns too, so you can't be dissing guys like that, they'll shoot you, (laughter) you know, that's what happens. They don't call them gangsters for nothing. So they had said, called the Klan cowards and so the Klan had aligned itself in Greensboro with the Nazi Party, yeah. And these Nazis and Klansmen drove up to the parade assembly place and they parked their cars, they get out and the word, the way it's described was they got out coolly, calmly with cigarettes dripping from their mouths, went to their trucks, in their trunks, and got semiautomatic weapons and rifles and proceeded to kill people, cold-blooded murder, just shooting at people, boom, boom, boom, shooting at 'em. I don't remember whether they killed or just maimed but they, they, they, I believe that they killed people, as I recall. And it was alleged, I always gotta say that, that an, an, an agent or an informant for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives), was part of the group, not that he shot anybody but he was aware of the situation. And that's always a problem when they, 'cause the, the government frequently infiltrates the Klan and the problem for the informant now, and they infiltrate Mafia, the same thing, do they, and do they advise the government that these guys plan to kill somebody or kill some people or do they go along with it, not kill but just don't stop it, it's always an issue. I mean, my, my, to me it's pretty simple, you stop, you don't let people kill people, that's easy. So they killed these people, shoot them, maim them, right in the middle of the community. Story_ID: 322031 Speaker 1: The national movement [National Anti-Klan Network; Center for Democratic Renewal] says, we're gonna make Greensboro [North Carolina] the battlefield, and we're gonna have a massive demonstration in Greensboro to show we are not gonna tolerate this. We bring out, February 1st, February 1st, February 2nd, that's when it happened in 1979. And they, we now are gonna march in that town, ten thousand people we bring out. And I'm the lawyer for the movement in the town, in Greensboro. We had to get a parade permit, they wouldn't give us a parade permit. You ain't, you ain't marching here. So I go to see the city manager, and I fly in from New York [New York], I was always on a plane some place, I, 'cause, I just got back from, from Nebraska where I'm representing the American Indian Movements [AIM], I literally drop in, come to New York, I change my underwear literally and get on a plane and go to North Carolina and I'm down in North Carolina. And the city manager is the fellow we have to get the parade permit from. So the head organizer and I we go meet the city manager. And I said, "So, so what seems to be the problem? I, I don't believe you're suggesting to us we have no right to march in your city, are you?" "Oh, no, counselor, I'm not saying that." I said, "So the issue then is where the, as I understand it, where the parade will end, is that right?" "Yes, counsel, that is right, it's where the parade will end 'cause we're worried about dispersement [sic. dispersal]" and blady, blah. I said, "Okay. So why don't we do this, Mr. City Manager, why don't you issue a parade permit to us subject to the city and the demonstrators agreeing on a parade termination point so we can begin our work and, you know, we'll, believe me, we'll be reasonable, we'll work this out." He said, "That sounds very reasonable, counselor, I think I can do that." So then he agrees. So then he said to me, "Counselor, where did you go to law school?" And so I said, "I went to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]." And he said, "Well, you know, what they say about Harvard lawyers don't you?" (Laughter) And I didn't, I said, I said, "No, sir, I really don't." He said, "Well, they say you can tell a Harvard lawyer but you can't tell him very much (laughter)." So I said thank you and I got up and I left. The mayor, when he heard that this is what had happened, he was like, "What are you crazy? We can't give 'em a parade permit," he refused to issue it. Now we sue them (laughter) because they won't give us a parade permit we sue them, and we won the suit, yeah, yeah, we won that suit. But the thing was I had this red Firebird [Pontiac Firebird] because I was, I had to move around, so I'm driving this real slick red Firebird, just tooling around North Carolina. And we're, one of the organizers, we're doing an investigation, we're hearing that the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] is terrorizing people, just like in Mississippi and they, and he and I are going all over the state just like the civil rights workers to try and investigate the situation only with one difference, I'm driving the car, my friend is sitting next to me, he's a North Carolinian, he's got a .45 caliber pistol and he lays it on the dashboard. And he said, "Randy [HistoryMaker Randolph Michael McLaughlin], if something jumps off shoot and don't ask questions." So I'm driving all over the State of North Carolina, this guy has got this loaded gun sitting on the gap. I mean, I, look, I, I saw more guns down South than I, I'm from New York and they say we got guns up here? We got bupkis compared to those folks. So we have the demonstration, it goes off without a hitch. Story_ID: 322032 Speaker 1: In the middle of this, four African American women are shot down by the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] in Chattanooga, Tennessee. They're immediately arrested, the head of the Klan group, no, three of them are arrested, two of them are acquitted of all charges, and they were arrested like right at the scene practically. They, the, the guns were in the car, it was no question, these are the guys; two are acquitted of all charges, one is convicted of simple assault, assault, not, assault with intent to commit murder, and he is given a nine month sentence for shooting five black, four black ladies, and he gets out in six months on good behavior. When these guys get off Chattanooga erupts, I mean, the brothers were marching on city hall, and there were, there were again pitched battles, 'cause these are ex-veterans and they're shooting up the town, I mean it was like, revolution was in the air. Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] flies in Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] to calm the situation down. And the situation gets calm, into this cauldron, I stepped. And the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] asked us to come into Chattanooga to represent the women 'cause we had developed this theory about how to fight Klan violence in the courts. I did some research, I'm a history major, and I, we found that in 1871 the [U.S.] Congress, the radical Republican Reconstruction Congress with a lot of black folks in it and no southerners--they were all being excluded--they had passed a law called the Ku Klux Klan Act, and this law that was still on the books in 1981 when this, in 1980 the shooting happened, still in the books, and this law gave the victims of Klan violence a federal lawsuit that they could come into federal court and sue the Klan and get money damages. No one had ever done it before--been sitting on the books, no one ever used. They tried but no one ever successfully did it. We said we're gonna do it. And we come into Chattanooga and I stayed in Chattanooga for at least two years, I mean, I was in and out but I was there for at least a month at a time. And we couldn't get, we needed a local lawyer to go on the case with us because we're out-of-town lawyers, we couldn't get a single lawyer in Chattanooga to agree to work with us. We had to go to Memphis [Tennessee] to get a lawyer in Memphis to agree to sign the papers with us. And he never came to the courtroom but we needed somebody to be our lawyer, to work with us. So we handled this case in Chattanooga. Story_ID: 322033 Speaker 1: So the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] head, who is now dead, great man, Charles--George Key, I always called him Mr. Key, I never called him George, I called him Mr. Key. And he would pick me up at the airport. First, first time and when, I'm staying in this hotel, motel kind of place, very, you know, it's a black owned hotel, right on the same street where the women had been shot [in Chattanooga, Tennessee]. So I'm getting out the car, and he gives me this, I think, it was a .38, semiautomatic, puts it on me and says, "Here, this is for you." I said (laughter), "Excuse me?" He says, "Yes, keep this with you for tonight, you never know something might happen." I said, "All right," so I take the gun. (Laughter) Again, I'm telling you, I had a lot of, I had a lot of guns. And I go to the hotel room and I've got this loaded semiautomatic revolver. Now, from my work in that York/Laborde case [People of the State of New York vs. Bashir Hameed and Abdul Majid], I had learned, 'cause when this case, I tried it in '84 [1984], I had learned that semiautomatics can jam because the bullets are in a cartridge, are in a, a, what do they call it? Not a cart, it's in a case, you know, and you put it in the bottom of the gun and as you pull the trigger a bullet comes out of the, out of the, out of the carriage, pops up and poof, shoots out. But the problem is because it's not like a revolver, a revolver is a round cylinder and as you press the bullet, one, and the revolver turns, so the revolver is turning and the bullets just pop up so you don't jam that, it doesn't jam, very unlikely, it could happen but it's unlikely. Automatics unfortunately because the bullets are shooting up individually, sometimes they, they jam in the cartridge, and I know this. So I'm like well, look if there's a Klansman coming through the door, I says he could just walk right in, there's no hotel lobby, it's like a motel, a open situation and yeah, they know I'm there. So what do I do? I said, I've gotta get a bullet in the chamber, and if you take the, or the semiautomatic and you pull the hammer back, whatever it's called, you pull this thing back a bullet will pop into the chamber and now the gun's ready to shoot, as soon you press the trigger, at least one bullet is going, the other one may not pop up but that one bullet is gonna go. So I got the thing loaded. The only problem, it's loaded, cocked, and ready to shoot, if the gun drops on the floor, it's gonna go off, right. So I've got the gun (laughter) on, on my night stand and all night long I'm practicing what am I gonna do if this, 'cause the Klansman, he's like 6'5", 300 pounds, what am I gonna do if this Klansman comes in, in at me. So I'm practicing all night long. I get out of the bed, I--get out of the bed, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You know, (laughter) so I put the gun there and I, you know, I gotta be careful because I'm rough in bed, I bounce around, I said listen, you gotta be careful, don't hit that gun, 'cause you could shoot yourself, that would be bad, civil rights lawyer shoots himself, you know, suicide, why? (Laughter) That kind of thing. So I, the next morning and Mr. Key picks me up to do all, whatever we're doing, and I give him the gun, I say, "Mr. Key, you keep it, I don't need that gun. Listen, I, I wasn't gonna shoot myself," and I said, "No, I just, I mean, you know, if I'm meant to die down here that's what's gonna happen. You know, I don't, I don't have a death wish, but stuff happens," you know. Story_ID: 322034 Speaker 1: And we're in this restaurant, Key [George Key] and I, during the course of the case [Crumsey v. Justice Knights of the Ku Klux Klan], this old white man comes up to us, there was a lot of publicity in the town, biggest thing to hit Chattanooga [Tennessee]. And the old white man comes to me and says, "You that Klan--that lawyer suing the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]?" And I'm like, oh, here it comes. I said, "Yes, sir, I am." He said, "I want you to get them boysfor us, 'cause we don't like what they did." And I said, "Well, thank you." (Laughter) And it just hit me that there are good people and bad people down here. And the thing about the South that I learned, unlike New York, the good folk tell you who they are, and the bad folks tell you who they are too, and you know who your friends are and who your enemies are; it's real simple, you know, and you, that's the way it is, so it was much easier. So we tried this case, funny thing. Great judge, Judge Johnson [ph.], great, great judge, old patrician and he didn't like what those boys did either. And in the courtroom, the courtroom was the third floor of a federal building, post office was on the second floor, we're on the third floor, and it was a courtroom that was built back in the '30s [1930s] by the workers, WPA [Works Progress Administration] worker, workers, whatever, the, the Depression [Great Depression] projects, they went all over the country and built things. And in this courtroom, behind the judge, there's this big beautiful painting on the wall, in the wall, I mean, it was like on the, it wasn't a painting, it was like right on the wall. And the date is 1864 and they had this white woman with this sunbonnet and this beautiful flowing dress and she's sitting there with this little white baby. And on the corner you see these men in Confederate uniforms, walking, marching with blood and crutches and, you know, the good soldiers protecting the white woman. And then on the other side you see these black folk picking cotton, yeah, and that's the image that I'm looking at every day, trying this case. And in 1864, those black folk are slaves. And I, I'm like stunned. But he was a great judge. And the Klan lawyers in the voir dire selecting the jury we, we had 'em one at a time in the courtroom, and the pool was outside. Story_ID: 321611 Speaker 1: The Klan [Ku Klux Klan (KKK)], the Klansmen's lawyers had a chance to question the jurors. And they would say things like, 'cause it's one juror at a time, when a black woman showed up or a black person, and we had a number of them on the jury, they would, on the pool, in the pool, and they would say to them, "Well, ma'am, now, you know, that this case is about the Klan, and you don't like the Klan do you? And the word nigger is gonna be used a lot in this trial and that's gone offend you, isn't it, ma'am?" "Well, yes." "And do you think you can give these Klansmen a fair trial?" And they'd go on and on like this. So they would then get up and say, "Your Honor, we move to strike this juror for cause because she can--it is our position that no black can sit on this jury, because no black person can be fair to the Klan, period." The judge says, "That's an outrage. I'm not gonna strike her." They said, "Okay, fine don't strike her. Boom, we'll strike her." They have a number of challenges that for, they call peremptory challenges, these are challenges to a juror that you can use without any explanation. The law has since changed but at that time without any explanation. So every black juror that comes up they do this to. They ask these racist questions, get them to say what they want 'em to say, make the motion, same argument, no blacks should sit on this jury, we want an all-white jury. This is 1984 in Tennessee. They run out of peremptory challenges 'cause they've struck every black, there's one black woman left and we've got let's say three challenges left and they're coming in order. And she's number five or six or seven, so even if we strike the next three jurors, and we're not gonna get cause challenges, even if we strike the next three jurors, you know, for no reason at all, for just automatic reasons, we'll never reach her. So we ask the judge to move her, no, we ask the judge for additional peremptory challenges because of the racist manner in which they've been exercising theirs. The judge says, "No, I'm not gonna do that but what I will do is, I'll move that black person up," and she comes up now and they put her in the box. He jumped her. Now, she knows they're coming in order, so she must have said to herself, why are they moving me up? Something is not right here. She comes into the courtroom very aware like, what's going on? 'Cause the other jurors are in the backroom, they don't know what's going on. You, they haven't heard the questioning. Now Vic McTeer [Victor McTeer], ah, that's Vic, Vic is, is lead counsel and it's his case, or I, I did all the grunt work, right but Vic did the heavy lifting 'cause he was the man. Speaker 2: But Vic was from Mississippi or-- Speaker 1: Mississippi. Speaker 2: --was he in Tennessee at the time? Speaker 1: Mississippi. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He was a board member at CCR [Center for Constitutional Rights, New York, New York] and he and I tried the case together, we split things. And George Hairston who was a Chattanooga [Tennessee] boy, he represented some, he was with us also, and he was working for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. George Hairston would later go on to major fame in another case involving an engineer in Texas who was convicted of robbing a chicken joint and George represented him on appeal and got him, and sprung him. 'Cause it was like absurd, the guy robbed a chicken joint and he's an engineer? That's absurd, he can buy and sell that chicken joint but that's southern justice. So the black woman comes up, Vic, gets up, he says, "Ma'am," he, he takes the same questions that the Klansmen had been asking black women all the time, and flips them. He says, "Ma'am, now you know this case involves the Klan, don't you?" "Why, yes." "And even though it involves the Klan, you can be fair then, can't you? You, you won't, you'll put that out of your mind won't you?" "Oh, yes, I will." "And now, Ma'am, the word nigger is gonna be used a lot in this case and I, I know it may be offensive to you in your personal life but you will be able to follow the instructions of the judge won't you, and, and, and give these, give these boys a fair trial now, right?" "Yes, sir, I can." So everything that they had done, we prepped her now. So they get up and what can they do? They said, "Well, you don't really think you can do that do you?" 'Cause they have no peremptory challenges left. They've gotta make a cause challenge, they've gotta, her--they have to get her to say I'm a racist, I hate the Klan, I hate you white people, I'm, no, no, forget about it. She's smart and she saw what we had done. So she figures something's up, and they're going at her. And she was like, "Oh, no, sir, no, that's not a problem. I, I can handle it." That's how we got our only black on the jury because that judge was a fair judge and we get a verdict for a half million dollars against the Klan. And we got an injunction from that judge preventing the Klan from ever engaging in acts of violence or terror, 'cause they were all homegrown terrorists, from, in, in that city against African Americans ever again. And that judge, that, that injunction still stands and from that case [Crumsey v. Justice Knights of the Ku Klux Klan] forward there has never been another incident of Klan violence in Chattanooga, never. And that was my, you know, Klan case. Story_ID: 321612 Speaker 1: So after that big case [Crumsey v. Justice Knights of the Ku Klux Klan]--that was 1984, you worked (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 1: --with Victor McTeer some more in civil rights cases? Speaker 2: Vic and I, Vic and I during that period of time from like '81 [1981] to '84 [1984], we handled cases in Milwaukee, Tenness--Milwaukee, Wisconsin, it was a, it was a desegregation case. City of Milwaukee wanted to turn a black school into a, into a magnet school, it was a huge school, maybe it had seats for three thousand kids and they said they wanted to make it a science magnet school so blacks and white kids could come together. They had enough space to make it a magnet school and an attendance area school but they said no, we're gonna close it as an attendance area school and all these black kids who are in here now, they're gonna be shipped out to this, on the edge of the Milwaukee and take a thirty minute bus ride, just so we can clear this place out, it was North High School [North Division High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. And we said that's, that's racist. Why can't these white kids and black kids, 'cause they were in different classes now, why can't they coexist peacefully in this same building, there's enough space for all. They wanted to get these low class kids out the building what it was and so they could attract the upper income folks. And we fought them tooth and nail, Bill [William Kunstler], Vic, Vic and I. And eventually we won. The, they opened it as both, both schools. Story_ID: 321613 Speaker 1: And then we handled cases in Mississippi, a voting rights case, my first voting rights case, I handled in, in Cha--Indian--Indianola, Mississippi, the birth place of [HistoryMaker] B.B. King. Speaker 2: And next door to my hometown. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Well, there's Indianola, Leland [Mississippi], and then Greenville [Mississippi], but they're all very close together. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. So we, I spent a lot of time in Mississippi with Vic [Victor McTeer] traveling around. One case we heard-- Speaker 2: Just tell me about the voting rights case in Indianola. Speaker 1: Indianola was an interesting case. In, Indianola was ann- there, there was the City of Indianola, and then unincorporated areas outside the city limits. And what the city was doing, they were annexing white areas that were unincorporated and when a black area petitioned to be incorporated they refused, just wouldn't do it. And we alleged they were doing that to basically dilute black voting strength, 'cause they were increasing the white voters. And we tried that, Vic tried that case, I don't know, I'm not sure, I don't recall what exactly happened 'cause I had moved on to other matters by then. But the fascinating case I think was a young black man, and Vic was a pilot, so we were flying, (laughter) here's two black guys flying all over, (laughter) all over Mississippi and we'd land at some little airstrip and the, and next to a corn, corn field and we would land. And, and we went to this one, we heard about this case of a young black man who had been arrested because he, he owed money and couldn't pay it, like a debtors prison, that's illegal, you can't throw somebody in jail 'cause you can't pay a bill, it's just, it's just illegal, you can't do it. So we fly in, Vic and I, to this small little town and we go see this guy, and we take his statement, and the sheriff lets us and he's in, he's in, in the jail house, not in prison, he's in a little one horse jail cell and we interview him and we take his statement. We get him to sign, we're gonna file a federal petition for a writ of habeas corpus to get this guy out of jail. And before we could get on the plane to go back to where we were going, we got a call that the man had been freed, just Vic's presence alone scared that sheriff enough to free this guy. And had we not been there, that boy would have been in jail for a long time. And that's what I learned down there, you know, justice is, not much has really changed (laughter) from the old days, in those small little villages where no one knows what's going on, all sorts of things can happen to people, you know. So we had a lot of fun down there. Story_ID: 321614 Speaker 1: What other things did I do that--I guess our next big thing is Liberia, yeah. Speaker 2: So Liberia happens before you start teaching? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. So let's go to Liberia. Speaker 1: Yeah, Liberia happened in, there are a lot of other little things along the way but Liberia is a big one. In 1979, well, let's back up a little, give a little history of Liberia. Seventy-nine [1979] there is a group of activists in Liberia who had been educated in the, in the United States. Liberia has a very, well, the Liberians, like to believe they have a very close relationship with the U.S. and they did until the U.S. no longer needed them. Speaker 2: But just to fill in some of the history of Liberia-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Liberians are all American citizens? Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: No? Speaker 1: --well, no they're not. Speaker 2: They're not? Okay. Speaker 1: Liberia, the history-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I thought they were all Americans? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The history of Liberia is very fascinating. And I, in the course of this work that I did in Liberia I had to do this research. Liberia was founded by the American Colonization Society. These were a group of, you know, whites in the states back in the 1820s, '30s [1830s]. And the notion was we're gonna ship these blacks back to Africa for a whole host of reasons. So they get a group of blacks, former slaves, and they agree to go back to Africa and they find this place called Liberia, not that, (laughter) now mind you it wasn't as if there were no people living there. And, and it wasn't, it wasn't like the American Colonization Society said to the people who were there, "Excuse me, we're gonna send some blacks back, would you mind, you know, if they live with you?" Not at all, they just sent them back. Took them back on a boat. And my, these were African Americans, 'cause they weren't Africans anymore, they, these weren't like folks who had just gotten off the boat and were being sent back, this wasn't, you know, well, 'Amistad.' These were folks who were Americans, they were Christians, they didn't really see themselves as Africans but they were leaving the United States 'cause they knew they couldn't get, they didn't feel they could get a fair shake here and they were gonna start their own country. So they land in the Misrata Coast, in, which is now Liberia, it's on the west coast of Africa near Ghana and Senegal, in that area. And the local people are not really pleased to see them because it's, it's like a class of, clash of cultures. The local folks are not Christians. They're, you know, native people, they didn't know the, as far as who these blacks folks were, and unlike now where we all see black folks as we're all one big happy family, not, not in, not in African days, not when, you were, I'm a crew, I'm, you know, a, I'm, I'm from my nation, my group, and if you're not from my group, I don't know you. Just 'cause you have the same skin color, that doesn't mean anything to me. I mean, I always find it interesting, why, why is it that we expect Africans to be one big happy country, we're, you know, the continent, when you go to Europe they've been fighting each other for years. I mean the French fight the Germans, well the French tribe if you will, fights the German tribe and no one says, that is like outrageous, why aren't all these whites getting together? But it's just the way it is. You know, people really have different views of who they are and their identity. So anyway, so these Liberian, these Africans come back, African Americans, and they start to call themselves Americo-Liberians, Americo-Liberians, and they begin a war of conquest, and by 1848 they declare independence. Now, you can't declare independence unless you're a colony of somebody, and they were a colony of the U.S. Their capital is called Monrovia [Liberia] after Monroe, James Monroe [President James Monroe]. Many of their streets are named after American streets. English is the language that these Liberians and their country adopt. Their flag is a single star with red, white, and blue just like America's flag. Their constitution is patterned after the U.S. Constitution of 1848 [sic.]. And under their constitution you had to own land to vote and that's the way it was in 1979, they had never changed that. You don't own land, you don't vote. And that meant that three-fourths of the Liberian population in 1979 could not vote, period. So the American Liberians established themselves as a ruling class, and they engaged in wars of conquest against the native people and slaughter them. By 1920, the American Liberians had controlled the entire country at that point, and the native folk were basically subservient. The League of Nations did a, an investigation because there was a report that there was slavery in Liberia. And the report concluded that the Liberian government had engaged in the slave trade. That they had sold Africans, not American Liberians, native people to the, to a place called Fernando Po [Bioko], I think it was the Portuguese ran it, as slave labor. And then, so that's bad, that, now, former slaves are now engaging in the slave trade, that's outrageous. Story_ID: 321615 Speaker 1: And then the Firestone Corporation [Firestone Tire and Rubber Company] decides it wants to use Liberia as a place to grow rubber. So the American Liberians, who now run the government, they're getting paid however, whatever is done, to do this, and they go up to the native people, I mean thousands of acres of land and say to the native people, excuse me, you know, no longer own this or live here, this is now owned by the Firestone Company and you're gonna work for them. So they make these people who lived on the, I mean, they were no different in the way they treated the indigenous population than Europeans who conquered South Africa. Only the difference is they had the same skin color. So they had developed this society that's purely a, a mimic of the West, and especially America. And Tubman [William Tubman] is the president for many, many years, and he was a brutal dictator of the worst order, an oppressive of, of the highest order. He dies in like the late '70s [1970s] and he's there for thirty years. And a fellow named William Tolbert [William R. Tolbert, Jr.] comes up. And Tolbert was his, one of his lieutenants but a little more liberal than Tubman was. And what the theory of revolution is, of social change is that when the foot of the dictator is on your neck, you don't rebel, oppression is too heavy. When you rebel, is when the foot of the dictator relaxes a little bit and people start to feel a sense of empowerment, that's what happened. These young African, young Americo-Liberians mostly, had come back to the United States and had seen the Civil Rights Movement, and wanted to bring that to Liberia and they began agitating and organizing, you know, political parties and activist groups. And they would demand the right to vote, a simple basic right. Tubman won't have it, I mean, Tolbert is not hearing it. And then they announce that they're gonna raise the price of rice--rice is the staple of Liberia, they eat rice for breakfast, lunch, and dinner, and I love rice, so me and the Liberians, we got along spectacularly. They were gonna raise the price of rice beyond the ability, the, the pay, of the local population to afford. I mean, they were gonna literally starve the people. And the people said no, we're not having this. We're gonna go in the streets, we're gonna protest, and they called it the Rice Riots, April 14, 1979, they go in the streets. And the government shoots them down. Unarmed people, two, three hundred people, killed, and more wounded and the hospitals are overflowing. Just mowed 'em down. Story_ID: 321616 Speaker 1: A group here in the United States called the Committee of Concerned Africans--never heard of them before, (laughter) or since--they write a, they send like a communique, you know, back in the days, and looking, they're saying they, they were, (laughter) they were organizing a group to do a human rights investigation into Liberia and the massacres in the Rice Riots. So I'm working at CCR [Center for Constitutional Rights, New York, New York], I communicate and I said, "Look I'd like to be a part of this thing because I'm a, I was an African history major in college and that was my field, I mean, so I learned all about a lot of things about Africa, literature, poetry, politics, everything." So the concerned group of Africans, they're like, "Oh, yes, very well, we'd love to have you go on the group," so we're talking, and talking and talking. And eventually I asked them, "Well, who else is going?" "We haven't been able to get anybody else to go." I said, "Is it just me?" Said "Yes, just you." So (laughter) I go to one of the vice presidents of CCR, 'cause I, I don't care, I'm young, I don't have any family, I've got no obligations, I'm going, I don't care what it is. I'm going to Africa and that's it (laughter). So I called, talked to the vice present at CCR, and he's a real big human rights guy, so he asked me, who, who's going with you? I said, it's just me. He said what? You're going to, to a, a foreign country and they've killed people to do a human rights investigation by yourself? What are you insane? I said, listen, Peter [Peter Weiss], I'm going, that's all there is to it. He says, "Okay, well, get some documentation from something, a letter from the National Council of Black Lawyers [National Conference of Black Lawyers], at least you'll have some introduction so people will know who you are and why you're there, in case something happens to you." I said "Okay." No cell phones in those days. I go, and I land in Liberia at, at Robertsfield [Roberts International Airport, Harbel, Liberia], that's the airport, it's like thirty miles outside of town. And I don't know who I'm meeting but before I land in Liberia, it's funny. We landed, I took Swissair, and we went to Europe first and, you know, the Swiss thing and then we went, the first place we landed in Africa was Senegal. Funny, when I, we cross the Sahara Desert, I swear to god, the plane got hot, it just felt that way. So we land in Senegal and it's my first time being in Africa. I got off the, I said I got, they said well, you can get off the plane, but I got off the plane and I, I knelt down on the tarmac and I kissed the tarmac, I was home, you know. So I get to Liberia, and I don't even know who I'm meeting. I mean, literally it's like totally like clandestine. And I see this guy, he flashes a picture of me, 'cause I sent them my (unclear), he flashed a picture, I said that must be my guy. And literally, I don't, he flashed it, puts it away. And he says, "This, this is the name you're supposed to use, you know. Don't give 'em your name." I said, "Okay." I'm Emmanuel (laughter) whatever it was, you know. So I sign in this name and he says, "What are you here for, are you here for business or pleasure?" I said, "Umm," the guy looks at me, I said, "Pleasure." He says, "Very good," and he passes me through. Story_ID: 321617 Speaker 1: And now I'm with these two guys in the dead of night in Liberia, hot as Hades, don't know anybody, and they're driving me into town. We stop in this little village before we get to town and it's called Smell No Taste [Liberia], that's the name of the village 'cause in this village people are very, very poor and they'll, you, you can come to the village and you, and Liberians are very gracious and very, at least at that time and very warm and giving, this is before the civil war had started, after the, after many years and the butchery that happened then. It's a beautiful, beautiful country. But Smell No Taste, people are very poor so they, you go to the village like to visit and normally you go to a Liberian home, they'll offer you food and beer and everything, you, you, you can't leave without eating. So this place, you'd come to the village, no one ever, you'd smell the food but you'd never taste it that's why they call it Smell No Taste. So they bring, 'cause I haven't eaten yet, so they bring me into this small little hole in the wall kitchen place, you know, whatever. And they bring me fufu. And I, the food, oh, my god, it was the best food I've ever had in life. I still eat and cook Liberian food to this very day. And fufu is just like cassava, doughy kind of a thing, it's hard to even describe, you know. So we go into town and for the next month I'm traveling up and down the country and interviewing victims of this tragedy, what had happened. What's really amazing to me 'cause this is my first time experiencing this, I wanted some palm wine, 'cause palm wine if you read any Chinua Achebe's novels, 'Things Fall Apart,' any of his novels, he always talks about palm wine, and I've been reading about it for decades, and I wanted to have some. So I said to one of my guides, my people, I said, "Look, I want some, I want some of this palm wine." They said, "Well, we, we have to go up country to get the palm wine but there may be someone here outside of Monrovia [Liberia] and we can get some for you." I said, "Okay, fine," (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, you know, I mean, I'm a funny guy, whenever I'm in an environment where the accent is different from my own, I kind of pick it up, you know, I just, this is the way I am, I hear it, I say it 'cause it, it's easier to get along. When I'm down south I pick up a southern accent, if I'm in Boston [Massachusetts] I park the car in the yard, if I'm in New York [New York], I'm a New Yorker. (Laughter) So we go to this old lady on the outskirts of town, and she's the palm lady, palm wine. So we go to her, she comes on the porch, these two guys are with me, two native Liberians, and she comes out and she starts yelling at them, some, (unclear) she's yelling, waving her arms around, I'm like oh, my god, what's going on? I knew she was angry about something because when you're in a country where you don't understand the language you have to pick up the old verbal, nonverbal visual cues, and tone and tone, all those things. And so he says to her, to me, I said, "What's wrong?" They're talking to her. And he said to me, "She is complaining and wants to know why we've brought this white man to our village. And we're trying to explain to her that you are not a white man, you are a black American and that you have different colors over there but she won't listen, she won't hear it." I said, "Are we getting palm wine?" "Oh, yeah, she's bringing palm wine." So she brings the palm wine in a little can and she gives it to them, she's not even talking to me. She gives it to the first guy and he drinks a little, he passes it to the second guy and he drinks a little, now I'm, I got the can, and I have this wave of emotion, you know, I'm sitting there with this like, it's, it's, I, I mean I'm overcome, at long last I'm here, this is Achebe, this is like history, it's culture, it's everything, my first, it's like drinking your mother's milk to me. And before I drink it, I remember my mother [Mae Rodrigues], and my mother who is Jamaican, in the holiday time, we always have some eggnog, she'd make homemade eggnog with white rum, Jamaican rum. And before she would drink it, she would always go outside and pour a little on the ground, and my father [Joseph McLaughlin] would give her, what are you wasting the good liquor for? She'd say, no, the people who died before they're thirsty, they wanna drink too, okay. So I remember this. So I'm there with this palm wine (unclear) and before I drink it, I look at, they're all looking at me, I pour a little on the ground, just a little (unclear) on the ground in memory of, you know, those who came before. And the woman starts yelling again, oh (unclear). I said, "What's wrong?" I said, maybe I violated some cultural taboo, "What's wrong now?" She says, they said, "No, she's not angry, she's not vexed with you." I said, "What's the problem?" "She's telling us, you are an African 'cause only an African would know to do what you did. We were supposed to do it but we did not. So now she recognizes you are an African." And I'm like wow, (laughter) you know. It's just heavy. It's like I'm having these reflections. So I drink the palm wine, oh, my god, it was the, it was phenomenal. And you can only get it in, in West Africa. I don't know why, they got palm trees all over the world but only the Africans know how to tap the tree, they just literally tap the tree, they go and they put something, a spigot in the tree and they, they don't do anything with it, they just literally draw the, the liquid out of the tree and they drink it, no fermentation, straight. When I was up country they, they'd bring a bucket from the tree and you'd drink, it's, it's indescribable but it gets you so (laughter) drunk. You're drunk but no hangover the next day. Story_ID: 321618 Speaker 1: So I'm traveling up and down the countryside doing this investigation by myself and with one guy, and it's fascinating learning the history of the culture and meeting these people who are really activists. And my last interview is with the former attorney general of Liberia, and that's a tricky interview, 'cause he's with the government or was with the government, and this is the only government guy I've ever interviewed in the thing. So I, I've gotta play the situation close to the vest 'cause I've got, I'm working with these radicals and if they did, you know, and no one's knows I'm there, I could have been killed a, a number of times. So I, I go to meet with him. And I said okay, I have my letter of introduction and I tell him that I'm there to do a report, a study on the interrelationship between indigenous law and, and Western law and how the two kind of relate to each other. So we're having this talk blady, blady, blady, and da, da, da and law and um-hm, I'm thinking no, it's all very interesting, that's not what I'm there for. And then after we've been interviewing and I've settled in, he's very suspicious [TW1]at first, after I've settled him down and calmed him down and I say to him, "I've been reading in the, in, in, in the U.S. about this April 14 situation. What, whatever happened with that? Could you tell me about that?" "Oh, yes, that was an outrage. I said, 'When you have a child and you tell the child don't go outside, what do you do when the child won't listen and goes outside?'" And I knew what he wanted. I said, "You spank him." He said, "Exactly so. You must discipline that child. These people they are children and we told them no, you shall not march and we, they marched, we must, we should have been harsher on them." I'm like oh, my god. "Well, thank you very much, sir." And I slipped away. And I wrote this report in 1980, '80 [1980]. And I wrote the report and I said, it was from the history of Liberia to the April riots, the whole thing. And I said, given the conflicts and the tensions in this country, if there is not serious change by the leadership, by the government, there will be a rebellion and a revolution in this country within the next two years. I was, I hate to say it like this, I don't wanna be egotistical but--and anybody could see this--but I was prophetic. In 1981, in April, almost on the anniversary of the riots, a sergeant, Master Sergeant Samuel K. Doe [Samuel Doe] and a group of other sergeants, other low level officials, I mean, soldiers, stormed the palace and they go up to Tolbert [William R. Tolbert, Jr.] and they shoot him in his office. Then they arrest the other leaders of the government, government officials, they carry them down to the beach, they strip them to their underwear, tie them to poles, and shoot them on the beach. And these people take over. And at first it looked like a revolution, because the people who I had been working with now were in government and were running the thing. But it was a coup, it wasn't a revolution. And I went back in '81 [1981], I revisit Liberia, I go back in '81 [1981] to do a follow-up study, some other issues but and do this follow-up. And my friends all have guns now. One of my good, good friends, he became an ambassador to France and that whole thing from Liberia. He's got an AK-47 in his, in his office and he walks, carries everywhere a .45. The guns are everywhere now. And we're having dinner with some people, radicals, and a general. And a phone call comes in to the house where we're at that it's being reported in the U.S. that this general who we're sitting with, young guy, Wiszan [ph.] was his name, had tried to kill the president who is Samuel K. Doe and we all laugh like oh, that's crazy, he's right here with us, what kind of nonsense is that? We all like put it away and had our club beer. I left, and I was troubled by what I saw. And within a couple of months he was dead, they killed him. Doe became one of the worst dictators Liberia had ever seen, but in a sense, the chickens had come home to roost. Story_ID: 321463 Speaker 1: Doe [Samuel Doe] was a, a Krahn, he was from the Krahn nation; they called them tribes, I called them nations. And he basically had been taught that the native, the indigenous people in Liberia had been taught by the American Liberians for years, how you rule. You rule through brutality and murder and abuse, and you award your friends and punish your enemies. So they just did what they were taught, you know, with, it's nothing unusual but it was horrible. They literally destroyed the country. And then years later a man named Charles Taylor comes back into the country, some suspect, well, he was actually in prison in Massachusetts for some, on some allegations, he had been in the Doe government, he comes back in and starts leading a rebellion, in the up country we call it, on the edges of Liberia and he comes down slowly through the countryside and eventually gets to Monrovia [Liberia], and he's sweeping his way through, 'cause the people are fed up and they think he's a liberator. So another lieutenant named Prince Johnson, he gets to Monrovia first and pushes in and catch, gets, catches Doe. And he's now, and there, there's videotape of this and I've seen some of the videotape, they strap Doe to a chair and they start to dismember him, a lot while he's alive, I mean, they chop off his ear first, they chop off his other ear, they chop off his arm, I think they might have chopped off his genitals, I'm not sure what else they, they literally dismember the man while he's alive and you hear him screaming as they're cutting him up. Horrid. I mean, when I went to Liberia back in, in 1979 people would say to me you have nothing to worry about here, no one, there's no violence, no one, there are no guns, no one will you, someone may take your money--a little pickpocket, that's the worst you have to worry about. So when I was traveling back in that time, I had no fear. Now, I say over half the Liberian population were living in refugee camps. And children were walking around with AK-47s and they became the, the, the, the proponents of the violence. And so Doe, Taylor takes over and he's a brutal dictator himself. And he gets, quote, elected but the Liberians elected him because they knew if they didn't elect him, he would just kill people anyway. And he continues his brutal reign. And now another rebellion starts up country again, and the, the West African nations led by Nigeria, they form a peace-keeping group, and they come and they make peace, and they separate the warring factions. And Taylor has now been indicted for war crimes in Sierra Leone. But a lot of pressure, a lot of pressure, I mean, 'cause now again the same thing is happening, these rebellion, these armies have rebelled outside and they're coming closer and closer to Monrovia and people are being killed in the streets and Liberians are literally camping outside of the U.S. embassy cause they're saying why doesn't the U.S. help us, we're your friends, we are your, you know, they see themselves as the fifty-first state. And the U.S. sends these troops in a, in a boat, in a ship and they're anchoring off the coast of Liberia, and they won't come on shore. And then eventually they come on shore but only to protect the embassy. And Liberians are there being slaughtered right in front of the embassy, and they bring the bodies, and they say this is what you're doing to our country, this is what you're allowing to happen in our country; they're like pleading for help. So in the face of all that kind of pressure eventually the U.S. is, okay, fine, we gotta work something out here, this is looking really bad for us. So they, you know, get Taylor to leave and he's now in Nigeria, he's been in Nigeria for a while and there's a possibility he may still get prosecuted. And I think in the fall the, they'll, there'll be elections in Liberia and things have kind of calmed down but the country was just, there's, there's no government, there's no roads, there are no roads, there's no electricity, they have just destroyed the entire country during this ten years of civil war for nothing. Now but Liberia has oil, they say, gold, for sure, diamonds, some of the best diamond's in the world, timber, iron ore, rubber plants, I mean, if they could harness the wealth of that country it would be unbelievable but, you know, right now it's just trying to get back on its feet, but it was a beautiful, beautiful place. A really spectacular place and wonderful people. Story_ID: 321464 Speaker 1: So from that experience, Liberia, where--and that's in the 1980s, where, what happens in your life, you-- Speaker 2: Well, a number of things are happening. I'm trying cases, working with Bill [William Kunstler], working at CCR [Center for Constitutional Rights, New York, New York]. I become their associate legal director. I'm now developing a New York practice. I'm handling cases in New York City [New York, New York], the York/LaBorde case [People of the State of New York vs. Bashir Hameed and Abdul Majid]. I do voting rights cases here in New York City, 'cause I found, my thinking at the time was that we were spending, and I was spending an inordinate amount of time traveling all over the country, plopping into a city, handling a case, and leaving, going back. And I had no sense of whether what we were doing had any long term effects. Whereas no one was doing that kind of work in New York, everyone is doing it someplace else. And I'm a native New Yorker and I said, you know, I know this place best of all. And I developed what I call the liberated zone theory where I said it's, we need to focus our energies on this place, someone does, and I decided to start taking cases in New York. Speaker 1: And you take the case of [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and White Plains [sic. New Rochelle, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's later. I'm doing voting rights cases in New York City, representing activists in New York, and but my family is, now I've got a family. And, you know, economic reality kicks in. So I decide it's time, I had been at CCR from '79 [1979], '78 [1978] to '86 [1986], it's a long time. A lot of changes have come about, and it's time for me to do something else, though I loved it and it was probably in terms of my legal career, I had such a wonderful experience in those years and the opportunities and the work that I did that was probably the highpoint of my career in that sense, because of the variety of things and the freedom that I had to just be a lawyer and, and a progressive civil rights lawyer. So I go to work for, you know, I gotta make some income, so I go to work for a small firm in Long Island [New York] that one of the partners was [HistoryMaker] Basil Paterson. And Basil was a, was and is, not only a Harlem [New York, New York] leader but he is a, he owned a, he, he, if he had run for mayor of the City of New York, he would, he almost did, but he had some issues he couldn't run because of health problems, but had he run he would have won, people are--Basil is probably one of the most well-loved, I, I don't know a single person who doesn't like Basil Paterson, he's that well respected and loved. And he's a, a homegrown Harlem boy, I mean, that's what he is. And if you, you know, and if you see Basil, you know, he, he has the best of both worlds. He knows how to move in places of power and he knows how to move in the street, you know, he's comfortable in both places. And see that's something that, that I learned that if you have street sense, you can move in the other arena and you can use techniques that the folks who don't have street sense, they don't know how to handle it and you can intimidate them, you know, because they don't know whether you're gonna get physical, not that I ever would but you can make people think you might (laughter) and sometimes just the thought is enough to back them up. So Basil was this great, great lawyer. I learned a lot from him, I worked for him for two years. We handled, we did a lot of Harlem based stuff. Story_ID: 321465 Speaker 1: What were some of the big Harlem [New York, New York] based cases? Speaker 2: We represented the Harlem, with--the Harlem Urban Development Corporation was a group that we represented, and they wanted to form a Harlem international trade institute [Harlem Third World Trade Institute] to set up a hotel here in Harlem, this is back in '86 [1986] to '88 [1988], you know, Harlem was not what it is today. They wanted to set up a, a, build a hotel on 125th Street and, and Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], a hotel and international trade center basically to, to rival the World Trade Center [New York, New York], but this would be a trade center that third world countries could come and, and to celebrate Harlem and work with Harlem-based businesses, it was a great idea. You know, now people all over the city wanna build hotels here in Harlem but then, then it was kind of like a radical idea. Then he also, one of the other plans was to go to the West Side, under the Riverside Viaduct [Riverside Drive Viaduct], there's just like this, you know, under the Riverside Drive, there are these huge, huge space and beautiful bridges and, and on the West Side of Harlem, right by the Hudson River. He had a vision, the guy had a vision. Not, and I'm talking about Basil but Basil had vision too but they're our client. And they wanted to build this wall, like a river way, a river walkway underneath the viaduct with restaurants and, you know, skating areas and parks, it was a brilliant idea. But, you know, it just didn't come to fruition, but he had vision this guy. That was one of our big things. Then we did a lot of labor work. We represented The Uptown Chamber of Commerce [The Greater Harlem Chamber of Commerce] as well. And we represented the registered nurses division of local 1199 [SEIU Healthcare 1199] of the hospital workers. And Basil is a very careful lawyer. And it was a great law firm. It was a, I call it a woodshed experience, 'cause these are some of the best lawyers, I, I had ever worked, I mean, Morton [Morton Stavis], and, and, and, and, and the, and Bill [William Kunstler] they were great civil rights lawyers, but these were straight lawyers, you know. One of the lawyers I worked with, Harold Ickes [Harold M. Ickes], he became the deputy chief of staff under the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration, in the Clinton White House. So they were, yeah, former corporate appeals judge was one of our judges, another appellate division judge was a, was, was one of our partners. Jack English [John F. English] who founded the firm he had worked for Jack Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. You know, Kennedy, Kennedy delivered his funeral, it's not Jack obviously, but Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] delivered his eulogy at his funeral. Story_ID: 321466 Speaker 1: And it was a great experience for two years. But I'll be frank, as Bill [William Kunstler] used to--what, what I would say is, I didn't go into law to make a living, I went into law to do things that had value. And, you know, I just, having done the work that I did to go to this firm, this straight firm and represent, you know, corporations and real estate moguls, you know, my heart wasn't in it. So an opportunity came up to teach, to teach at a law school, Pace law school [Pace University School of Law, White Plains, New York], and I applied. I'll never forget the interview I had with the then-dean, her name is Janet Johnson [Janet A. Johnson], and I said, "Look, you know, I wanna come to teach law school because I want to have the freedom to do my, this civil rights work." 'Cause I could still work with CCR [Center for Constitutional Rights, New York, New York]. And they said, "Fine, we want you to do that, we think it'll be great." I said, "Okay, and then this is the school for me," so I came. And my, my vision at the time was my role model now was Charles Hamilton Houston. And Charles Hamilton Houston was a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate back in the '20s [1920s]. And he trained all of the great civil rights lawyers of the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], Thurgood Marshall was his student. Many, many, many of the lawyers who would work on the Brown case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] were his students. And he developed this philosophy of using law school as a training ground, using law school as a place to develop social engineers who would now go out and do this work in the field and, and bring cases in. He became the head of the NAA- he was the first director of the legal, of the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] legal team, and then Thurgood succeeded him in that role. So he taught students and at the same time engaged in the work that was my role model in terms of what I did. And I said okay, I'm gonna teach and work. So I did that and from that point on I, many, all the cases that I've had (background noise) were brought to me or people asked me to get involved, my former students of one stripe, stripe, or another. Story_ID: 321467 Speaker 1: My first voting rights case in Long Island [New York] was a case in the town of Hempstead [New York]. Hempstead is the largest town in the country, and it has a significant black population, 18 percent. And they never had an elected official in the town, and at the town council level. So a lawyer from Long Island, a homegrown guy, named Fred Brewington [Frederick K. Brewington] asked me to get involved, 'cause he knew about my voting rights work, and I did. We sued the town of Hempstead. Ten years later we won the case and we got the first African American elected to the town council. And, and that seat has always been an African American seat ever since. Speaker 2: And it was a woman? Speaker 1: A woman. Speaker 2: What was her name? Speaker 1: Dorothy Goosby, she was the plaintiff and the case was Goosby v. Town of Hempstead. I'm not sure if she's still in the seat now, I don't remember but we, we broke up into districts and it's, it was a successful case. Story_ID: 321468 Speaker 1: So as a result of the work I was doing out there when I got to Westchester [Westchester County, New York], 'cause, you know, my sense of Westchester having been a--growing up in Queens [New York], working-class Queens, was that Westchester was the home of basically rich people; there are no poor people with issues up there. Well, little did I know when I got up to Westchester I found that wasn't really true. Yes, there were very, very wealthy people there, but yes, there were very, very poor people there as well, a lot of them live in Yonkers [New York] and New Rochelle [New York] and Mount Vernon [New York]. I call it the southern tier cities. Right, the southern tier of Westchester, that's where the blacks and Hispanics live and they border the city. 'Cause people move in, in progressions. They move in, you know, geographic progressions and they fan out. So these folks have come from the Bronx [New York] and Manhattan [New York], not too much from Queens. Queens people and, and Brooklyn [New York] tend to go to Long Island, that's the progression that they move in. And folks from the Bronx and Upper and Manhattan tend to move to Westchester because it's just, it's just, it's a natural progression. But the blacks and Hispanics are basically concentrated in Mount Vernon, Yonkers, and New Rochelle, in the southern tier cities. And then Upper Westchester, the further up you go, the, the less diverse it gets. So I was contacted by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in, in New Rochelle. And, and I filed the case out in Hempstead [New York] in 1988, I filed the New Rochelle case in '89 [1989], maybe. And New Rochelle had the same problem that they had in Hempstead. And it had a large election system, entire village, entire city, and they'd only had in that case one black elected to the council. So we contacted [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis who has been a long standing resident of New Rochelle and asked whether he'd be interested in representing the case [Davis v. City of New Rochelle], as plaintiff, the lead plaintiff. I met him in his home, and he said to us, "Explain to me why I should get involved." And Ossie is like Mr. Politics, he was involved in everything, any march, any demonstration, that's Ossie. So he said, "Explain to me why I should do this." And I said, "This case will have implications not only for New Rochelle but for the country, because it's important for people to know that the problems we see here in New Rochelle are the same problems we see down south." And he said, "All right, I'll, I'll get, I'll lend my name" and he did. And we sued, we worked very hard and we were able to force the city to change its system and they, and because of that suit, the first African American female again was elected to the city council, she would later become deputy mayor and a great, great woman. It was a 51 percent black district, ten years later when the city was getting ready to redistrict as a result of the census, I testified at city council. I said look, you've got a majority black district, you can do what you wanna do in other areas but this district has to maintain itself as a majority black district. They said thank you. And then the city council decided they were gonna butcher the district, literally, just chop it up and they made it, they reduced it from being a majority black district to making it less, almost a little more than 40 percent, just chopped pieces of it and put it all in, in, in white districts. So the NAACP came to me again. And would you sue about this? So we sued. And we tried this case in 19- no, 2002, 2003. And we got a wonderful opinion from a great old judge. Who is like another hero of mine, his name is Charles Brieant, old judge, handlebar mustache. I tried my first voting rights case in front of him in New York City [New York, New York], conservative judge, very conservative, Republican. And when I tried the first case in New York City with him, people said to me, "Oh, you'll never win that case, you know, Brieant is a conservative, he'll never rule for you; civil rights, forget about it." This- that case was the case where we challenged the election, the, the run off primary law in New York State that only applied to three elections in New York City. This old judge, not only did he rule for me, he ruled for me on every ground, every ground. And so I'm now trying this case in front of him up in Westchester again, and he calls me professor, Professor McLaughlin [HistoryMaker Randolph Michael McLaughlin], and, and (laughter), and one of the lawyers I recall objected to him calling me professor, he, he should call me Mr. McLaughlin. He said, "I'll call him whatever I feel like calling him, and its professor" (laughter). So we had a great time. And he wrote a spectacular opinion that forced the city to reestablish that black majority district because of what? The stroke of his pen. And we have now maintained for over ten years and until the next, for these twenty years, an African American district in the City of New Rochelle, and it's again elected a black person in that seat so they have representation on the council. And I must say this also because of the work they did in New Rochelle they have now a Latino who's also been elected. So the city's, you know, it's an interesting city. Story_ID: 321469 Speaker 1: The more complex areas, the--and we, we were involved in Ossining [New York] also. Ossining is a very interesting community up in Westchester [Westchester County, New York]. They had a vicious shooting there, police shooting, and, you know, it was, no one was indicted, and we came in to help work with a, to create a police, a civilian complaint review board and we did it as a joint civilian complaint. There were, there was police representation and civilians. It was a model, it was the first civilian complaint review board in the county of Westchester. We worked on the creation of the Human Rights Commission in Westchester County that would actually start to help folks with human rights issues. And then we got involved in Yonkers [New York]. And Yonkers is probably the toughest town in New York State that I've ever worked in. I mean, it's, it's another world. It's a completely different world. Part of the problem with Westchester as I find is that there's a brain drain in Westchester. People who are really, most, a lot of folks who are really smart and intelligent and could do things to make things change, they get on the train and they come to New York and they work here. They go home at seven o'clock at night and they eat dinner and go to bed. The people who are left behind in Westchester, you know, it's just like Africa, it's a brain drain. So a lot of folks, and the media doesn't pay much attention to Westchester, the local paper, the general news up there, you know, sometimes they do interesting stories but most of the time it's like, you know, the, the cat that crossed the street and got hit by a car, or the local 4-H Club. I mean, it's like pablum. It's amazing to me how uninvolved it is. You wouldn't, you wouldn't know what's going on in the world if you, if you just read that paper. So we got involved and we worked there, we formed the Social Justice Center [Pace Law School Social Justice Center] in 1986, no, no, no, strike that, we filed the, we formed it in, I think (unclear) '88 [1988], '96 [1996], I forgot, it's been that long. I, we found, we, we founded it in '96 [1996] and it was designed to basically train young lawyers and young law students how to be civil rights lawyers and to give service to the community. Story_ID: 321470 Speaker 1: We represented a group of homeowners in a little place in New Rochelle [New York], again New Rochelle. New Rochelle wanted to build an IKEA store in this place called City Park [Flowers Park, New Rochelle, New York]. It was a run-down section, low income section of, you know, New Rochelle, but people, you know, owned homes, there was a mixed use community, a lot of factories. So if you drove through, it was like, hmm, it's kind of odd but the city had literally not delivered any services to these folks, they hadn't paved the streets, they hadn't paved the side, the sidewalk, they just kind of let it run down. We call it condemnation blight, they just blight an area by not taking care of it, and then they say, oh, look it's, it's blighted, we gotta clean these people out. So the city came up with this idea they were gonna bring in IKEA, a massive superstore and just flatten the entire community. I mean, literally the stores, the, the rest, the restaurants, the factories, the homeowners, take their homes, condemnation, and just flatten the place and build, make this big, build this big blue store. Basically we're gonna take your home from you so we can build a building, a store to put home furnishings in for other folks homes, but not yours. And we came in, we represented the people. And we came up with some crazy ideas. I said, okay, you wanna take this man's home, this is an integrated community, and it was low income, low to moderate, elderly people, I said, "If you take their homes you've gotta give them a home in a community, enough money to go to a community that's integrated like the community they're leaving otherwise, they're, they're, they're being deprived." Now, there are very few integrated communities that are low income and moderate income in Westchester. Those places tend to, those houses tend to go for a half million to a million dollars, 'cause they're in upper income areas. So I was gonna make it so expensive for them to get rid of these people that they wouldn't be able to do it. So now, we, we start organizing, we form coalitions with other groups and we're demonstrating at the Swedish embassy in New York [New York], 'cause IKEA is a Swedish company. And this big tall blond man, blond gentleman comes out and says, "Oh, excuse, can, can I speak to, are you, are you a leader?" (Laughter) So I said, "Well, you know, I'm a lawyer." "Well can, we'd like to speak to you, can we speak to you?" I said, "Sure, but I'm not going by myself 'cause I don't want my people to think, you know, I'm off on my own." I said, "No, let me bring some folk with me." "Very good. 'Cause we would like to know what is going on and why you are here so I can send a report back to the home country." I said, "Okay." So we go up and we explain to him, he's taking notes, "Oh, that's very interesting, I will write back to the country and let them know what you're doing and why." And so reports start to get written in Sweden about what IKEA is doing in New Rochelle. And we're doing this massive, they're doing demonstrations and car caravans. One day we're in the office, we get a call, IKEA has decided to pull out of New Rochelle. They had spent like $10 million, we're like some small little band of radicals, you know, just pushing, sticking the elephant like, like, like mosquitos, 'cause this is a big elephant, you know, but it's, zing! Stinging them. So they pulled out. They just left. And what happened after that was New Rochelle learned, the city did, you can't just treat people this way, you can't just decide what's good for them and then tell them get out. You can but if they're lucky, they'll get organized and they'll get somebody to help 'em fight back, and that's what we did, and we saved those peoples' homes. Story_ID: 321471 Speaker 1: And we did things like that in--in Yonkers [New York]. Nineteen ninety-seven [1997], '98 [1998], a group of African Americans came to a school board meeting, and Yonkers had a history of problems with school boards, they have had the longest running school desegregation case in the history of the country, they fought it and fought it and fought it and fought it, just horrid, horrible things they do, they did up there. They had the first African American school board superintendent and they were firing him. And some activists came, I didn't know that, I was in Lake George [New York] on vacation and a conference and these, one of them being a civil rights lawyer who was an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] leader came and knelt and prayed on the steps of the stage while the school board met and refused to leave. They arrested them. And we handled the case for these thirteen activists, called the Yonkers thirteen, and we tried the case in Yonkers. And it was a packed courtroom every day. 'Cause we were alleging they had no right to arrest these men, they didn't do anything wrong, you couldn't even identify them. It was tried to a judge because it was a low level charge and eleven of them were either acquitted by the judge, dismissed and no charges proffered. The two leaders were forced to continue with the trial. And the judge then found them both guilty of a misdemeanor. One did community service, and he sentenced them, he sentenced them both to community service. The reverend, Charles George [ph.], he said, "I'm not serving." He said, "Put me in jail. I'm not gonna do this." And at the time I'm like, you know, "What's the problem, I'm working this out for you." He said, "No. I took an act of conscience and if I cooperate with the state then I'm violating my own conscience, I will not. Put me in jail, if that's what you will." And he stood firm. And the judge knew he had him in a box, because if the judge put him in jail he'd be a martyr, but the judge couldn't let him walk out and not do something to, you know, to put, you know, he couldn't put him in jail, but he was firm, "I'm going to jail, that's what I'm gonna do." And the end of that case, the judge put him in a, gave him a fine, he didn't put him in jail, wouldn't do it. But those are the things we did up there, you know, we did some interesting work and the work continues. Story_ID: 321472 Speaker 1: So how did you get to Hale House [Hale House Center, New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: That's a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with you being a lawyer? And being a professor also at Pace University [Pace University School of Law, White Plains, New York]. Speaker 2: I have been working and living in New York all my life. Hale House was in the middle of some real difficult period, a real difficult period. And a crisis had broken out and news reports were, was swirling around. And Hale House was founded in 1969 by Clara, Mother Hale [Clara Hale]. And it was set up by her as a home for children, babies and toddlers whose mothers were on drugs and unable to care for them. Later they became AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] babies, crack babies. And she gave them twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week care. And, you know, nonjudgmental, when the children were ready she sent them back to their mothers, she'd work with the mothers; it was essentially saving babies lives. And then the care, the residential care program has been around since then. She died in 1992 and then, you know, a lot of money was being raised, she was recognized in '85 [1985] as a national hero by Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] in the state of the union address. And every celebrity in the world came at her door, doorstep. There was a, there were allegations that there were, she had died, her daughter took over, there were financial irregularities in the way things were being operated. So I got a call and from a good friend, a Harlem friend, and he said, "Look, Randy [HistoryMaker Randolph Michael McLaughlin] they need you at Hale House." I said, "Well, you know, this didn't, the reports are bad, this is really bad." I said, "If they wanna fight this thing and blame the white man for this problem they're having, then I'm not gonna do this but if they wanna save these babies and save the, I'll, I'll be willing to come in and work with them." He said, "No, no, they'll cooperate with you." I said, "Okay, fine." So I come down on a Sunday, they were having a rally, whatever, and I walk up the street and next to us is a, we're on a, in, in, in central Harlem [New York, New York] and next to us is a school with one of those iron fences. And these two men, I didn't know who they were at the time, are in suits in August and pressed up against, no, April, pressed up against the wall, the fence, with these cameras literally just on them like this, and they're sweating bullets, they looked like criminals, not that they were criminals but they, you know, it didn't look good. So I said to myself, and they didn't know who I was, I'm just walking up and sliding in. So I sit down, I meet with them, I said, "Look, here's what we're gonna do, we're cooperate with the AG [attorney general], we're gonna bring in a new board"--there was no board at all--"and we're going to do an internal investigation up, up and down and whichever way the wind blows that's where we're going." They agree. And we brought in an outside firm to do the investigation, met with the AG, I brought in the former head of his charities bureau, 'cause he knew the ins and outs, but even as I'm going through it I'm saying, you know, Randy what, this is kind of odd, what are you, why are you doing this, this is not your line of work, you're a tough as nails, hard litigator, what do you know about Hale House? I mean, I heard about it. And then one day I'm here and I see these little babies walk by me, little toddlers, and I saw that they hugged me around the knees, and I said okay, this is why I'm here, I'm here to save, make sure these babies have a home. 'Cause it was at risk, the institution could have been thrown into receivership, it could have been closed, anything could have happened. And within a month we had shut the investigation down, we had brought a new board in with Zachary Carter [Zachary W. Carter] who is a former U.S. attorney from New York State in Brooklyn [New York], and the deputy mayor or former deputy mayor of the City of New York, Randy Mastro. And we conducted the investigation by the external firm and he, they issued a report several months later, and then once the report came out, we sat in this office and proceeded to fire the entire administration. Story_ID: 321473 Speaker 1: We were at Hale House [Hale House Center, New York, New York], you guys decided to clean house, fired everyone or almost everyone? Speaker 2: The entire administration. But we didn't discharge any of the childcare providers, 'cause there was never an allegation the children weren't being well cared for. There were irregularities on the finance side, the development side. And we brought in an interim executive director, I was now counsel to the board and we began, began to rebuild. And we, we rebuilt the organization floor by floor literally, development, finance, and stabilized the institution. Made sure the children were safe and healthy, and we had a good program. And we had an executive director before me, and I stayed on as counsel. And then in April of '04 [2004], the then executive director stepped down. They asked me to step in as interim executive director. I said, okay, look, I'll do it as an interim, I got a law practice, I'm a law professor, you know, I can't just walk away from tenure, you know, but I'll do it for the summer. Two things happened, one, I fell in love with the place in a profound way, and the place fell in love with me. Two things kind of, we just, I felt like this is where I was meant to be, you know. All the things I had done before this is where I was meant to be. And so my first non-legal job I've had in thirty years, and I love it. I love the people I'm working with, I love coming, I love being in Harlem [New York, New York], and we're doing great things. I've been here now as the executive director for a year, from April, well, September-- Speaker 1: For one year? Speaker 2: One year, September '05 [2005] to September, no, '04 [2004] to '05 [2005], I'm in my second year and a half, whatever it is. What have we done in that year? We've put out the first annual report, and I'll make sure you get a copy of it, first annual report ever in the history of Hale House. We have completing a, the first strategic plan which has ever been adopted by Hale House. We've entered into a $3 million contract with the City of New York [New York] to provide support of transitional housing in two of our apartment buildings. Hale House owns six properties in Harlem, three brownstones, two apartment buildings, and a vacant lot. We're well positioned. And then in the two apartment buildings we have a social worker who, who works there and a full program with the city to help transition homeless families from the shelter system to a, to a transitional apartment, to permanent apartments. And we've already transitioned five, six, seven families already within, within months, and we haven't even been open a year and we've already done that transitional work to give them permanent homes, they're no longer on the streets, and that's something that my people have done. We open, we constructed the first educational daycare center in the, in, in Harlem which is really a program to help these kids get pre-literacy training and skills so that when they get to school, they'll be ready to learn and that we're completing the construction on that. Mother Hale [Clara Hale], our street, 122nd Street was renamed last September, Mother Hale Way. So she's now, and I, and I said to my folk, I said, look, today, we made history, 'cause even when we're all gone, when we're old and gray, you can come back to this street and see that you were a part of this. And now we've just signed an agreement with another not-for-profit to start to work on the issue of abandoned babies. Babies are abandoned all over the country, but in New York, some of these babies are dumped in dumpsters and, you know, they're dead. They found 'em, they find 'em all over the place, 'cause young mothers, teenagers, don't know what to do, and they just get afraid, and they just, some of 'em are found dead. So we wanna develop what's called a baby safe haven program to help save babies' lives, to pass a law in New York that will really be a safe haven program law and then to enable young mothers to bring their children to us if they wish to abandon them and just let, let us take care of the children. Well, we have an adoption license, we'd use the adoption license and run a twenty-four hour program to have a hotline and basically giving these mothers a chance, an alternative to, you know, abandoning their babies without any care. Speaker 1: And then you would do what with the babies? Find families for them? Speaker 2: Find families, yeah. We'd get them adopted. If the mother, and we would try to work with the mother, 'cause the first goal of Hale House is to reunite the child with the family, and we would try that still, but if we can't, and the mother says look, I'm twelve, thirteen, fourteen, I can't handle it, then we would reunite, we would get them adopted. And a number of our kids are adopted by good families, and they're happy and healthy kids. In the last year that I've been here, maybe five kids have been transitioned out. We don't believe that children should stay with us longer than two years, because we wanna get them back into a family environment. It's really respite care, it gives the family a chance to stabilize itself, the mother, and or the family and that we can make sure the child is healthy, psychologically, physically and in every way, and we give them twenty-four hours a day love and care. And then they, one of, at our gala last year, our gala is in June, we were hiring a, a video company to do the video for the gala, and one of the companies that competed for the gala video, the director was a Hale House child, had been here as a child, we hired his firm, and he did the work. So it's been, you know, we have turned around the institution, it's a Harlem institution, it's a great place and it's a, you know, it's a legacy. So what I'd like to say is, and if you notice all the people who I mentioned as mentors were all men, so I would say now that for years I've been walking in the footsteps of great men, now it's time for me to walk in the footsteps of a great woman. Story_ID: 321474 Speaker 1: So now having said that, what would you like for your legacy to be now? Speaker 2: One person can make a difference. That when you're given a lot, a lot is expected of you. I think that when I was a young man and my parents [Mae Rodrigues and Joseph McLaughlin] came to this country without anything and I had a lot of opportunities, you know, I could have done a lot of different things, I could have gone on to work for a Wall Street law firm if I wanted to, but I think it's important to, you know, for your life to have value, I mean otherwise you're just taking up space. And to me the quest for money is just not a value, it's not gold. I mean, I'm, and I don't need much. And we don't really need much but, you, you know, you, you, I'm not saying everyone can dedicate their entire lives to serving not-for-profits, but do something other than just make a living, you know, make a difference, you know, help somebody along the way, somebody helped you. And my, my mother always said that when someone help, when you help someone that person doesn't owe you anything except when someone else needs help for them to help that person. And just give, don't, you know, whether you give money or time, you know, or, or your skills, you know, do something, don't just take up space. You know, it doesn't cost you anything to help somebody, you know. Whether it's just, that--it just doesn't. Story_ID: 321475 Speaker 1: So although you're a young man now, when you look back over the life you've had up to this point, what stands out as the highlight? Speaker 2: Oh, that's a tough one. Hmm. I'd have to say, well, two highlights, twin peaks. One would be the work with, against the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] in the South because that was an education for me and an eye-opening experience in a part of the world I knew nothing about. And the other would be my work in Liberia, yeah, 'cause that, too, profoundly changed the way I look at the world. So those two things would be the peaks, I would think. Story_ID: 321476 Speaker 1: So just to go back, just for a second, what became of the report in Liberia (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The, the report eventually-- Speaker 1: And who did you do the report for and what became of it? Speaker 2: I did the report for the Committee of Concerned Africans. It was later published in Liberia after the Doe [Samuel Doe] folks came in, and now my people, my friends were in government, and they published it. And I think it was a, it was a good thing to do because it was a way for the Liberian people, 'cause to read why are we here, what happened to us, and why did this happen? 'Cause no one had ever written about the April Rice Riots at the, at the level I did. It was a really in-depth analysis, and I think in that sense I, I performed a valuable service for the Liberian people. Story_ID: 321477 Speaker 1: Why do you feel history is important? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: You were a history major. Speaker 2: --I think it's important to, in order to know what you should do, you have to know what was done. And, you know, when I was a young man growing up in New York City [New York, New York] in high, in the high school system, the school, the public school system they had a very rigid, set curriculum. And they didn't teach us anything about Africa or Latin America except from a European or U.S. perspective, and the U.S. had the Monroe Doctrine. Well, how did the, how did the, how did the Central Americans feel about that? I'm reading this wonderful book now that I recommend to everybody, it's called 'Guns, Germs, and Steel' by Jared Diamond. He won a Pulitzer Prize for it. And it's basically about the roots of inequality, why are, why, he, he, asked the question why did the Europeans get guns and why did they conquer the world? Why not the Africans? Why not the Aztecs? And he says basically it wasn't that black folks were lazy, or it was just so hot down there, no, we had great empires in Africa, great empires in, in the, in the west, in the Aztecs and the Incas, it was a confluence of opportunities. There were certain animals, certain minerals in the zone, in the temperate zones that Europeans had access to, that they then capitalized on, that weren't available in other parts of the world. So it's an accident of geography. Then, of course, because of the size of the place and the weapons that they amassed, conflicts grew and they became quite good at, you know, conflict. And when they then would leave their area where they had developed these technologies and go to areas where there weren't those kind of technologies, they slaughtered the people. Then, but, I, I think that where Diamond leaves off, we, we, we need some sociological explanation for why the people who, who, who acquired these weapons and this technology why they would then treat others who didn't have it as if they were subhuman. That's not geography, that has other explanations and I think that has to do with religion and, and, and, and culture, you know. It's a lack of respect for other cultures and a lack of respect for other religions and other folks' way of lives. They didn't see these Aztecs and Native Americans or the Africans as, as humans, because they didn't have the same skin color as they do or the same religion. And once you dehumanize anyone, whether it's what the Nazis did in Germany, once you dehumanize people, then you can slaughter them. But you can't slaughter them if they see, if that's your sister, that's your brother. So, you know, you know, my, my, family comes from, we have strains from all over the world, I'm, I'm reading these articles about DNA research that African Americans are doing now, well, if I was to do a DNA research I, I, you know, I'm sure my DNA would be spread all over from the tip of South America, South Africa, to the, to the, you know, to, to England and Ireland, and I actually wanna know about that. But because of that, you know, I don't hate anybody, I don't hate, you know, any group because all groups are within me, I'm like, you know, a polyglot in that sense. And I think that, you know, what we have to hopefully realize and one of these days and I'm not sure we ever will, I don't know we'll see, is that, it's a, it's a planet that we're on. You know, maybe if the aliens came down from, you know, Mars and started bombing us, like in 'The War of the Worlds' [H.G. Wells], we'd all realize we're all on this spaceship together, and either we learn how to preserve this spaceship or we're gonna destroy it, you know, and that's what to me it's about. It's, it's very simple. I think that because of the way history has developed and the way the world has developed, there are a lot of animosities, a lot of anger, a lot of brutality and hatred. And the people who are benefiting from that, a small handful, wanna make sure those kinds of divisions keep going on because if we ever with, we ever realize that we have more in common than we have difference, then they may not be in power much longer, and that's the way it is. Story_ID: 321478 Speaker 1: So, the very last question to end this interview, why did you agree to be a HistoryMaker? Speaker 2: Well, I, I'm not sure I was or am, but I, I think that I've had the privilege and the luck to have been in some interesting places and work with some fascinating people who helped make history. And I thought it was important to share, in an oral history way, the way we did in the, not only in Africa, Homer's 'Iliad' and 'The Odyssey' those weren't written down, the Bible wasn't written down for hundreds of years, neither was the 'Iliad' and 'The Odyssey.' Oral tradition has been a part of man's culture for centuries, it's just since we started writing things down we figure out we could do that. I think it's important for people to hear the stories because hopefully, you know, they'll get, just like I did, with the, with the Jared Diamond book ['Guns, Germs, and Steel'], I first saw it on TV, it was a, it was a documentary called 'Guns, Germs, and Steel' and that led me to go read the book, 'cause it was, I was getting a snippet. So my hope is, I guess, through this whole project that young people, people, who hear these stories will say, "Oh, that's interesting, let me go on the Internet and look that up or go to the library and, and read more about that." And maybe they'll get inspired to dedicate their lives or a piece of their lives to trying to make the world a little better place. We're, one person is not gonna change the world, it's not gonna happen but if we each do our little piece, in our little spots it ripples out, you know. When you drop a stone in a still pond it just ripples out and, you know, one person standing up makes a difference. It took one lady, her name Rosa Parks to say I'm not taking this anymore and she led a, a movement. She didn't lead it but she started it. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was one man, he wasn't quote, he didn't go to Montgomery, Alabama, deciding I'm gonna lead a Civil Rights Movement, history found him, what we call the zeitgeist, you know, that's the spirit of the times, kind of found him and said all right, you're it, we're gonna, you've got things to do, come over here. And that's what you hope, that people will be inspired to go and find out more about their own history and then hopefully we can start to move, you know, in a better direction than we are now...