 Story_ID: 644941 Speaker 1: Okay, so my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer; and I'd like to have you start out, we slate the interview at the beginning, so start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including your middle name-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or maiden name. Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Shirley Anne Massey, formerly Shirley Anne Streeter, formerly Shirley Anne Barnett (laughter). My name is spelled S-H-I-R-L-E-Y, middle name is A-N-N-E, my mother's name was Anne [Anne Johnson]. The E has to be on there, and then my present last name is Massey, M-A-S-S-E-Y. My maiden name was Streeter, S-T-R-E-E-T-E-R and my first married name was Barnett, B-A-R-N-E-T-T. Speaker 1: So I wanna also ask your date of birth. Speaker 2: August 14, 1942, and I was born five blocks from here at the old St. Luke's Hospital [Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] at 14th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue]. Speaker 1: That's cool. Okay, I didn't know that. And then today's date? Speaker 2: Is August 24, nin- oh two thousand--oh I just forget, 2013, right? Speaker 1: Right, that's right, 2013. And the location is the location is The HistoryMakers, 1900. Speaker 2: 1900 South Michigan [Avenue]. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I classify myself as a professional wife. I'm not a housewife, I don't cook, Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] cooks, I don't clean, I hire someone, so I call myself a professional wife. I organize and I'm in charge of the money. Speaker 1: I call you a civic leader. (Laughter) Okay, so, so anyway. No, that's okay. Story_ID: 644942 Speaker 1: We ask five People magazine-ish questions, short answers. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: --That I have an absolute favorite food to be honest. Speaker 2: Favorite color? Speaker 1: Turquoise, as you see. Speaker 2: Favorite time of year? Speaker 1: I love the fall. Speaker 2: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 1: Cape Cod [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: A phrase that my father [William Streeter] always used, go with the flow. Speaker 2: You know I'm always amazed how people have these favorite phrase and sayings, I'm, I'm you know, anyway, that's good. Story_ID: 644943 Speaker 1: Okay, so we're going to get started and I want to start out by asking you about your father, and what you--give his name and what you know about his background and his side of the family. Speaker 2: My father's name was William Henry Streeter [William Streeter]. He--we were told--he was told he was born in Rome, Georgia. Back then they had no birth certificates. He was one of five children. His mother, apparently, from what I was told, because I didn't get a lot of information on either side, in fact, but she apparently was American Indian [Native American]. I have no photographs, we have no photographs. And then they moved to the Chicago [Illinois] area and then his father [Newton Streeter] married again and had five more children. Speaker 1: And so you're, what set is your, your--? Speaker 2: My father is of the first set. Speaker 1: Of the first set, okay. Now did he talk about, did he remember any growing up in Rome, Georgia, did you ever hear any of those stories? Speaker 2: He never really talked very much. Speaker 1: So he wasn't a talker, he was-- Speaker 2: No, he--not about his past. Speaker 1: Okay, so do you know why the family ended up coming? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: You don't know that? Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, ma'am. It's very unfortunate that they didn't talk. Speaker 1: Well there was a lot of that. So what, how would you describe your father though? Speaker 2: I think daddy was smart, he was always ready to work and well his first job that I remember was being janitor at the University of Chicago Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] and what I do know about that because they talked about it often, is he had gone down to sign up for the [U.S.] Army and was denied 'cause he had flat feet which sounded strange, and they, the recruiters told him that he might be able to get a job as a janitor because so many of the white people were leaving to go to the war [World War II, WWII], and sure enough he was hired and he would do things on the side like serve parties and housecleaning for different faculty members, so he was, he worked. Speaker 1: And so, but what about his personality though besides a worker? Speaker 2: He was fun, he was fun. He was always joking and he was just very outgoing. Speaker 1: Do you remember any sayings that he had? I mean you mentioned one. Speaker 2: That's the only one I really remember. Story_ID: 644944 Speaker 1: Now what about your, your mother, can you give her name? Speaker 2: My mother's name, from what I know, was Anne Johnson, and her story is a bit more complicated. My grandmother whom I did know, her mother, was raised in New Orleans [Louisiana], which I did go visit there after she left. My mother was born--my father [William Streeter], I didn't say, my father was born in two thousand--1906. He was eighty-eight when he died. He was ninety- ninety-eight, I guess, or ninety-six, something and my mother was born in 1912. Now I didn't learn any of this about my mother until about nineteen ninety--1978, '79 [1979] in talking with her because they didn't talk. My mother, my grandmother had three other children before my mother. My mother looks white, apparently her father was, and my grandmother gave her away to a white woman in the town, and I'm not sure if it was Mississippi or Memphis [Tennessee]. So my mother was raised white until she was seven. At age twelve her grandmother, her mother's mother, found out about this and went and got her on the other side of town, so then she was moved and was in the black section. Difficult. Then her grandmother dies and her mother at this point, who I think was probably a woman of the night (laughter); it just does not sound other than that. She had moved to Chicago [Illinois] so she had to move all of the children to Chicago. So there they are in Chicago, my mother, who I never got taller than, and it was just, she went to Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and that was difficult and I never realized how difficult it was until much later in life. That explained a lot of my mother's moods, and then she was raped at sixteen (laughter). Speaker 1: So she was raised-- Speaker 2: Until she was seven, white. Speaker 1: --white. And I've heard some of those stories before with people, it's very co- and then, so how did that manifest then with her? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. So how did that manifest? Speaker 2: She had lots of mood swings (laughter) to put it mildly, but she was a very strong person. She didn't take any stuff so to speak and I think that, that's how they raised me, to just not put up with things. Speaker 1: Now her mother's name was Mamie-- Speaker 2: Mamie, Mamie Hardy, that's, you know, and I remember the man Mamie was with whether they were married or not. And Mamie lived with us off and on, and she liked to gamble. And so she would, we shared a bedroom, and she would go out and gamble and come back with money. She was in her sixties and she was fairly progressive. She took me to New York [New York], she took me, I think I was twelve when she took me to New York. Then she took me to New Orleans when I was sixteen. And back then you didn't wear black. She went and bought me a black suit with fox cuffs which was not, young girls didn't wear black (laughter) when I was sixteen, but my grandmother was fairly progressive. Story_ID: 644945 Speaker 1: I was--I would--and I had a brother, my mother's first child, he was sixteen years older. Speaker 2: Sixteen years older (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixteen years older than I. Speaker 2: I see. What was his name? Speaker 1: William Fransioli. So my mother [Anne Johnson] did marry the young man that impregnated her and so I remember seeing him a couple of times coming, but I was like a favorite child. I mean I was spoiled and my parents had me late. For that period my mother was thirty, my father [William Streeter] was thirty-six because she lost lots of children in between and so that was old. I always thought my parents, I have the oldest parents around, but they were very, very, I think they were very progressive in a sense that they made sure I knew everything. I knew which uncle not to sit on their lap. If someone got near me, I was to tell them. We had people that were gay in the family, but that was all right. You know we didn't call it gay then. I forgot what you call it (laughter). Speaker 2: Sissies? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Sissy. Speaker 1: But that was the family and so everyone was included and they were very good about me. Now they didn't always get along, they argued, but I never felt there was any problem with them caring for me. I didn't have anything to do with that. And as I said they made sure I knew everything and I went to a Catholic school, oh, that was something. I lived at 65th [Street] and Langley [Avenue]. And-- Speaker 2: Is that where you were born at 65th? Speaker 1: Right, that's where they were, in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. And the Catholic school in the neighborhood was Holy Cross [Holy Cross School, Chicago, Illinois], but Holy Cross didn't take black children back in the '40s [1940s] so I sent to St. Anselm's [St. Anselm's School, Chicago, Illinois] which did, and that was at 61st [Street] and Michigan [Avenue], and I remember my mother at that time was a waitress at the Pershing Hotel [Chicago, Illinois] and also she did dispatching for the livery service because the regular cabs didn't pick us up. So I went to school in a cab, or a livery car because my father never learned how to drive, we didn't own a car; and so I was taken to school over (laughter) in a, in a livery car. Story_ID: 644946 Speaker 1: So let me ask you, what did--how did your parents meet? Did you ever figure out that story? Speaker 2: From what I gathered, my mother's [Anne Johnson] second husband, and I don't remember his name, was a friend of my father's [William Streeter] and apparently he was just supposed to just kind of watch out for her. Well I guess it got a little bit more than that (laughter) because they ended up getting married. Speaker 1: So now, who, do you know about your mother's first husband? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I only know the name, and I remember seeing him once. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Don't know the second one at all. Story_ID: 644947 Speaker 1: So when did you find out that your mother [Anne Johnson] was raped at age sixteen? Was that much later? Speaker 2: That was--I didn't find that out until 1978 or so. I didn't--we were talking, I was at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island]. Walter [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] was the dean of the college at Brown and my mother was there, and we were talking about my older son [Keith Massey] going off to college and she was saying, "Well I didn't let you go." I said, "What do you mean," and then she started talking about herself, and that was the first I had ever known, and that's when I told her, I said, "I think you're pretty sane having gone through that," (laughter). "You raised me." Speaker 1: So, what--how would you describe her? Speaker 2: I thought she was the most beautiful person in the world (laughter). And she was strong, but naive, if that makes sense. She, there were some of her friends I didn't like, female friends, and I didn't understand why she didn't see that they would kind of use her. That might just come from just wanting to have someone as your friend, but she was a strong person, but she was still naive. Speaker 1: Naive on the personal side then. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Naive on the personal side, she was a strong person, but was she naive on the personal side in terms of in her personal relationships? Speaker 2: Yes, that's what I mean, that's what I mean. I mean in terms of her being strong, she stood up, she stood up for what she was. To give you an example, as I said I was born five blocks from here, and I was in the white, she was in the white section so when my father [William Streeter] came, they didn't let him in. And my mother was furious and she, my mother cursed a lot and she cursed the doctor out and everybody around and the doctor got very angry and instead of putting Negro or colored on my birth certificate, I had black on my birth certificate, which was a big insult in 1942. My mother was livid. And, of course, when it became fashionable to be black, I said, "I'm okay now mama," (laughter), "I'm okay." But she just told everybody off, and when she worked places, if things weren't right she'd tell them. Or if the nuns didn't do things right, like in my high school [Loretto Academy, Chicago, Illinois] they called all the light-skinned girls with light eyes in and asked, "Where'd you get your eyes?" And I was a little smart thing, and I said, "From God." And the nun was a little bit annoyed and I sassed and she said, "I'm going to call your mother," and I thought, that's a mistake. She called my mother and my mother balled her out (laughter). Speaker 1: So your mother then, you're saying that she was on the white section of the hospital [St. Luke's Hospital; Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Correct, because when she went in in labor they thought she was white and then when my father came they wouldn't let him in. Speaker 1: There was a lot of that, we talk about the complexities really of life in America as a black person-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --because it would be confusing sometimes, sometimes people would do convenient passing. Speaker 2: Correct, correct. She was never into that, never. Speaker 1: So she accepted herself as, as (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cor- yes. Speaker 1: --as she was. Story_ID: 644948 Speaker 1: Now what is your earliest memory growing up? Speaker 2: I looked at that and it was, it was interesting trying to figure out and there's something that I always remember and I can't remember exactly how old I was. I had to maybe be three or four, maybe three. I remember my father [William Streeter] coming home from having worked somewhere serving a party, and he brought food and it was squab, and it was good and then I found out squab is pigeon, (laughter) and I remember sitting there in the bed, we were all in the bed, eating squab (laughter). Speaker 1: How old do you think you were then? Speaker 2: I think I had to be, I must have been about three, only because we were all sleeping in the same room because we had what was called roomers, people that, the two bedrooms were rented out. That was what people did to make money. And I remember being in that room and from what I remember in talking about that, that I had to be about three. Story_ID: 644949 Speaker 1: Describe the block that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The block we lived on? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Well the apartment building had six apartments. It overlooked McCosh playground, McCosh grammar school [McCosh Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. In the building we had six families. The, one family on the first floor, I don't know if they were white or not, but they looked white. They might have been passing. Next door was a white family and then there were several black families. It was in--Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] was integrated at that time. And across the street was Miss McNeal [ph.], and don't ask me how I remember her name, but she was a teacher at McCosh School, and so the block was, we weren't rich but everyone knew everyone, and you just looked out for each other. Story_ID: 644950 Speaker 1: So if we go back to that, you know, that time, so what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: The only smell that I ever remember evoking something in me was something that happened when I was in my twenties. I was in Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company] and walked by a counter and the lady was spraying perfume and it was my mother [Anne Johnson] that was the smell. And I had never--I didn't know that smell until I smelled that and it was like, evoked something and I called my mother right away and I said, "Did you ever wear Shalimar?" She said, "Yes, I used to wear that." It was the weirdest thing because she hadn't been wearing it and I'd never smelled it, and then it was like, all over, I was just this little baby. Speaker 1: So what did that smell evoke in you sort of? Speaker 2: Warmth. Speaker 1: Warmth, okay. And then what about sounds? Speaker 2: I don't recall any sounds that really were impacted. I just, I know our house we had music, we always had music. Speaker 1: What kind of music? Speaker 2: All kinds. My mother played the piano, don't, and we had a piano. I have no idea how she got piano lessons, but she played classical and she played the other music. My brother [William Fransioli] had a jazz group, and as I said, my [maternal] grandmother [Mamie Hardy] lived with us off and on, and so we would dance. We would all dance. I learned the Black Bottom, and the Charleston and the Lindy and all of these things. We always had music because we listened to the radio or we listened to records. We didn't have television back then immediately, you know. That came later. Speaker 1: And what were you listening to on the radio when you think about that? Speaker 2: 'Fibber McGee and Molly' (laughter). I remember that, and 'The Shadow,' and my grandmother was a baseball fanatic so we were always listening to the White Sox [Chicago White Sox]. That radio would be on; and then as I got a little older I'd listen to [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent the Cool Gent (laughter). Story_ID: 644951 Speaker 1: So you were in a, you were in a mixed community in, in a lot of respects. Speaker 2: I was in a mixed community and the school-- Speaker 1: And this is in the 1940s--? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940] because I was in first, kindergarten, first grade, I think, maybe second, at St. Anselm's [St. Anselm's School, Chicago, Illinois] and then when they started letting blacks go into Holy Cross [Holy Cross School, Chicago, Illinois] since that was the neighborhood I was in, I went there, and that at that time was mixed. All of Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] was mixed. The whites had not started to run away yet. Speaker 1: So the whites, were they factory workers and things like that, or do you know-- Speaker 2: I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or what ethnic, do you know what ethnic group? Speaker 2: They were white, they weren't Irish. Speaker 1: Okay, they weren't Irish. Speaker 2: You knew there was another section of town and, as you know, Chicago [Illinois] was very, very segregated by that. Speaker 1: Do you think they were Polish? Maybe not. Speaker 2: No, they weren't Polish either. They were just--to me they were just white, there was no ethnic. Speaker 1: So, so school, how was school at St. Anselm's? Do you remember anything about the school, the first St. Anselm's? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Oh yes. Speaker 1: So were your teachers white or were they black? Speaker 2: They were white. Speaker 1: They were white 'cause it, but it was a black Catholic school, okay. Speaker 2: That was the only, those were the only, that was the only order that did teach. That and Corpus Christi [Corpus Christi School, Chicago, Illinois] was--Corpus Christi, Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] and St. Anselm's were the three schools that blacks went to, Catholic schools. Speaker 1: So were you, was your family practicing Catholics? Speaker 2: Well, that's an interesting story. As far as I know, my mother [Anne Johnson] and father [William Streeter] were both baptized. I was baptized. I even have my baptismal certificate. My mother didn't go to church very much, my father did. So I just think my mother was annoyed after the whole issue of, well, prior to my going to Holy Cross she tried to enroll my brother [William Fransioli] and they said yes and then she brought him and the nuns said no and my mother blessed her out and says, "We are all like flowers, beautiful colors." That was just something she used to say all the time. So I don't think, she didn't really go to church very much. Speaker 1: Okay. And so were you going with your father then or were you-- Speaker 2: Most of the time I'd go with my father (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your father. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 644952 Speaker 1: You're really raised almost as an only child in some respects (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --because your brother [William Fransioli] is so, is much older than you. Speaker 2: Much older, so I was like an only child. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you had older parents [Anne Johnson and William Streeter] who had you as sort as the center of their universe. So what was school, what were your memories of school then? Speaker 2: In Holy Cross [Holy Cross School, Chicago, Illinois], I was teased (laughter). Speaker 1: Now why was that? Speaker 2: Because I was skinny. Speaker 1: So what would they say? Speaker 2: "Skinny, skinny." But I didn't get upset about it. That was, that was just the way it was. Speaker 1: So how were you as a young child? Were you outgoing, were you-- Speaker 2: I was outgoing. From what I am told and from what I can remember, I was a very outgoing person, and I know I knew almost everyone on the block, and from what my parents said to me, I always was very outgoing, and talkative. Speaker 1: What else did they say about you as a young--? Speaker 2: I talked back. Speaker 1: You were spoiled. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You talked back to them, so would you get whippings or anything? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't get, I only remember getting a spanking once and that's because I lied. And I got caught in the lie. That was one thing wasn't tolerated, you don't lie. So I never lied again, (laughter) never lied again. Speaker 1: But only once. Speaker 2: I only remember being spanked once. Speaker 1: So would they talk to you if they were upset with you or you had done something (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, yes, I'm sorry, they would. Speaker 1: A lot of talking huh? Speaker 2: Yes. Like when I remember being at the table there were foods I didn't eat. And I can remember my father saying, "You don't talk that way to your mother," if I said I wasn't going to eat something. Story_ID: 644953 Speaker 1: So, what, what foods didn't you eat and what was--? Speaker 2: I wasn't going to eat liver. Did you like liver? (Laughter) I was not going to eat liver, so when they had liver, they'd fry pork chops for me. Speaker 1: So, what was the dinner table like then? Speaker 2: We always sat at the dinner table and it was always set with a tablecloth because a lot of that I think was because daddy [William Streeter] served parties on the side, so we always sat down at the dinner table in the dining room, not the kitchen, in the dining room. Speaker 1: And was your mother [Anne Johnson], was she, she was working though right? Speaker 2: She worked off and on at a variety of things, like I said, dispatcher, waitress, cleaners, and so she would--my father did the shopping and he did some of the cooking and my mother did some of the cooking. It was somewhat divided. Speaker 1: So what were the favorite dishes? This is like-- Speaker 2: Fried chicken, of course, pot roast, salmon croquettes. I didn't like catfish. I didn't want that. I didn't like sandwiches and I didn't like breakfast foods. I didn't like eggs or bacon or anything, and my mother was always very worried so we went to Dr. Doyle [ph.], I remember the doctor's name, my goodness, Dr. Doyle, and she was complaining about how I wouldn't eat and he said, "Well what does she like to eat?" And she said, "Chicken noodle soup." He said, "Well give her chicken noodle soup for breakfast." And I would have chicken noodle soup. I also refused to drink milk and I didn't find this out until I was an adult that the reason I got coffee every morning with my parents was because most of it was milk. I don't like milk (laughter) so I wouldn't drink milk; and so they would ge- and I'm in grammar school [St. Anselm's School, Chicago, Illinois] and I would have coffee with my parents in the morning. Story_ID: 644954 Speaker 1: And then you would go, go to school in the livery taxi, taxi. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Until we went to Holy Cross [Holy Cross School, Chicago, Illinois], then I would walk. Speaker 1: And then you could walk there, okay. So what, how did, how did Holy Cross differ from-- Speaker 2: St. Anselm's [St. Anselm's School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) St. Anselm. Speaker 2: I don't know how much it differed. I just don't remember that there was that--what I remember about St. Anselm, I was in the band. I played the bells. They didn't have that at Holy Cross. It was just, it was just a school, I don't remember much. Speaker 1: So Holy Cross went to the sixth grade? Speaker 2: No it was eighth grade. I graduated from eighth grade (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, went to the eighth grade. I see, okay. So were you taking cate- classes, catechism? Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to take catechism, religion. Speaker 1: Religion. Speaker 2: And I took piano lessons too. Speaker 1: So you were in the band? Speaker 2: No, no, I was in the band at St. Anselm's. They didn't have a band at Holy Cross. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, I see. Speaker 2: I just took piano lessons, first from Mrs. Mollett [ph.] and she was in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. She was the piano teacher. And then I also at some point took piano lessons at the grammar school, Holy Cross. Speaker 1: And so, at Holy Cross were there teachers that you liked, or no? You don't remember? Speaker 2: To be honest, I don't really remember. Speaker 1: Okay, I understand. Well what other things are you remembering around that period of time when you're growing up, you know, 'cause--? Speaker 2: That particular time, there were some things that I was curious about how the nuns lived so I snuck into the convent to peek in their room and I got, I got, had to stay after school for that. Speaker 1: So what did you see in the rooms? Speaker 2: Just a room with a bed, nothing. Speaker 1: Very plain right? Speaker 2: As I said, the neighborhood, the school was mixed and I remember that all of the white children that were there they usually had lots and lots of children and they didn't have any money and they weren't dressed nice. Now all of us black children were. Now a lot of my clothes were hand me downs from people, but they seemed to be a cut below; and I do remember thinking that, that they don't have anything. Story_ID: 644955 Speaker 1: So what about holidays? Speaker 2: Oh, you mean Thanksgiving and Christmas? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Well did you celebrate hol-? Speaker 2: Oh yes, we did. Thanksgiving always ended up in an argument with somebody, because my mother [Anne Johnson] did have a sister and she would come sometimes. Christmas was--now Christmas we just was mainly with just us. And I always got lots of presents. Speaker 1: You were--'cause I--you really were like a, I mean, you're saying, you know, not a poor family, but at the same time you're, you're really, I mean you're having dinner, you know at the-- Speaker 2: I didn't feel poor at all. I never felt poor. I knew, I mean having hand me down clothes was fine because they were nice and I didn't feel poor. Now I knew we weren't rich because there were people that were doctors, well later on doctors but I still didn't feel poor. Speaker 1: So what other memories do you have? Are there any family trips or things that sort of stick out? Speaker 2: Yes there was a trip. In fact, Walter [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] and I last summer discovered the place. I remember going on the bus and I must have been about seven, to Michigan, to Paradise Lake [sic. Lake Paradise], but the bus went to Vandalia [Michigan] and we would go there, they had an outhouse and there was some friend of my [maternal] grandmother's [Mamie Hardy] and it was on this lake up in Michigan, and I did some research a couple of years ago just to see where this place was, and Walter and I drove up there, and it turns out this was an area where a lot of blacks had summer homes, and the area was where a lot of blacks came to up there. And so I saw the area, its run down now, but we did stop, there was a family cooking out and they remembered that there were a lot of Chicagoans that had come there, and it was just beautiful. It wasn't beautiful now, but it was just beautiful and it was really nice to be able to go back and see where I had been. Speaker 1: So where's this, where's this located? It's not like near Union Pier [Michigan]. Speaker 2: No, it's not near Union Pier, it's-- Speaker 1: Is it further up? Speaker 2: That I don't know, I don't know, but I know the bus, the Greyhound bus went to Vandalia and I remember the bus driving saying, "Vandalia," and we'd get off. And then someone would pick us up and take us to this house. Speaker 1: Now, so summers, so--but you're, you're a small family unit in many ways-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was small (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it sounds like, 'cause this is not a lot of-- Speaker 2: Oh no. It was--no. Speaker 1: --it's not like tons of people around and cousins and things like that. Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't like my cousins, no, on my mother's side. Speaker 1: On your mother's side. Why? Speaker 2: I liked my cousins on my father's [William Streeter] side, and I was the oldest of those cousins too. Speaker 1: So would you get together a lot with them and were they within close vicinity. Speaker 2: I would go and spend the night with them, but we really didn't get together a lot. We would go here and go see them but there wasn't that kind of thing. I'm very close with my aunt who's eighty-six, my father's sister [Minnie Streeter] of the second group, and I would go with, see her and her children, which I still do. Story_ID: 644956 Speaker 1: So how are you forming as a person? And what are you aware of in sort of the outside community, you know that's sort of going on? Do you, you know 'cause it was in the early, you know, we're talking about now, you know, I would have you maybe-- Speaker 2: Late '40s [1940s] Speaker 1: --late '40s [1940s], it's, you know, there's still a lot of people moving into the city [Chicago, Illinois], you know in the late '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: That's right, and I remem- that was, that was a little bit difficult. Where my [maternal] grandmother [Mamie Hardy] lived prior to, before she started moving back and forth with us, was on Drexel [Avenue] and 47th [Street]. She lived in one of those big old houses, but rented a room, one of the rooms, and that, then what happened is people started coming up from the South and they weren't as nice, the places weren't kept up as nice and that was, that was, that was not good. That was a little bit sad to see because the places had been kept up even though they were renting rooms, but then people, as my grandmother used to say, they didn't know how to live in a house. Speaker 1: Did you ever hear her use the term 'Bamer? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, none of that, just that--you know 'cause a lot of times they would say from Alabama that they were 'Bamers. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, so she--so now were you--was there any sense, I mean 'cause you're fair of skin, was there any conversation around that? Speaker 2: About my being light? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Like-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't want to be light, I wanted to be darker, it looked better. (Laughter) I was a little strange. I wanted, I wanted to be, I didn't know why I couldn't be browner. Speaker 1: And so how are you developing as a young person though? That's what I'm trying to understand. What are your interests? Speaker 2: What you mean, going into high school? Speaker 1: Um-hm. And what high school? Speaker 2: I went to a school called Loretto Academy [Chicago, Illinois], but in the meantime we moved to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. When I finished eighth grade we moved to Hyde Park because McCosh [McCosh Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] was going to be expanding and they needed that block so I thought we would move to Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois] or Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] where everyone was moving at that time in the early '50s [1950s], in the middle '50s [1950s] and we ended up moving to Hyde Park, which I thought was just ridiculous because no one was ever going to date me, come down there. And the reason we moved to Hyde Park is 'cause my father [William Streeter] was a janitor at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], we could get an apartment in a university owned building and we lived in the apartment there on 56th [Street] and Maryland [Avenue] and there were faculty people, graduate students, there were six apartments and my father, and as it turned out, that was probably the best thing that ever happened because Hyde Park was then just starting to boom. Speaker 1: That's right, and the year--and so you're living at, where are you living at this? Speaker 2: 56th and Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay, you moved to 56th and Maryland, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: And you're, you're thirteen? Speaker 2: Thirteen. Speaker 1: Thirteen. Speaker 2: Thirteen, fourteen. And it turned out to be fine, it turned out to be fine. Now going to high school, none of my friends from Holy Cross [Holy Cross School, Chicago, Illinois] were in the classes I was in because they made the decision according to your tests, what you took, and they said I had to take Latin. Speaker 1: So you tested well. Speaker 2: I tested well. So I had to make new friends. And I remember looking around seeing who I was going to be friends with, and to this day I am still friends with some of the people. In fact, I'm going to a luncheon Tuesday with some of them. Speaker 1: So the people that were at Loretto? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Oh, I see, okay. And so what was your course of study then with Latin? So they were tracking, I mean, tracking you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I took Latin. My favorite class was algebra and trigonometry, I loved that. I hated physics (laughter) and I married a physicist [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey]. Geometry I didn't care very much for, biology I didn't, it was okay, it was okay. Speaker 1: But what about the, English and on the other side of the-- Speaker 2: We had, we had history and we had English, yes. Speaker 1: But you were more attracted to the ma- math (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I liked the math the best. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Story_ID: 644957 Speaker 1: As it turned out, I might mention my mother [Anne Johnson] was very smart. My mother could add up a column with figures without anything. We'd go to the supermarket, even in her late age and she could add up when she got to the checkout and know what she's supposed to pay, in her head. I could never do that. Speaker 2: I see, I see. And did you see that actualize in other ways with your mother, you know, I mean, but she was v- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was in charge of the money and I remember her and my father [William Streeter] sitting down because you didn't have checks then, you bought money orders and she would manage the money. And I remember them sitting at the table going over expenses. Speaker 2: That's interesting because you have that function in your marriage now [to HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey]. Speaker 1: Oh yes, I, I, demanded that (laughter). Speaker 2: That's good though. So she, so your mother ran the household from a financial standpoint? Speaker 1: Correct. Speaker 2: Okay, and what was your father's role if that's your mother's role? So, I'm just, you know, 'cause there're different divisions of responsibility and then I wanna ask on top of that, did you have chores? Speaker 1: Well, I wasn't very good at chores. I didn't like to cook and my [maternal] grandmother [Mamie Hardy] at that point was living with us and then I had to learn to make meatloaf and stuff and I'd put gloves on. I didn't wanna touch that, and I did have to do dishes, but I put gloves on. I put gloves on to do everything. I didn't like it. I remember my grandmother saying, "I hope you marry somebody that won't have to take care of you," because I didn't like cleaning at all. I did not like dusting, I did not like vacuuming. I did it under duress. Speaker 2: So you were spoiled, I mean spoiled. Speaker 1: I was very spoiled. Speaker 2: I see. Did they have a nickname for you at home? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: What was it? Speaker 1: Peanut. Daddy used to call me Peanut and Morning Glory. Speaker 2: Those are endearing terms, they are. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 644958 Speaker 1: So, you, in high school [Loretto Academy, Chicago, Illinois] are you dating? Speaker 2: I finally was able to date, yes. Speaker 1: At what age? Speaker 2: Sixteen. Speaker 1: Sixteen, so that's--and so who were you dating, who was, who was your, what kind of boys were you attracted to? Speaker 2: I don't--they were just people. I remember some names. There was one boy that I knew from grammar school, and then I dated him in high school. Remember his name too. And another boy. And then the one I really liked when I was older was Dennis [ph.], but we broke up, and then I met my first husband. Speaker 1: So how did you meet your first husband? Speaker 2: It was at a football game. He went to Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois] and I was at a football game with a group and he sat on my feet accidentally. And we started dating off and on for probably three years. We would date, then break up and date, and then break up. Speaker 1: And so, now how old were you when you got married? Speaker 2: Let's see. I got pregnant before I got married so that was in January of 1961 because Keith [Keith Massey] was born in '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: So how old? You were, you were-- Speaker 2: I was eighteen I guess. Is that right? Yeah. I was going to be nineteen that August, and so I got pregnant with Richard, the man that I was dating off and on, and that, that was an accident, of course (laughter). And he had a girlfriend at that time, and it just, so I got pregnant. Speaker 1: So Richard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And at that point I was going to Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: I see, okay so you had already graduated. Speaker 2: I had graduated. Speaker 1: What year were you when you--? Speaker 2: I graduated high school in 1960. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960]. So you were seventeen. Speaker 2: I was born in '42 [1942] so I was eighteen. Speaker 1: Eighteen, okay, right. Speaker 2: Eighteen, so I was nineteen when I got married. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. So, the thing that I'm, so his name was Richard Barnett [ph.]? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Was he any relations to any of the other Barnetts that we know in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: His family was, I mean I didn't know anything about them. I know his mother and his grandmother, but his father wasn't alive and they never talked about him, so I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you got pregnant what was the reaction of your mother [Anne Johnson] and father [William Streeter]? Speaker 2: Well they were a little bit upset. Speaker 1: To say it mildly (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I said, "Okay, fine, but I'm having this baby." "Well then you have to get married." I said, "But I don't want to get married." They said, "Well you have to get married," and I said, "I don't wanna get married," and I wouldn't tell them who the father was. And they finally convinced me, so I said, "Okay, I'll get married but I'm not going to stay married" (laughter). Speaker 1: You did say that? Speaker 2: Yes, I didn't want to be married to him. It was an accident (laughter). Speaker 1: But you wanted to have the baby still. Speaker 2: Well I wasn't gonna have an abortion. Speaker 1: So let's talk about that. So back then what were the options, because this is--? Speaker 2: You have a baby or you find an abortionist and they do stuff to you. Speaker 1: And what would you hear about what they did to you? Speaker 2: Stuff you or something? I don't wanna do that. Speaker 1: Or you know 'cause there was always the back alley type things. Speaker 2: That's what I'm talking about. And I was in, as I said I was at CTC at that, Chicago Teachers College, and so was he. So was his girlfriend, who ended up being his second wife. So I went to school and admitted that and people said, "Well why are you saying that?" I said, "What am I supposed to do, hide? I can't, I can't, I'm not going to pretend otherwise." And I would, I went to parties and things. He didn't like that, but I didn't care. His girlfriend didn't like it either. Speaker 1: Wait a minute, you went to parties and things, you're saying, pregnant? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so I see. So he had a girlfriend too on top, I see, so this was, so you got married, how long did the marriage last? Speaker 2: Let's see, I think we got married in maybe February, I have it written down somewhere, March. Speaker 1: Of 1961? Speaker 2: Yeah, and then we divorced in January '62 [1962]. I wasn't going to stay married. I didn't want to be married. Speaker 1: I see. So how was it in that year period though? You moved in, where did you move or live? Speaker 2: I, I was at home. Speaker 1: You were at home? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So did he ever live with you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You got married and you never lived with him? Speaker 2: I just got married because they were all upset because I couldn't have this baby and not be married (laughter). Speaker 1: So you're living at home and you're still going to Chicago Teachers-- Speaker 2: I finished that semester and then I stopped. Speaker 1: Okay you-- Speaker 2: And I would sometimes go spend the night with him, but he still had the girlfriend. (Laughter) I would tease her, she didn't like me. Story_ID: 644959 Speaker 1: At any rate, then we had a fire in my apartment and that was somewhat (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this--you're living with your parents [Anne Johnson and William Streeter] so you-- Speaker 1: Right, so we had a fire. Speaker 2: And this is on Maryland [Avenue]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. And everything burned up. Speaker 2: Everything? Speaker 1: Everything burned up. Speaker 2: So what caused the fire? Speaker 1: I think it was my [maternal] grandmother [Mamie Hardy] because she used to smoke and she, she would put the cigarette out sometimes and not have it all the way out. Speaker 2: So you lost everything? Speaker 1: We had a few little things here and there, but everything. And then my parents had to go live in a hotel and then they lived with my brother [William Fransioli] and his girlfriend. And then I stayed with a girlfriend for a while until we got back into the apartment, but I--Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] I don't remember it being that difficult. It was this is what had happened and you just carry on. Speaker 2: You carry on, and here you are single, you know, but with a baby. Speaker 1: At this point, I think what finally caused my parents to break up was this fire because everything was in such turmoil. So that--a year or two later after my son [Keith Massey] was born, they separated. And a girlfriend and I shared an apartment and I got a job. Speaker 2: You know that happens. I had a friend who, who they had a fire and it was just too, and the husband wasn't the same again. It caused stress and they didn't have insurance. Speaker 1: No, we didn't either. Speaker 2: Right, and it caused a lot of stress. Speaker 1: Lot of stress. And we did move back into the apartment, but it just wasn't the same. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It wasn't the same. Speaker 2: So did your mother stay in the apartment or your father, or they both left? Speaker 1: No, they both left. My mother then had started dating someone and she moved up north and my father, my mother informed me, when she was going to leave him, and she told me I had to come home and take care of him. I said, "No. I'm not going home. I've already started my life." And so he got an apartment around the corner from where I was living. Speaker 2: Your father? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That's nice. Speaker 1: And so, then my mother eventually they divorced and she married again. But one of the stipulations I made to them if they wanted to see their grandchild, they'd have to come everybody together on these holidays. And my girlfriend also had a son and we'd have all of the people there. And we said, "You have to all come together because the child doesn't understand," and so they did-- Speaker 2: That's nice. Speaker 1: --if they wanted to see their grandchild (simultaneous). Story_ID: 644960 Speaker 1: So you then, so you're about, at this point, maybe twenty then. Twenty-t- (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was about twenty-one. Speaker 1: Twenty-one, okay, twenty-one, twenty-one. And it's like -1960-- Speaker 2: Three [1963]. Speaker 1: Three [1963]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you are then living with this friend now, this friend of yours and you're both working, now where are you working? Speaker 2: Okay, that was the thing, you have to go look for a job. I went to look for a job and you look in the paper and I got dressed up and I went down to the Sheraton Hotel for a front desk job, and I go to be interviewed and the man tells me that I had to go apply for a maid job. Well I said, "Phooey on you." And the one, I can't remember how I found this job, it had to be in the paper, but the one company was Playboy [Playboy Enterprises, Inc.] that hired everybody. And I got a job at Playboy handling the bank accounts for the clubs. There weren't that many then, and the bar checks for that. And that was great, I mean, I, I liked that and everything was going fine and then I didn't get a raise, and I went into the office to the lady, the bosses were all women, and she said, "Well you were late once." And I said, I said, "Well all those other people, those white people got their raises." And this was at the period where black power is coming in and I was furious. I came out of that office and I went to my supervisor's desk and I knocked everything off of her desk and I yelled black power. It was just so, it was definitely racist because those other people, and I told them, I said, "They go and they let those men touch them, I don't do that." And there was another lady working there who was going for an interview at TWA [Trans World Airlines] and she was a part-timer and so she says, "I think they're hiring there," so I went there. And I went in for the interview and the job required that you had to go to New York [New York] for two weeks, and I remember going and saying to the man, and I said, "Okay, I want to do this," but you don't know if you're going to get the job until you pass the test, the training. I said, "But you can't call my job to get any reference because I have a child [Keith Massey] and I have to take care of this child and if I don't get this job, I won't have the other job because I'm going to take a vacation." I'm saying all this and the man just kind of looked at me, and he didn't call my job and I did go to New York. This was the year of the World's Fair in New York [New York World's Fair] and I got the job. Speaker 1: You got the job at TWA? Speaker 2: Um-hm, a reservationist. Speaker 1: I wanna though go back to Playboy. And what was the company like at that point in time? And what office were you, you know, where was the office? Speaker 2: The office was on Ontario [Street] in the basement where, the main building was on Ohio [Street], but the other office that I worked in was on Ontario. In fact, that was where the original, the first Museum of Contemporary Art [Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] was right there between, whatever those. As I said, it was the only company that had black writers, just everybody. The issue that happened with me was just those people in the office, like the ladies you work with, they might speak to you in the office but if they saw you on the street, they wouldn't speak to you. Speaker 1: And what, what, how large was the company at this point and how--? Speaker 2: How many clubs? Speaker 1: How many, you said when you started were two I think. Speaker 2: I think there were two, I think there were two. And I handled, maybe there was only, I don't know. I handled the deposits for the checks that came in for the members. Speaker 1: Now did they require a certain look with the females they hired? Did they-- Speaker 2: Not that I recall, but I, you always dressed up in Chicago [Illinois] anyway. Speaker 1: Right, right, okay. Speaker 2: No there was not, there was not that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. 'Cause, do you remember any of the bunnies at the time, you know, who was-- Speaker 2: No, I never went to the club. Speaker 1: I see, 'cause the club was located over where, State Street, no Dearborn Parkway [sic. State Parkway]. Speaker 2: I can't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never went to the club. Christmas we had a party at Hugh Hefner's house. He always had a party there. Speaker 1: That would be exciting at that time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was exciting, that was. Speaker 1: 'Cause he was quite an icon there-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and the Playboy, I mean anything Playboy-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --was, was the thing 'cause it's a different time then, you know. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Cigarette smoke and drinks (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, right. Speaker 1: --you know, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We were talking about a different-- Speaker 2: Oh, right, right. Speaker 1: --different, different time period completely. Story_ID: 644961 Speaker 1: So, I quit and started working for, for TWA [Trans World Airlines], and you, you start out working 3:15 to midnight. You have to work, you know, their shifts, and reservations went all night (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it's the second shift you work they called it? Speaker 1: Correct, second shift, second shift. I didn't have to do eleven to seven, that was-- Speaker 2: So how did that work with your, 'cause you're, Eric [Eric Massey], right? Speaker 1: Keith [Keith Massey] is my oldest son. Speaker 2: Keith. Right, Keith. Speaker 1: That was fine because my girlfriend worked days at Continental Bank [Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company; Bank of America] and so that worked out and if I needed anything my father [William Streeter] or somebody, mother [Anne Johnson], would intervene. And so I was, I ended up being there for five years and the young lady that I met at Playboy [Playboy Enterprises, Inc.], we both started at the same time and at that time I think there were maybe two or three other blacks in reservations, and after a while you're supposed to go on days, and I never, I didn't get on days and I'm watching other people get on days even the young woman I started with, and then I know what happened. The supervisor who's from Indiana, Mr. Burwell [ph.], he would come around and touch you. Well you know men did that right? Speaker 2: They did. I was gonna say, that was the thing of the pinch touch. Speaker 1: Oh, and I said, "Don't touch me," and the young girl next to me she says, "Well he, you have to." I said, "No I don't have to, I don't have to," so I never got on days. And I'm wondering, I said, oh, that's 'cause I told him, "You don't put your hands on me." And then supervisors at night were women, two women, you know, shift changeover, and I said well, you know, I'm gonna have to address this and I can't address it to him by himself. So I waited until the three supervisors, the two women and he were in the, 'cause he was he manager over everything. We're in the office together. And I went in, I clearly remember this. I said, you know, "You haven't put me on days because I wouldn't let you touch me." I said, "If you don't put me on days, I'm going to New York [New York] and speak to Mr. Tillinghast [Charles C. Tillinghast, Jr.]." I only knew that he was chairman, I didn't know him. Fast forward, when Walter [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] went to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], I met Mr. Tillinghast and I told him the story because he was a Brown graduate. But, I got put on days. And-- Speaker 2: This is 1968, right? Speaker 1: This is, no this is probably, let's see I married in '69 [1969], this was probably about '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], okay cause I thought--so this is midway through you working at TWA then? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Well, I'd been there almost a year (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Almost a year. Okay, okay, okay, okay. Speaker 1: So maybe '64 [1964], '65 [1965]. So he eventually got demoted, surprisingly enough. Speaker 2: That's pretty good for that time period. Speaker 1: For that time. But then we got another supervisor that wasn't good too, and I did something really bad. Speaker 2: What did you do? Speaker 1: Well, I had Keith and at that point I was working with two other ladies, three other ladies on the desk where you handle the travel agents. And Keith was going to go away to camp so I had to be late for work, and I agreed with my three co-workers they'd cover for me, which you could do, and so I could be a couple of hours late to put him on the bus to go away to sleepover camp, and Lothars Vane [ph.] was this man's name. Another time I get docked because I was late, and he was German and I went in the office and told him off and then I said, "Heil Hitler," and I brought a picture of my son and left the picture on the desk and he tried to tell me I couldn't have that picture on the desk. But I went over his head too. Now there was a dress code there at TWA. You could not wear shoes that showed toe cleavage. Do you know what toe cleavage is? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: If you wear a shoe and it shows part of your toes, not this, the shoe--the little lines. And you couldn't wear miniskirts. Speaker 2: And this was the time period. Speaker 1: And the reason you couldn't do that, we were told, it would excite the men (laughter). Speaker 2: Did they have any color code along with it either? Speaker 1: No, it was just you couldn't show toe cleavage and you couldn't wear a miniskirt (laughter). Speaker 2: So how, what else was the culture? Did you have flight privileges at all back then? Speaker 1: Any what? Speaker 2: Did you have flight privileges? Speaker 1: Yes, you had flight privileges. Speaker 2: You did? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, so I traveled. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I did travel. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: We did have flight privileges. Story_ID: 644962 Speaker 1: So Keith [Keith Massey] is now, he's three, four? Speaker 2: So he was, well let's, let's, let's see. In 1968 I met Walter [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] so I started--oh, I eventually did get my own apartment 'cause I was, I was making more money. So he and I got an apartment in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], 53rd [Street] and Blackstone [Avenue], and my father [William Streeter] moved on the second floor. My then boyfriend that I was dating, he moved down the hall and my ex-husband [Richard Barnett (ph.)] was going to move in. He had, at this point, left his second wife. So, (laughter) they did get married. And so fortunately he didn't move in. I said, "I don't need you here." And so I moved in there I think about 1967, '66 [1966], '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: And so how--but that job [with Trans World Airlines] would have been considered, both of those jobs, would have been considered very good jobs. Speaker 2: Oh yes, they were very good jobs. Speaker 1: They were very respectable (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were very, they were very respectable, very good jobs. Speaker 1: And so what are you--talk about Chicago [Illinois], how Chicago was at that time, and-- Speaker 2: Well at that time in Hyde Park especially, there were lots of jazz clubs around and-- Speaker 1: What are some of their names? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Smedley's [Chicago, Illinois], oh I can't remember, I can't remember all of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, 53rd Street was really bustling. It was beginning the height of, you know, black power and so on and-- Speaker 1: Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] is really, it's been happening. Speaker 2: Correct, correct. And-- Speaker 1: You have Bill Berry [Edwin C. Berry] at the--is Jim Compton [HistoryMaker James W. Compton] not there, right, Bill Berry would-- Speaker 2: Bill Berry was. I forgot about Bill Berry, right. Speaker 1: Because I mean the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois], there are a lot of jobs going back through the Urban League, right? Speaker 2: Right, so it was, it was vibrant, it was very vibrant, very, very vibrant. And I remember the March on Washington. I couldn't go, but I remember going to Soldiers Field [sic. Soldier Field, Chicago, Illinois] when they had that there; and it was, it was just very alive. Story_ID: 644963 Speaker 1: And then I started really dating, but when you dated back then you, they didn't have these sites, and so you did blind dates and there was a girl that lived down the hall and she was always getting a new, new, new boyfriend, and every time she got a new boyfriend, I got a new blind date. And one, the day Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, I came home from work and picked up Keith [Keith Massey]. He was at a babysitter at that time on 64th [Street] and Woodlawn [Avenue] so I had to come down 63rd Street with all the guns and all this, you know, the [U.S.] Army. And I stopped, and everyone in the building was just, you know, really sad and I went into, stopped by her apartment and she had a new boyfriend and it turns out that Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] and his wife had just separated and so he says, "I have someone I want you to meet." So I said, "Fine." So we never did quite meet. He cancelled the date before I even knew him because he called and said he had computer time. He was a post-doc [post doctoral researcher] at Argonne [Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois] and he said he had computer time so he had to cancel the date. Speaker 2: So you're wondering what kind of guy is this. Speaker 1: Right. So then we, we talked--uh-oh he says it's thirty minutes. We talk again and he says, okay well he can come by on a Wednesday, and I said, "Well that's fine but I don't go out during the week because I have my son," and that particular day my girlfriend was taking night classes so I would keep her son and--do we have to stop? Speaker 2: (Inaudible response). Speaker 1: And then I said, "Fine." He said, "Fine I'll come," and that was a good barometer because if I told some men that I couldn't go out during the week, then, or if we went out on the weekend some days we could go to the museum with my son. If they didn't want to do that, then there was no reason to pursue it. So I remember him coming and I looked out the window and I saw this person get out of this white Ford convertible in white cut off jeans, short jeans, black leather shoes, no socks, a black shirt trimmed in purple, which I still have, and he comes into my apartment and I'm cooking. I'm making spaghetti and hot dogs, except that I don't really cook, but the hot dogs had been boiling and I was going to pour some tomato sauce. Now I had lots of spices and things because, as I said, my father [William Streeter] cooked and he lived downstairs and he gave me, so Walter in the meantime looks at what I'm cooking and he goes and opens my cabinet and starts putting spices and things in and two little boys are just looking and then he goes down the street and gets a bottle of wine. You know that Chianti with the straw, and the kids are just like, "Wow," and I'm thinking, I'm marrying this man. (Laughter) I'll give him time, but I'm marrying this man. Story_ID: 644964 Speaker 1: So Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] comes in and he takes charge and you're like, I'm gonna marry him. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was wonderful. And he was talking with the kids. Now these two boys are seven years old, and he's engaging them. It's like wow (laughter). Speaker 1: And did he, so what, where was he at this point in his life? I mean besides being a postdoc. Speaker 2: He was at Argonne [Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois]. He was a postdoc. This was 1967, or '68 [1968], Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]-- Speaker 1: That was 1968. Speaker 2: --was shot in 1968. And that was April, and so that's what he was doing. He was eventually, he was looking to get a position as a professor, which he did that fall. Speaker 1: So what attracted you about him besides the, I mean, first of all describe him at that point. Speaker 2: He was cute. (Laughter) And he was just, to have someone come in, take over, be pleasant, not, you know, try to get fresh, and talk to two children he's never met, that was wonderful. That was, I mean, because I knew that at some point in the next two years if I didn't get married it would be very difficult to marry somebody and bring him into a pre-teen kid, male. That probably would be difficult. And so I thought fine, I like him, we'd be friends and I'll just give him some time. Speaker 1: So how long did you wait then? Speaker 2: We, more or less, started, let's say--he left for Urbana [Illinois] in--he did get a professorship at the University of Illinois, Urbana [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], and we started dating, I ran into him at the supermarket, say late summer, and I thought oh, this is great. So I bought a lot of groceries so he could help me take them home. And then we started dating that summer, early summer. And then he went to Urbana and I went down to see him once, and that was that. We just started dating. Speaker 1: When did you get- you got married-- Speaker 2: We got married in October of '69 [1969]. We broke up in the summer of '69 [1969] because I wanted to be married and he wasn't ready. So we broke up and I went to Hawaii and got real tanned and beautiful and came back and he said he wasn't gonna get married. I made love and I said, "Okay, I don't need any more friends, goodbye." I got on the train and came home and cried all the way home. And then about a month or three weeks, I don't know, later, he called me one night, and I didn't, I wasn't gonna talk, and then he called back and he said, "Will you marry me?" And I said, "Yes." And then his part of the story is he gets in the car and drives all the way up here, gets stopped, almost got a speeding ticket, but told the police what he was doing, so in the meantime, he's taken a job at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island]. He didn't stay at Illinois very long. He took a job at Brown as a professor, and he was due to start in January of 1970. And he said, "We'll get married in 1970." And I said, "Well, you know what? If you get married in '69 [1969], you'll have two deductions because you haven't had to pay income tax," because he'd been a post doc [post doctoral researcher]. And I know, "You'll get two deductions if you get married in '69 [1969] 'cause you'll have to pay income tax on just yourself," so we got married in October of '69 [1969], but in the meantime he had taken this job at Brown and he had come and they had had two or three other people in the physics department that had gotten divorced and he said, "No, I'm not married." Well he shows up in January with a wife and a child [Keith Massey]. (Laughter) That was interesting. Story_ID: 644965 Speaker 1: So how is this experience? Because this is really your first time outside Chicago [Illinois], right? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Is that not true? Speaker 2: I did not like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh you had been traveling. Speaker 2: I went to Urbana [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh you did-- Speaker 2: We got married in October and I went to Urbana for those (unclear). I don't know how anybody could live, I was used to Chicago. Providence [Rhode Island] I loved because it was a New England town and I just loved it. Now Keith [Keith Massey] went to three different schools that year because he was in school here, he was in school in Urbana and then he was in school in Providence. And that was fine, we got a tutor (laughter). Speaker 1: Because this is, so you're, he's the professor in the-- Speaker 2: Physics department. Speaker 1: --physics department. Speaker 2: At Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island]. Speaker 1: And really how many other black physics professors, there are not-- Speaker 2: There weren't, there weren't, but there were a lot of black professors. There were a lot of blacks at Brown at that time, which there's not as many now. We talk about that. There was the head of his department, the one of this, two or three in English, head of human resources. I mean there were just a lot, and we thought this would really be a time that would, but there's not as many now in a lot of the places. Speaker 1: A lot of the places (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And we had so many there. Speaker 1: Because this is, this is the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: This is 1970. Speaker 1: And so there's a lot of hope and opportunity. People are coming out, you know, affirmative action (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: --I mean there's a lot of that going on so how did, what is your life like because it's not like you had been, had experience being a professor's wife. Speaker 2: I didn't know what it was like and Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] was doing physics and so I would, we met people and we'd invite people over 'cause, like I said, we had a large black community, and he would say he's going to do physics. I'd say, "Fine, you all don't have to leave," and we would just sit around and talk, and he just did physics. That's what he did. And he had graduate students. But we were part of the university, so it was, it was fun. I did get a job. I sold real estate (laughter). Speaker 1: How do you find Providence though after living in a town like Chicago? Speaker 2: I did not mind that. One issue was I didn't know how to drive. So I met a couple, a woman at a physics party, her husband's an artist, we're still very good friends, Myra Fishman [Myra Margolin Fishman], and she was--I said, "I don't know how to drive." That was an issue. And she said, "Well I'll take you to the supermarket," and so I called her up and she would take me until I took driving lessons and learned how to drive. I did not mind because I had always read about New England and being on a college campus, so I loved it. I really did, even though it was not a big city like Chicago, it wasn't a hick country town like Urbana (laughter). Speaker 1: And then the other thing Shirley [HistoryMaker Shirley Anne Massey], and why you've made such a good partner with Walter, you're outgoing and-- Speaker 2: Right, and he wasn't as outgoing as--doing physics. I can jump ahead to when he became dean of the college and he was having difficulty with the staff because it was only one copy machine, and there were two people that couldn't get along and he said, "They have to solve this," and I said, "Nothing is going to happen unless you solve it. You have to bring everyone in and sit down and talk to them. That's it, it's not going to work." But that's jumping ahead. So I liked being, the physics community we always did a lot of things together, and, you know, parties and cookouts, and we bought a house. Speaker 1: And that was really your first house, right? Speaker 2: I went to look for a house; and I was pregnant then [with Eric Massey]. Story_ID: 644966 Speaker 1: Oh, we, we--Keith [Keith Massey], I still let Keith go see his grandmother and his great-grandmother because those were his on my--from my first husband so he would visit every summer. And then we made the decision that he [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] was going to adopt Keith. So we had to go through all of these rigmaroles and all of that and we finally get, go to the judge and the judge says, "I don't usually approve mixed marriages." Mixed marriages? Keith was baptized Catholic, Walter is Baptist and Rhode Island is one of the most Catholic states in the union. But he approved it. Speaker 2: He approved it, okay. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, you, you couldn't--Jewish people couldn't adopt non-Jewish and reverse. I mean this religion thing was bizarre. Story_ID: 644967 Speaker 1: So he, so Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] moves up. So you're a professor's wife and you're entertaining and you've moved into your house, and this is really, I mean he's not making a lot of money though. Speaker 2: Well that was another issue, he wasn't making a lot of money and when he took the job at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], he was going without a wife and a child and he took a pay cut to leave Argonne [Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois], and I told him I said, "You have to get some more money." So I said, "What do you do?" He said, "Well I have to talk to the provost." I said, "Well you talk to the provost." He says, "I can't get an appointment, I'm a junior professor." I said, "Let me tell you what you do. You make friends with the secretary and she can get you an appointment with the provost and you explain to him what happened." And he did, and he got some more money. Speaker 1: So you know he tells that and it's an interesting, in his interview he tells about how you've been such a wonderful support and mate and that you told him that the most important people were the secretaries. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: 'Cause he's a scientist. Scientists don't have any ideas about anything, and so, so you, so he, so, but still there's not a lot of money, you know. Speaker 2: No, but it was fine. Story_ID: 644968 Speaker 1: How long are you at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] then? Speaker 2: We moved to Providence [Rhode Island] in 1970; and we left in '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay. So let's talk about those years because there were a lot of students that you ended up mentoring during that time period (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And really sort of setting the stage for even what you're doing now-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know-- Speaker 2: I would have, especially a lot of the young black female students come over and talk. And some of them would have issues with boyfriends and then you'd have somebody to come cry on your shoulder. And I did do that. Speaker 1: And then Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] became provost in what year? Speaker 2: No, he-- Speaker 1: He came back. Speaker 2: What happened is we took a sabbatical in 1974. He had been doing physics but he also been doing a program called inner city teaching for students and scientists [Inner City Teachers of Science Program]. And so he took a sabbatical to see if he really wanted to go, stop doing physics and go into administration. So we went to the University of California, Santa Cruz [Santa Cruz, California], and spent, excuse me, a year and then it just so happened that the deanship came up so we moved back to Providence and moved into the dean's house in 1975. Speaker 1: So you spent a year out at Santa Cruz and then came back. Now did you like it out there at that point 'cause you would go back to-- Speaker 2: Well I thought we would not want to leave California. And it was not--California is different, and the people are different, and they say they were going to be friendly but then they weren't really very friendly, and it was a period where it was a little wild, and Santa Cruz was very wild with the smoking of the pot [marijuana] and people switching off partners, that, it was-- Speaker 1: Open marriages. Speaker 2: Right, it was a lot. And Santa Cruz was well known for that and it was, we both looked at each other and said this is not what we want. And so with this coming back to Providence in the dean's house, that was great. Speaker 1: So is--how many black deans had been there before Walter? Speaker 2: There was not dean of the college, but there were deans on his staff that were black (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But there were, but there were no, he was the first black-- Speaker 2: He was the first black dean of the college, correct. Speaker 1: So what is his responsibilities at that point and what are your res- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Curriculum. That's was a big, big thing and that's when Brown was going, changing the curriculum. Story_ID: 644969 Speaker 1: And for me, that was when we started really entertaining because we were in the dean's house and I had never really entertained formally, and I had a neighbor that was very helpful about how you entertain formally and how you, I mean I knew how you set the table, but I didn't know who the guest of honor would sit here and there and I remember our very first dinner party, it was ten or twelve people. I was so nervous and his secretary had been his secretary at the physics department and she was there (unclear). She was the mother of fourteen, she and her husband had fourteen children, only one set of twins, and she says, "We had this all the time, you'll be fine," and my neighbor across the street was very helpful. So we had this dinner party, and we set the people and it turned out that the two ladies that I put down by Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] were very prima donnas, one was Austrian and one was something else, and they were just one upping each other, and the two people at my end of the table I couldn't get to talk at all. It was just, and Walter was trying to control these two prima donnas, this--and from that day forward we always checked out the people before we sat them across or near each other. But I learned how to have dinner parties. And then we would have students to dinner. Speaker 2: And that's a very important skill to have, you know, because really, I mean in many ways, what you're not addressing also, is Walter became, you know, he was going up the administrative track-- Speaker 1: Correct. Speaker 2: --and not the, you know, the pure research scientist track (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Correct, correct. Speaker 2: So who is president at this point at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island]? Speaker 1: Oh, my mind went blank, my mind went blank. Speaker 2: Okay. And the provost, do you know who the provost was? Speaker 1: Yes, but I can't remember his name (laughter). Speaker 2: So you--he does that. What is significant besides that whole thing, are you finding any, any issues with the demands of being Walter--the dean's wife? Speaker 1: Oh sure, and that was I had to, the dean's house had been occupied by someone and it had to be fixed up, and I had to get furniture and I went all around campus and found furniture and fixed it up, and found dishes in storage and all of that kind of thing, so I was, that was, I enjoyed that. That was a big deal. And we had a four year old and a fourteen year old [Keith Massey], so you have to really divide your time. I found a good babysitter. I sent Eric [Eric Massey] to school like I had with a young five, six year old (laughter) (unclear) babysitter. And then we sold the house we had and I, I made the decision that we really needed to have someplace to go, and he got invited down to Woods Hole [Marine Biological Laboratory] at Cape Cod [Massachusetts] to give a talk, and I thought this would be a great place to come on the weekends with children and the dog to get away so that you have some time with just the children, so we, I started looking for a house down there. Speaker 2: And that's when you bought the-- Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-five [1975] I bought--'75 [1975], '76 [1976] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you've had the-- Speaker 1: Not the same house, but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, okay. Speaker 1: --but bought a house there. And we were able to get there in about an hour and fifteen minutes on Friday after you have to do things and then come back on Sunday afternoon. Speaker 2: So how are you, because scientists are their own people, and so how are you bridging, I mean because, you know, scientists can be also creative but the, you know a lot of times people have trouble having conversations with 'em. Speaker 1: Well, it, they wa- that wasn't that difficult. Now Walter didn't like a whole lot of that, but once you go into administration you have to. But I found that when we would go to the physics parties when he was doing physics you just sort of understood the language and it, they were much more social than engineers. (Laughter) And they liked to party. Speaker 2: They liked to party. Speaker 1: They did. Speaker 2: And see you were always, because jazz is a very important part, dancing, you know it's very important part of-- Speaker 1: Walter didn't, didn't really like to dance. We'd go to these things when we got here because he didn't want to be the first one on the floor black. I didn't care, so I'd find somebody else to dance with (laughter), usually another lady and go. And he finally got to the point that it didn't matter. Story_ID: 644970 Speaker 1: So when you, so you're at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] for, until, from--? Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: To '79 [1979], and then after that, then it's, you-- Speaker 2: Argonne [Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Argonne, that's right. Now that's a huge--first of all that brings you back here to your-- Speaker 2: That was a little difficult. Speaker 1: (Pause) I'm surprised about that. Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, why was that difficult? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I, I said we weren't gonna live out at Argonne, we were gonna live-- Speaker 1: In the city. Speaker 2: And we'd been living in the dean's house with staff and what have you, which I had to learn how to handle. Daddy [William Streeter] was very helpful in explaining to me how you handle staff. And-- Speaker 1: But then once you get used to it, it's nice to have. Speaker 2: Yes, and so when I came to look for an apartment, a place to live, it was February of '79 [1979]. It was a big snow storm and they started showing me-- Speaker 1: That was the huge snow storm. Speaker 2: (Nods head) They started showing me places I had grown up in, you know, on the university campus that Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] had been in as a postdoc, and I wasn't, I said to Walter, "We can't go back to that. I just can't." Then they showed me a couple of other places that I asked that were beyond our means but had a doorman because I didn't want a house. I wanted an apartment with a doorman, I didn't want to have to deal with a lawn and that sort of thing. And we couldn't afford that. And I told him, I said, "You can't take this job because," I called him, I said, "because we can't afford to go back, we can't afford to go back and the only place we can go we can't afford." So he called Hanna and the provost and-- Speaker 1: That's Hanna Gray [Hanna Holborn Gray], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, she's the one that got us here. And he spoke with the provost whose name I can't remember, and they said, "Okay, we'll see." So they put us in a place called the Cloisters [Chicago, Illinois] temporarily, which was very nice, on 58th [Street] and Dorchester [Avenue]. And we were still looking for a place and at that point, the building that we wanted is a co op, which is where we are now, not the same apartment. But co ops you couldn't get a mortgage, back then, you had to pay cash. You can get mortgages now. So my connection, so we met people, one couple that lived in the building was Ed [Edward H. Levi] and Kate Levi [Kate Sulzberger Levi]. My daddy used to do housecleaning and helped serve parties with them, so I knew them and they knew daddy very well. And, and so Ed said we will arrange a loan, so that was my father's connection. (Laughter) So for us coming back it was, I knew so many people because daddy knew so many people, and so that was really proud for him. Speaker 1: That's significant though. Speaker 2: That was very significant. Speaker 1: Talk about the building that you moved into. Speaker 2: It's a co op, forty apartments. We have elevator operators and doorman, and someone parks your car at night because it's an outdoor parking lot. And we have an indoor pool and a ballroom on top and an outdoor deck up top. And it's, it's a group of people, there were a lot of university people in there. And it was--and we, we left and came back and we moved back into the building. It's, it's very nice. Speaker 1: Well it's called the-- Speaker 2: Powhatan [Powhatan Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Powhatan. Speaker 2: Pocahontas' father's name. Speaker 1: Right, right. And it also has always had a certain level of prestige, that building. Speaker 2: Yes, it has. Speaker 1: So I mean, I want you, you're not saying those things, but-- Speaker 2: That's true, it was built in the '20s [1920s] and it was built as a premier building. Speaker 1: And it's art de- does it have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's art deco, very art deco. Speaker 1: And each of the, each of the apartments open up-- Speaker 2: Open into your own floor, you meet at the back, the back doors do. One side the apartments are about four thousand, five thousand square feet. It varies, and the smaller sides, they're about twenty-six hundred to three thousand. But each apartment is different because when it was built, the people who bought into it could move the walls and have it in places that they wanted, so every apartment is different. Speaker 1: So what is the history? Do you know much of the history of the building and the--it's a beautiful building. Speaker 2: I should but I don't. That, that whole area is called, was called Indian Village [Chicago, Illinois]. And Fifth Army [Fifth Army Headquarters] used to be over there. And so there were plans to have a lot more buildings whereas there was only one other building that was built like that, similar to that, not quite that prestigious, and that was the Narragansett [Chicago, Illinois]. But it, they did not--they just didn't build all the things that they were going to build. Story_ID: 644971 Speaker 1: When you move there, I mean this is huge, Walter's [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] appointment, I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh this--now tha- the other thing that was very different for Argonne [Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois] is we're in a whole different realm because we are now in the City of Chicago [Illinois] being involved with the makers and players of Chicago. And that was a big thing because I didn't realize how big--I remember when we first went to this party that they had for Argonne I was expecting just a small thing and I walked into this huge room. And I had to rethink. And so the other thing is we had to make, the issue was to make Argonne more visible to the people in Chicago, even though it was part of the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. And so we would go and meet people and do things and we got on the list of going to all these fancy parties. Well nobody knew us and so we would go around and just introduce ourselves. Well we had one person that really made a difference. There was a young man at Mor- at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] who we had befriended, he was having difficulties there and when he graduated his mother came and, and father, and they were in the Chicago scene, the Edelmans. They were, Dan [Dan Edelman] and Ruth Edelman, they said, "We will have a party for you." They had a dinner party, a small dinner party. The mayor came. Speaker 1: Mayor came (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Brooks [Brooks McCormick] and Hope McCormick [Hope Baldwin McCormick] came. I mean there were all these people and I'm sitting next to Brooks and Hope at the area and she says, "We're going to a party afterwards, you come with us," and it was Abra Prentice Anderson [Abra Prentice Wilkin], and I said to Walter, "We're going to a party afterwards." He says, "We can't go to a party, we weren't invited." I said, "This lady says we can come." So we go to the party, in essence crash, but we're with Hope and Brooks and that's their relative or something, that fancy building on 209 East Lake Shore Drive or wherever it was, and so it's a dancing party, fabulous party and Walter asked some people to dance and Brooks and I danced, and I'm outgoing and I ask this man to dance, some man, I didn't know. That was fine. Well let's skip ahead a couple of years, he decided he would dance and I said, "I remember when I asked you to dance and you wouldn't dance with me," (laughter) because I wasn't someone he knew. And so what we did we had to just go around, we'd go to these functions and just meet people and talk to them. He would take one side of the room and I would take the other because they had to get to know us. Speaker 1: And so the significance of this Shirley [HistoryMaker Shirley Anne Massey], first of all let's look at the huge difference from when you left Chicago-- Speaker 2: Oh god, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and then when you returned. I mean he's a lowly professor, and, you know, and in literally, what is it eleven years, you know, your world has changed so dramatically, and what you're talking about here now is introduction into the white community-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --significant white community. Speaker 2: Significant white society of Chicago (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Chicago. Which, this is a Chicago still that people--the black community, is still just making its way downtown, okay. Speaker 2: That's right. Story_ID: 644972 Speaker 1: So we, we would just then, you know, after you start doing this and you meet people and then they invite you to things; and we, we got to meet people and the thing that was really a shock, he then stepped down from Argonne [Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois] and became vice president of research at the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and at this point he goes to lunch with John Swearingen and Vic Morrow and--well another Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] connection, let's skip ahead, the Gidwitzs, I don't know if you know that name. Speaker 2: Gidwitzes, Ron Gidwitz. Speaker 1: Ron Gidwitz. Well Ron, Ron's brother went to Brown, his sister went to Brown, so we knew them, so we were in that group, so that was the Brown connection because they would then have us to functions. So Gerald Gidwitz had a company, not the Helene Curtis [Helene Curtis Industries, Inc.], another small company, and they asked Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] to be on that board, so that was the introduction to being in the corporate world, and that was, of course, the Brown connection that we knew, and then from there he got asked to be on Amoco board [Amoco Corporation; BP Corporation North America Inc.], which, for us, we didn't know anything about these board things, and Walter called me and said-- Speaker 2: And what year is this? So 'cause-- Speaker 1: So, let's see. Speaker 2: So 1980, you come back in-- Speaker 1: In '79 [1979], '80 [1980], so this is maybe '83 [1983], '84 [1984]-- Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) about that. And we didn't know you got paid to be on these boards. You got paid. That was wonderful. Money (laughter). And so, I remember being very nervous about going to these board things, and Walter said, "You know Nobel Prize winners, and physics professors will be Nobel Prize, you will be fine." 'Cause I was very nervous 'cause this is the corporate world that I knew nothing about. Speaker 2: 'Cause you had, you knew the academic world and that's where you had cut your teeth, but a lot of times academia does not meet corporate, ever. Speaker 1: No, no, totally different. So then you're on one board and then you get to be asked on another and it just, it was great (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, I mean, it's almost a Cinderella story. Speaker 1: That's what I felt like. I mean for me to be a janitor's daughter and-- Speaker 2: And a single mother too. Speaker 1: And a single mother. I was determined to be, I was gonna be successful, period. I was not going to be on welfare (laughter). Speaker 2: And not be a statistic. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But so, when he, 'cause when I met you, I met you about 1982 and that was around Kuumba Theater [Kuumba Theater Company]. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: You were also very involved in the community, you know, and you had, and I think maybe because of Brown and that, you were gatherers of people in many ways (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes. I still believe in putting people together. Speaker 2: And so what are you learning though this time around because--and what are you wanting your life to really sort of be because one, there's money, and you're being invited to clubs to be part of groups and organizations. Chicago [Illinois] has a black mayor [Harold Washington], you know, I mean, what-- Speaker 1: It was, it was fun (laughter). It was fun, going to a lot of the parties and the functions. But what's very interesting, it was still separate because-- Speaker 2: Separate. Speaker 1: --the black parties are separate from that, there wasn't, and there still isn't a very large, there are a few people you can mention, like the McKeevers, that cross over, but there's so many people that don't. Speaker 2: So did that give you a different prospective of the community that you had grown up in? Speaker 1: Well for me coming back, black--a lot of these people I knew who they were, but I wasn't of the stature that would be, I wouldn't be one that would be in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] and that, and that was fine. Or having dated someone and when you find out, I remember finding out my father [William Streeter] was a janitor, he's says "I'm not going out with you." Fine, don't go out with me. Speaker 2: But you know one thing about Chicago, I'm sorry to interject, they do like stature and status-- Speaker 1: Oh yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) so you it wouldn't have mattered. Speaker 1: But I was still, but there were people that knew me before but they still, it was like, or people that wouldn't talk to me before, but now would talk to me. And I would say, "You didn't talk to me before." I mean there were those, but since I was married to Walter now, it was okay (laughter). Story_ID: 644973 Speaker 1: It's really the tale of two cities in many respects (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: So--but the thing is, so Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] becomes, he--wait, he's dean at, didn't he have a dual appointment though between Ar- there, wasn't there a time when he was at Argonne [Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: He was always at the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinos] because-- Speaker 1: Argonne and the university are sort of-- Speaker 2: They were the overseers of the-- Speaker 1: Over- okay, of Argonne Labs, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so he then--wait then you're here until nineteen eighty-- Speaker 2: Nine [1989]. Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989]. Speaker 2: And then we went to-- Speaker 1: Nat- Speaker 2: --Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Right. So let's talk about this because he--how does that appointment come up, and then because-- Speaker 2: Well he was involved in the scientific community and, and with the different organizations and so-- Speaker 1: What were some of the organizations 'cause-- Speaker 2: American Association for the Advancement of Science, American Physical Society of--something physics organization. And he was on the National Science Board and that is the board that oversees the National Science Foundation so he was on that board and that came about, oh, that must have come about back in the '70s [1970s] because he had to go through, you know, FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] clearance and all of these things to be on that because--and you carried a special passport and all of this, even on the board. And then at some point they needed a director, the one was retiring and so they asked him to head the National Science Foundation. He had to leave, so we went to Washington. He had to resign from all of his boards because he's a government person now. Speaker 1: He was at this point you said Amoco [Amoco Corporation; BP Corporation North America Inc.] and what-- Speaker 2: Amoco, Motorola [Motorola, Inc.], First Chicago [First Chicago Corporation]. I don't know if he was on McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] at that time. But he had, Tribune [Tribune Company; Tribune Media Company], Tribune board, so you cannot do that and be in government and then the stocks you have to put in blind trusts, and so we went to Washington losing almost 75 percent of our salary, 'cause it was, 'cause you don't have all of those things. We were fortunate enough that we, the son was in college but that was covered because he had been at the university and so we were in Washington for two years. It's--the National Science Foundation directorship spanned presidencies. It's not just for one, they have it set up so he was under Bush Senior [President George Herbert Walker Bush] or father and Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], so we knew we could only do it financially for a couple of years, so we had kept our apartment in Chicago [Illinois] for a time and we at that time had a house in Santa Fe [New Mexico] and a house on Cape Cod [Massachusetts], still. We had three places. Speaker 1: So where did the house in Santa Fe come from. Speaker 2: That came about because our son, older son, Keith [Keith Massey], moved to Santa Fe. He got married and moved to Santa Fe. And we went out to see them and we needed to do something with some money so we bought a house out there and we liked it. And that's another scientific area because of Los Alamos [Los Alamos National Laboratory] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Los Alamos. Speaker 2: And so we moved out there, we had it and I moved my daddy [William Streeter] out there for a period and we were waiting for our first grandchild, so that was, so that was fine, we were able to function. We had put enough money aside, but we could only do it for two years and we were thinking we would come back to Chicago. And he got an offer to be the provost for the University of California system in government labs, so we said okay, we'll try California again and it was with the thought that he would eventually be president of the university system because the way it was put to us, so we were, we, we decided to do that. Story_ID: 644974 Speaker 1: Can I go back to Washington [D.C.] for a second? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you find that community? Speaker 2: Well, I was fine because my good girlfriend, Ann Cook Jordan [HistoryMaker Ann Dibble Jordan], was a friend of mine here, so I didn't have a problem. We were in-- Speaker 1: You were in. Speaker 2: We were in, we were in. And she and I were old friends, had been old friends. We used to walk together in the morning here in Chicago [Illinois] and then we would walk together there, so we didn't have a problem. It's not an easy city to crack because there's the government and then there's the local. Speaker 1: And then there's the society too. Speaker 2: That's what I mean, the society, and they don't really always mix, believe it or not, but we were able to be in both. Speaker 1: And, now that was the time that [HistoryMaker] Dr. Louis Sullivan also, he was in the same, the same administration (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was there, yeah, he was there, um-hm. Speaker 1: And, and then was Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious], was she, did she--? Speaker 2: We, we knew June [sic.] very well. Story_ID: 644975 Speaker 1: I missed something. I missed our sabbatical in Paris [France]. How did I miss that? (Laughter) That--saying Jewel [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious] made me think about that. Speaker 2: I see, so your sabbatical in Paris-- Speaker 1: We did a sabbatical in Paris when we were here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: With Argonne [Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois], with the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Just--with the university before we went to Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 2: Okay, to Washington, okay. Speaker 1: And Jewel was there a lot so we used to spend time with her. That was, that was from 1991 I think. That was, that was fun. I'm glad we did that. We made a lot of friends there too. Speaker 2: In the international community? Speaker 1: Um-hm, which we still have connections with. Speaker 2: So did you travel a lot to different places in Europe when you were there or did you spend more time-- Speaker 1: We did, we did. We went to Brussels [Belgium] a lot because what he [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] was involved in was in Brussels and that was mainly all we did. We went around France. I'd forgotten all about that. Story_ID: 644976 Speaker 1: So that's, you know what I'm trying to also understand, Shirley [HistoryMaker Shirley Anne Massey], is there ever during this whole period any faux pas or any like, I'm tired of being Walter's [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] wife or any, you know, things that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well what I've always have done is I go off to a spa and have time to myself and I say that to a lot of women who might be professionals or might be professional wives, that you have to have time to yourself. And I, almost every year, every other year, I take myself down to the Rancho La Puerta [Tecate, Mexico] for a week and that's my time for me and I go by myself. Because you have to have time for you. You have to have down time. And so whenever I would feel that, it was time to go away (laughter). Speaker 1: Because there were a lot of obligations, a lot of people pulling at you-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, there are (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a lot of, you know, 'cause you're handling, you know, there's the office things and interacting with the office but then there's also the home things and then the requests. That all-- Speaker 2: So you have to have your own time. And fortunately also when we were here in Chicago [Illinois], we had our house at the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] and with the university schedule, the calendar, we were a- I was able to go out, say in May and stay 'til October. And our son [Eric Massey] was in boarding school at that time in New Hampshire, our younger son, so that worked out fine. Story_ID: 644977 Speaker 1: And had you decided--now what was, why was the decision made for him to go to boarding school? Had you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He made the decision. He was in sixth grade and when we--his brother's [Keith Massey] off in college. Speaker 1: This is-- Speaker 2: Yeah he's, how old are you in sixth grade? Ten or something? Ten or eleven? About that. His brother's off in college and when we were at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] there were a lot of students, a lot of African students especially that had gone to boarding school in England, and we always had the African students over too. And we were invited to a friend's house who was having an introduction to this boarding school that their son was in. And he took him and he wanted to go. And so he went for the summer and then went in, he went for the summer after he finished sixth grade, and then he went for seventh and eighth grade to this boarding school in New Hampshire. Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: Cardigan Mountain [Cardigan Mountain School, Canaan, New Hampshire], and he loved it. He liked being away and then in ninth grade he went to a boarding school in Switzerland, which he wanted to do. Speaker 1: And this, this son is named? Speaker 2: Eric [Eric Massey]. Speaker 1: Eric. And Eric was born in what year? Speaker 2: Born in 1971-- Speaker 1: Nineteen-- Speaker 2: --in Providence, Rhode Island. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. That's right. We went, we had talked about that. Speaker 2: So he, he was one of these children that did not mind going away. Speaker 1: So how was his experience in Switzerland? Speaker 2: He was very upset when we brought him home, and we had to because the dollar dropped, it was expensive and I went over two or three times that year. Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] did not and he was missing him. And so with the financial issue, we said, "You can't stay the rest of the time." So we brought him back to finish up the junior and senior year at the lab school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois]. He wasn't happy. He had to talk to a therapist (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, the lab school too is also known in some respects, not good experience for black boys. Speaker 2: And he had not had a good experience in the beginning when we came. Speaker 1: I see, so he was back. Speaker 2: But it worked out better. Being older, he was able to handle it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. But gosh, he was in Switzerland and comes back, that's sort of--okay, (laughter) okay-- Speaker 2: Culture shock. Speaker 1: Culture shock, right. Story_ID: 644978 Speaker 1: So, then when Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey]--okay so we were talking about California, you know, and-- Speaker 2: Leaving Ar- leaving-- Speaker 1: --Argon- Science (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) National Science Foundation-- Speaker 1: And going there. Speaker 2: --and going to California. Speaker 1: So let's talk about that 'cause you were saying that it was this anticipation that if he would go, the track was-- Speaker 2: Right, and we moved to California with the intent that we were going to stay. I went out to look for a house, which is always my job, and it was right--a couple of years after the big fire in Oakland [California], and the real estate agent is showing me houses. And they're houses built on stilts on the side of a hill and houses down in a gulley and I did not want that. I had said to her I want a house that has a basement, I want a house that has been retrofitted because that's important. I want a stucco house not a brick house, because I'd read all the research about earthquakes and I want a place that I want to walk somewhere if I need to get somewhere, and we did find a place. But--oh, and I wanted a bridge view. We were going to be in the Oakland, Piedmont [California] area. But it took three places to buy one in California. We had to sell the apartment in Chicago [Illinois], the house in Santa Fe [New Mexico] and the house on the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] to buy one. Speaker 1: And you did that. Speaker 2: We did that, we did that. And it was beautiful. It was a beautiful house, but it just didn't work out (laughter). Speaker 1: So what happened there, what didn't-- Speaker 2: Well a couple of things. I mean he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was the time period too right and a lot of things? Speaker 2: A lot of things were going on. There was this issue where they were saying they were going to--you couldn't be on boards if you worked for the university. What else couldn't you do? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DICSUSSION) Speaker 2: The affirmative action thing-- Speaker 1: Was going, that was-- Speaker 2: --was going on. Speaker 1: The Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978], was it Bakke? Speaker 2: Whatever that proposition-- Speaker 1: I think it was Bakke. Speaker 2: --whatever it was. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right. And then they had this write up in the paper about Walter because our son Eric [Eric Massey] went to the University of California the first two years of his college. He had gotten into the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] but he didn't want to stay because we were here, so he went out there, and when we left, he came back. But there was the issue they said, but. Being black, they insisted he take this course as if he was a student that wasn't smart. They had these courses that black students-- Speaker 1: Oh the intro- right. Speaker 2: Now this is somebody that's been in Switzerland and this and lab school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois], and so they had this article about why would we pay for this person who has all this money and his son's taking advantage. They told him he had to, period. There wasn't any discussion about that. They just said you black, you take this course. And it got to be ugly, all of these things. Speaker 1: So they were saying he was ta- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then people started calling from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: So, so they were saying that he was, you were taking advantage of the system and, you know, he's getting special treatment and all of that, okay. Speaker 2: (Nods head) Even though he's gone now, he's not there anymore (simultaneous). Story_ID: 644979 Speaker 1: And then people started, someone started calling from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. We'd only been there a year, here [California]. And I said, "Don't call here, we're not going anywhere, don't call here." And they kept calling, and they kept calling, and so I went down to Atlanta [Georgia] just to check it out. When he was finally was thinking he was going to do this and I'm talking with people and I'm talking, now I have to interact, I work always very closely with his secretaries and assistants. They're in charge but we work closely together. I don't do anything without checking with them, and he's been very fortunate to have even people like twenty years old to take over his life, and they're very good. And he had this young woman, Yung Lee [ph.], who was very good. So I go Atlanta and I meet the people that are going to be working for him, and I came back and I said, "First of all we have to have a house on campus. We can't live out away. The students live on campus, we should be there." Because they hadn't--there had been a house and then they tore it down. So the president lived way off campus. And then there was the issue of how it's figured you have to live just so many miles for it not to be a tax issue if you living and the school is paying for you. I said, "And furthermore you can't go unless Yung Lee comes, because you are not going to be able to work with this person that's there. It's not gonna work." So we had to convince her and her new husband to come, which they agreed. And we were very fortunate, we got an apartment near the school, downtown Atlanta, but it was at the time of the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] and we got the land for the house and they sold the president's house, the house the president was living in that wasn't on campus, that was able to be built there, and then we were able to find alums to give us money for endowment and two other friends to give us money for the furniture. Speaker 2: So wait a minute, so you built a new president's home. I did not know that. Speaker 1: I was on the committee. Speaker 2: I see. I didn't know that. Speaker 1: They weren't expecting me on the committee. Speaker 2: So Atlanta was a different community. Speaker 1: Atlanta was a different community. It's the South (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So how did--it's the South and you hadn't spent time in the South. Speaker 1: Never spent time. But what was so amazing is people just talk and are friendly, white and black, and they all, I said to Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey], "White people eat grits!" He said, "Of course they do." Speaker 2: Well, this is, Walter was coming back home and many way-- Speaker 1: He said, "Of course they do." I said, "White people I knew didn't eat grits." He says, "Who do you think cooked for them? They all ate- ate the same food." I mean I, it just blew my mind. Story_ID: 644980 Speaker 1: So talk about your Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] years though, because there you became the first lady, in a, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --of, right, of the university, and you also need to, I mean, for Walt- [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] this is his alma mater. Speaker 2: And the school was a mess in terms of cleanliness. Like I went into a bathroom and it was filthy and, I just, I said, "We have to clean this." This was in one of the (unclear). I mean the secretary said--I would just start going around to the bathrooms that the women would go to, and then I'd bring rubber gloves and some naval jelly and say this is how you clean, because the, it was an in house cleaning service and they just relaxed. And there was, they didn't plant trees, so I had a committee, we planted trees and just got involved with all of the staff, the people that do the work, make friends with the janitors and everybody because if you're friendly with them then they'll work for you. If you treat them like equals they will work for you. If you treat them, talk down to them, they won't do things at all. And so I was popular in that sense. And then we would, I would, we started, I started the thing of greeting students and parents, handing out literature when they come into campus, and just getting to know students 'cause it's fairly small. And we had white students too and I'd say to them, "Why are you out here in the sun? You're white, go get some suntan, go get some sun block. You can't sit out here in the sun." (Laughter) I mean, no, so and then we'd have dinners for the students and talk about how to eat and what, now what silverware do I use, I mean just those kind of basic things for those that didn't know. And my big push was that all students would get a passport because we had study abroad and the woman who handled the international studies was so happy that I started pushing that, and because once you go away, you appreciate home first of all, and then you have an appreciation of the world, and that still is very, very big, so I was a big hit (laughter). Speaker 1: But those were a lot, those were some of your initiatives then. So how did it differ, Morehouse differ from Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], and from, you know, 'cause this was your, you know-- Speaker 2: I was--well first of all we were on campus at Morehouse so we would go to things at night. Walter would walk over to the office in the morning. We'd go to functions at night if they're having parties. We had work study students that worked in the house. He's gonna tell you to sit back--worked in the house (laughter). Speaker 1: I keep going in this direction, but go on. That's the problem. Speaker 2: Worked in the house and that was, that was very helpful for them to, you know, do things, help with parties. Speaker 1: So what is, what is the work that you did? Talk about your contributions to Morehouse? Speaker 2: I think, a lot of-- Speaker 1: I mean you talked about the initiatives-- Speaker 2: --initiatives-- Speaker 1: --but there was major money being brought in and major initiatives. Speaker 2: We worked at raising money, we both did. I mean he did, I did too. We would just meet people and introduce them. I joined a group of women that was, I had been on an organization in California that had a chapter at Morehouse, which funds students. Morehouse is the only one that they have where they give students scholarships at an undergraduate level. Most of them are graduate. And this was the white establishment of Atlanta [Georgia] and that, ARCS [ARCS Foundation]. I think I gave you information about that. And so I was involved in that, and then there was something called the Monday lunch bunch. Well this is still mainly white, because we had several board members that were from Atlanta, white, and they would introduce us to people to raise money 'cause that was what we did. Speaker 1: So how much money did you raise? Speaker 2: I don't know, a lot. I should remember but I don't. I don't Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson]. We made the capital campaign, plus, but I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay, but I mean that was significant because who was the president before Walter? Speaker 2: There was an acting president and then there was a president, Leroy Keith [Leroy Keith, Jr.], and then he left and then an acting person, who I didn't get along with (laughter). He was chairing the committee of building the house and I made it a point to say at this meeting that we need a house where we can entertain and one of the alumnus was saying, "Well what about the alumni, we need to have a place." I said, "You need to build your own alumni house then." "And you should have a swimming pool." I said, "We don't need a swimming pool. There's a pool on campus." So we had the lower level of the house as meeting rooms and the upper level was, they wanted sunken living room. I said, "We can't have sunken living rooms and marble floors." I said, "Did you ever stand on marble floors in heels? And we have students that are handicapped. We can't have sunken living rooms, and we have to have an elevator," because we had come from California where there were all these rules; and so I won my way (laughter). Story_ID: 644981 Speaker 1: A lot of the things in terms of the school year and the programs like the candle- your, your big event? Speaker 2: The big event Candle in the Dark [A Candle in the Dark Gala]. That had started before us. Speaker 1: That had stan- started before. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But you sort of took it to a new level in some respects (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We worked at getting some well known people. Speaker 1: So talk about that. I mean this is your chance. Speaker 2: Okay. After meeting different people and I'm trying to remember, we met, we met Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] and we would, we were in an organization called the American Academy of Achievement which Quincy would come to that and so we started meeting these people and then started, which was a separate organization we were involved in that met around the world. And we started inviting different, those people to come to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and once you start with one, then you get others. And like Quincy, of course, we would, I start seeing something, and Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] wasn't there and he'd say, "Come on, we're gonna hang out," and with him and his girlfriend at the time. He always had a girlfriend (laughter). And so, and so we became friends with them, and then once that happened you get to meet other people. We got to meet Ray Charles' manager [Joe Adams] and we got him to come and got Ray Charles to give us $5 million. I mean, so it was, and I mean it was very interesting. The thing about Ray which I found very interesting, him being blind, we were sitting one time at the table and I said to his manager, "How does he know people?" He says, "He can tell how people are by the way they react to touch." Because if you pull away, then you don't want to be bothered, or if you engage, and I had to sit and think about it. You close your eyes and if you're sitting next to someone and you go and you hold their hand, and they kind of pull away, then, you know, something's wrong, and that was true. He could tell what you were like and so he became friendly and we would go out and see him in California too. And, and he gave us money (laughter). Speaker 1: And that, I mean, it's, so talk about the prospecting and how, how you really sort of did that and how you and Walter worked in partnership with that because you talk in terms of we. You know a lot of times, you know, the wife may not be helping, you know and that, but you talk in terms of we, so you were as significant as he was. Speaker 2: Oh definitely. Oh, that's definite. And I don't know--I mean people look at us as a unit, really they do. And a lot of them say, "You are the stronger unit," me (laughter), "in terms of the people." And that is probably true because I will go out and talk to people before Walter will. He does much more so now, but that's because we've been together for so long. Speaker 1: 'Cause he was a scientist, he's more shy and retiring and not-- Speaker 2: He was not interested in socializing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But that had to change and it did and he, he's very comfortable with it now, I mean because this is something that we are starting, are going to start a campaign here. Speaker 1: So, so, what was the largest gift you got? Speaker 2: In terms of one lump sum, it might be Ray's gift, but also what Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] had done and just so many students she provided a scholarship for. Speaker 1: So talk, that's what you need to talk about because that happened your-- Speaker 2: Under our leadership. And we had met her, of course, when we were in Chicago [Illinois], and we would invite her down and she was very good about wanting to help, and so we encouraged that. We would go see her, you know, come to see her and Walter would. I remember one time I was supposed to go and I got sick and I couldn't go. I felt so bad; and it was just one of those things that it clicked, one of those things that just clicked. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 644982 Speaker 1: She had a commitment of paying tuition for students--the Oprah Winfrey scholars [Oprah Winfrey Endowed Scholarship Fund], which was wonderful. And what was, what was another wonderful--we gave her a candle, which was the first woman to receive a candle at the function, A Candle in the Dark [A Candle in the Dark Gala], and when she had the event here, all of those scholars, almost all of them, came and they pledged money for that Oprah Winfrey scholarship, and that was so wonderful. I mean I just love Morehouse men. I mean there is no place in the world that we don't go that there's Morehouse men. We're walking down the street in Amsterdam [the Netherlands], "President Massey [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey]!" We've been in Paris [France] this past Christmas, two different places, two different Morehouse people. And I always say for such a small school, they're everywhere. I used to think I could stand up and say, "Is there a Morehouse man in the crowd? I need some help" (laughter). Speaker 2: Well you know you should talk about also the university and its whole-- Speaker 1: College. The college (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, right, Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]. I don't why I call it, but Morehouse College. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: But what its purpose is and its mission. Speaker 1: To educate African American males. Although we have more, everyone is not, we have non-whites, Asians that go, but that was its purpose when schools weren't around for African Americans, blacks then, coloreds, Negroes, back in 1867 when it was founded, and it, for all of that Walter was the ninth president, since 1867, and it just, you watch the transformation because if we have a function at the house, they'd have to dress, and we tell them, if you're going to go out in the world, you have to know what to wear. It's like doctors wear certain things when they go in an operating room. Athletes wear certain things, so if you're going to look for a job, you have to dress a certain way. And we would have clothes if they didn't have things. We would have jackets if somebody needed a jacket. And the other thing I said about teaching you how to sit at a dinner table, and if there's something you don't like, you don't say you don't like it, you say, "I'm allergic," (laughter). "I can't eat that. I have an allergy." And that's a lot of what we did, the social things of what I would do. If someone was using bad words I'd say, "Don't do that." Or you got angry, I'd say, "That person is making you angry and look you're getting all upset." That involved my being around the young men on the campus. And we were around and I was around. Story_ID: 644983 Speaker 1: I think the biggest tribute I have ever had is having a building [Shirley A. Massey Executive Conference Center] named after me on Morehouse College's campus [Atlanta, Georgia], which I'm the first woman ever to have a building named after her on that campus, and that was done last year. Speaker 2: Congratulations on that because, I mean that, it's a historically black college and university [HBCU], and-- Speaker 1: For men. Speaker 2: --for men and really the only one like that for men. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And, and so, you know, I wanted to ask you this because Walter [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] and you had been at majority institutions, though he had been trained, you know-- Speaker 1: At Morehouse (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at Morehouse, so what was, 'cause there are people that cannot go back. You know like they can't, you know like we interview people who've gone to majority institutions and they try to go back and then they're back in a majority institution, so what, you went back and you made a tremendous, tremendous difference-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: --there. And so what was that, what did you learn about yourself because, you know, blackness was really all around you in many ways, and young black people, you know, so what did you learn out of that experience because what you're also, what you've been saying up to this point is that you're engaging in a largely white world, not that you ever lose your black roots-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Oh, that's a tough one. I felt, well first of all I felt like I was the mother of all these young men, (laughter) and having raised sons that's a nice feeling. And I would speak to every black man, young man, in Atlanta [Georgia] if I was standing somewhere, even if he wasn't dressed because I said you never know if he's a student or he might possibly be a student. Or if I see someone with a young boy I'd say, "Well have you thought about going to Morehouse, and we have this program for you to come in the summer if you need help." I mean I would just talk to strangers, if I'm in a restaurant, you see someone, a mother or something with a young boy, and I would just do that. And I found that I was just a champion for the school, which was a surprise since I had never, ever been in that situation. Does that answer (laughter)? Speaker 2: That does. And did you find anything difficult about it, you know, Atlanta or the, the community? Speaker 1: I, surprisingly, I did not. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean, I was so astounded, you go to the supermarket and you'd be around white and black because the people were always around each other and they would start chatting, and I just, that was so different say from California, of course. And that was different from the way Chicago [Illinois] was segregated. But as Walter always said to me, everybody lived together, there was just those laws that said you couldn't do things together but everyone knew each other and everyone lived around each other. Speaker 2: And what do you think for Walter the significance was? Speaker 1: Oh, I think being able to go back and give back because it had been, had given him so much, that it had given him so much. If he had not gone there at what, fifteen, sixteen, he would not be doing what he's doing today. Speaker 2: That's right. 'Cause he was a young, little baby going in there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was very young, very young. Story_ID: 644984 Speaker 1: So that was the longest appointment that you really had (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. It was. Speaker 1: And so you di- you say you're retiring at that point. Speaker 2: Well what happened about why did we decide to retire from there, two things, we--when you get to a point where you don't feel like going to all the functions anymore. First of all you're getting older and you don't feel like going to all the parties, because we would go to the parties, we'd go by the parties you know you're getting older, and you're tired. And so that was about two years when we'd say I really don't feel like, but we'd have to go and then the capital campaign had, was winding down and we were doing that and so we felt that you don't want to stay past where you aren't giving it your all. You have to give it your all because you don't do well if you don't, and we just, we got tired and it became the same thing over and over again, so it was time to leave [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. So we retired. Speaker 1: You--and so you thought. Speaker 2: So we thought. Story_ID: 644985 Speaker 1: You came back to Chicago [Illinois]. This is-- Speaker 2: Nineteen- 2007. Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007], and now, in the transition had the next president been--'cause it was Franklin [HistoryMaker Robert Franklin], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Franklin. Speaker 1: Okay, so there's no holdover, you move, you move-- Speaker 2: And he came right in. Speaker 1: He came right in, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So you come back to Chicago. Now had you given up, you had sold your place. Speaker 2: We had sold our apartment. We, well we bought another apartment a few years before we came back, a smaller apartment. Speaker 1: In the same building. Speaker 2: Same building. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, okay, so you were smart enough to do-- Speaker 2: Well what happened was I had come out, we had been looking at Chicago, but we'd been looking on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] and Ed Levi [Edward H. Levi] died and I came back to visit with his widow, Kate Levi [Kate Sulzberger Levi], and had the-- Speaker 1: Those were friends that you had met, they lived in the same-- Speaker 2: They lived in the building. Speaker 1: That's, that what--I see. Speaker 2: That's right, that's how we got there. So I came had lunch with her and some other people that lived in the building and I said, "You know we're looking at- on the North Side," and she said, "What do you mean you're looking on the North Side? You belong in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]," (makes sound). I said, "But we don't--." "There's an apartment available, Mrs. Katz [ph.] has died, you're gonna look at that apartment." So I did and we got it. (Laughter) We did. So we had always planned to come back to Chicago because Walter [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] was on the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] board and then was involved in recruiting science, trying to get minority students into graduate programs at U of C so he had an office there and we were involved there. Speaker 1: And then he was also, he became, he joined the Bank of-- Speaker 2: Well he joined the Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation] board when we were in California. Speaker 1: Oh, so, but he became-- Speaker 2: He became chair (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Chair, that's what I was gonna say. He became chair and also he was involved with BP [BP P.L.C.]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So I thought he was retired. I could not, I mean I was thinking Walter's too busy, you know, and he also, I don't know what year he joined the Mellon Foundation board [Andrew W. Mellon Foundation]. Speaker 2: I don't remember either, but he was on that for a while. Speaker 1: So, so, you--so he's actively sort of involved in that, so how is the present situation--and then are you, do you fit into the Chicago community immediately or does it take a little more work (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, we really didn't have much time because I was gonna go spend time at the Cape [Massachusetts]-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --and so but we really didn't have much time. Speaker 1: 'Cause he had said that, that's right. Speaker 2: And then he gets this, this chairman of Bank of America--well, regarding the boards, he, we talked about how our life would be after retirement, so we started boards one here, and not all at once, you know, you gradually so your budget is, your money is budgeted out. And so he had gotten off of the Motorola [Motorola, Inc.], and there was a period where he had to leave the BP at a certain age, and then the Bank of America, we thought they were gonna make these changes and we, I figured he was going to be off when they were gonna make all these changes because there was this big upheaval and my whole thing was, I was watching on the television because I knew that if he was voted off of the board, I'd have to call the accountant right away because that would change our tax estimates that you have to pay. And I was sitting there watching and he called me and said, "I'm on my way to the airport, I can't talk," and the next thing I know, they say on the news they've appointed a new chairman, Walter Massey. What? Speaker 1: That's how you found out? Speaker 2: I found out on the television. And the people saying, "We don't know who this person is. He's some sort of scientist," and then ten minutes later, you know, they had Googled obviously and they said this. And so I didn't get to talk him until he arrived in Chicago. So I didn't know. I'm sitting there saying, what? And we had planned this big trip in November to go on the Queen Mary from London [England] to Southampton [England] to here and I thought we were gonna have to, have to not do those but it turned out all right, we were able to, but he was on the phone all the time, and so he did that. Speaker 1: 'Cause that was, that was during a very critical-- Speaker 2: 'Cause the then head of it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The financial meltdown. Speaker 2: Right, and then the president of the company retired, which wasn't expected, so you had to find a new person. Speaker 1: And that was the president that was identified with Bank of America too. Speaker 2: Right. And then the board had to be changed, and so he spent all of that summer and the fall working on that; and he's very good at that. So. Story_ID: 644986 Speaker 1: Then we retired again (laughter) after that; and he was at a meeting, McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] meeting, and one of the board members said to him, "I want to talk to you about something." And he said, "We have this school, the president here has left. We have a new provost coming in, we don't want to start a search and I know you've been a president, and maybe you could do this temporarily." And so Walter [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] and I talked and I said, "Fine," and it's been fun, it's been a lot of fun. It's totally different, we're with artists and we-- Speaker 2: So talk about the school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The School of the Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] was founded in 1866. We have a Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] connection between the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and Morehouse. The first black president of Morehouse, John Hope, his wife, Lugenia Hope [Lugenia Burns Hope], is a Chicagoan, she graduated from the school in about 1890-something. That came about by one of Walter's classmates when he found out about this, he says, "My grandmother was that." A hundred years later her great-grandson graduated from the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. You know Leah Hope. Speaker 2: Yes, Leah Hope. Speaker 1: This is, this is, Leah's father and Walter were in Morehouse together and that's her great-great-grandmother. Speaker 2: Her great-grandmother was the one who attend-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. I think it's a great-great-- Speaker 2: And she was, say that again, she was the-- Speaker 1: She graduated in 1890-something and she was the wife of John Hope, the first black president of Morehouse. What's been very interesting about being at this school and learning about it is the art world was much more integrated because artists do that and there have been blacks going to that school since its inception, since its inception, and we have a couple of--there's one Morehouse graduate who has a graduate from SAIC, Sanford Biggers who's a big artist in New York [New York], and that's, speaking of a Morehouse man, we had a dinner in New York which he came to and he didn't have a tie. I said, "Sanford." (Laughter) But at any rate, there's been that connection and there's the connection of SAIC and Argonne National Laboratory [Lemont, Illinois], they have science programs and so we have that. But this has been, it's been fun and I'm involved. As I said, they don't call me first lady, they call me co-president because I'm involved, I have a desk, I go to the functions, I meet he students and I just do things. I get involved. Speaker 2: You know what is--so you, you're--as you were saying earlier, Walter's contract now has been extended, right? Speaker 1: Correct. They've asked him--well the other issue is Walter's boss, the chairman of the museum [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and the school is Tom Pritzker [Thomas Pritzker] and I'm very good friends with his mother, Cindy Pritzker, so I knew Tom when I used to call him Tommy when he was a young person. That's Walter's boss and what's been very interesting about this whole thing is all these younger people that we knew, they were very loved, like [HistoryMaker] Linda Johnson Rice who's involved with the museum and all of these things. They're all now running things, John Rogers [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.]. And they are running things and it's so much fun to see this and we're back involved with them. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And this has been very, very nice. So they've asked Walter would he stay until 2016. And, and we have agreed. Story_ID: 644987 Speaker 1: So at this point in your life, what are--where are you at this point in your life? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I'm seventy-one years old and I don't feel it, I'm very happy to be back in Chicago [Illinois]. I haven't really thought about what I would be doing or will be doing when we're not doing this. I don't know, I just don't know, but I like being able to hop on the bus with my senior citizens bus pass, go downtown and Chicago downtown, as you know, is alive now. It's very much alive and there's so many young people with all the schools down there, and it's like that downtown is a little campus. I don't know what I'm going to do or how I'm feeling. I haven't thought about what it's going to be like when we're not doing this. I think we will probably spend more time at the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] because he [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] is involved out there with the science organization and I can be involved in things there. We had bought a little place in Atlanta [Georgia], I don't know that we'll spend that much time there now since he has this job [with the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Right, and you've been, you've become so involved back in the Chicago c- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have become involved back in Chicago. Speaker 1: --in the Chicago-- Story_ID: 644988 Speaker 1: So how has the Chicago [Illinois] community changed for you in, in, in, in ways? I mean 'cause you look at this, this is your home, this is where you were born and you know, and you look into the span you've been in and out of it and so-- Speaker 2: What's amazing to me is that we live all over the city now. First of all when I was here, people lived north, they had never lived south, whereas we were all concentrated on the South Side or the Far West Side, and there was that period where downtown before Michigan Avenue was alive and then Michigan Avenue happened and they made downtown a mall, they closed it off, and then that changed. So downtown is alive again, and that to me is, is just makes me feel good because I came downtown to work every day when I worked for TWA [Trans World Airlines]. In fact, my office was in the building that Walter's [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] in now (laughter). My friends that we were at TWA together we laugh, they said, "He's at 37 South Wabash [Avenue]? That's where we were." I said, "I know." TWA reservations was in that building, and it's like wow, how did this happen (laughter). Of course it didn't look like that. But it's just nice to see the city alive and I like getting on the bus. Do you ever take the bus here? Speaker 1: I haven't taken it-- Speaker 2: Oh, I take the bus all the time. And you just see a cross section of people that ride the bus in the City of Chicago and that is great. I think our transportation system is the best in the country. Speaker 1: Right 'cause you even can know when it's coming, coming (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes. Story_ID: 644989 Speaker 1: So what do you think of your journey? Speaker 2: It's been amazing. When I, I have--when I went to a reunion with some--my high school [Loretto Academy, Chicago, Illinois], they said, "We don't believe this Shirley [HistoryMaker Shirley Anne Massey], here you are you started out like this, you didn't have anything and look at you now." (Laughter) And I said, "I know. It's great." I, I just, it's amazing, and what I say is this could happen to anybody, just don't give up. So things don't work all right, so you get pregnant, you--don't give up, just keep going. Speaker 1: Because it's almost a Cinderella story in some respects. Speaker 2: It is, for me it is (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 644990 Speaker 1: Let's talk, you know, about the--you've seen both the black and white community, and you've seen a lot of change over the years. What are your thoughts about--you know I think today they're having a March on Washington, but anyway what are your thoughts or hopes or concerns about the black community? Speaker 2: Well, I have always said if everybody keeps intermarrying we'll all be one, and I like that. You know there's that period where people didn't want black men to marry white women or black women to marry white men. I said if we do that then we're all gonna be mixed up and there won't be just this, this one over here, that one over there, we're all mixed up, and as you said earlier, we already are mixed up, and I just, I just am always championing that (laughter). Everybody should be mixed up. Story_ID: 644991 Speaker 1: Have you thought about the communities here, you know the-- Speaker 2: The one community that is most troubling, of course, is Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], which was, was a nice community. Speaker 1: When you grew up. Um-hm. Speaker 2: I didn't live over there but it was a nice community. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: That's where my father [William Streeter] lived. Speaker 1: Where your father lived, that's right. Speaker 2: That's where they came. And it was a very stable community. People had homes and I, one of the things I guess happened is when those who were able to move, moved and then the neighborhood just fell apart. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about race relations, because, you know, this, we talked about this, that this, Chicago [Illinois] is still, you know, racially stratified though, you know, people, it's better than it was. Speaker 2: I think it's not so racially stratified and maybe I'm wrong, with younger people, but I don't know that my age group it's still somewhat stratified because they're the old clubs, you know, the old organizations, but I think it's, I think it's, there are many more, the younger people when you go to the North Side areas [Chicago, Illinois], those new town or whatever you call 'em, they're, they're more mixed than, than I think some of our areas. Story_ID: 644992 Speaker 1: And then, Shirley [HistoryMaker Shirley Anne Massey], what would you say to young women nowadays, 'cause, you know-- Speaker 2: (Makes sound) Well, first of all, respect yourself and don't let people take advantage of you, speak up for yourself. If things aren't going right, talk with your girlfriend and say what's, what's happening, and don't stay in, in relationships especially if they don't make you feel better or treat you well. Then it's not worth it. It's just not worth it. And get a job and support your own self. Don't just depend on someone else. Speaker 1: So do you think ladies like you are a thing of the past in some respects? Do you see-- Speaker 2: Probably, but I never classified myself as the quote, housewife, in that I just went along with everything. Some people might look at me that way, but people that know me don't look at me that way, and I never felt that. I mean I didn't feel that I was an appendage; I felt like an equal strata. Story_ID: 644993 Speaker 1: The next to last question: what was the lowest point in your life or in your and Walter's [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] marriage. And what was, what was the highest point? Speaker 2: The lowest point was when it was very difficult to, to, to keep him up and so I was down. He had two or three interviews for presidencies and none of them came through and he went into a deep depression, a really deep depression, and that was hard because then he didn't wanna talk, didn't wanna do anything. We--and, of course, that was about the time that I had menopause so that wasn't helpful either (laughter). That wasn't helpful at all. We came through that with lots of talking to each other and that's something that we have always done. We'd sit down and talk to each other. At dinner, we'd sit down. We did that with the children [Keith Massey and Eric Massey]. We'd sit down at the dinner table and that's when you talk. It's not for television and dinner. The highest point, oh, I would say, you mean in terms of career? Speaker 1: Career or personal. Either, or you can do both. Speaker 2: Well, I think a couple of high points when you have friends that invite you to the Nobel Prize dinner and you're there, and that was, that was a high point, just being there at that in Sweden when our friend got a Nobel Prize and we were the guests, his guests, and I think probably at some point it took a while but finally being at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] became the highest point. It wasn't in the beginning, but it did, because you could see the difference we made. Story_ID: 644994 Speaker 1: And that's, the last question goes to legacy. And I want, I want you to think in terms--I'm going to ask you about your legacy, but I want you to think in terms of, you know, a building [Shirley A. Massey Executive Conference Center] at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] now in your honor when you were the, the, you know the daughter of a woman [Anne Johnson] who had been, you know, who didn't know, I mean she had been black and white and raped--but loving parents though, but when you think of that, how do you think of your legacy and what people say is sort of quintessentially Shirley Massey [HistoryMaker Shirley Anne Massey]. Speaker 2: What I think of me is I like everybody, and most people know that I am friendly and will befriend all peoples, whatever their stature, and I think that really will be what people will remember about me, is that I treat, will treat the janitor at Morehouse the same as I would treat the professor at Morehouse, or the Nobel Prize person I would treat the same as the clerk in the supermarket, which I think that's important. Story_ID: 644995 Speaker 1: And I lied, one more question. That's about you and Walter's [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] marriage. Why has it been successful? Speaker 2: 'Cause you work at it, (laughter) you have to work at it. If you don't, I--and that's what I tell a lot of young married people. If there's something you don't like, or something that annoys you, you have to let each other know. And I'll just add this anecdote, when he first retired and he was home before he did the Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation], I had my routine in the morning and I was accustomed to that and here I have this person now that's interfering with my routine, or going to the supermarket with me and I'm ready to just get out, or not loading the dishwasher right (laughter) and being annoyed, and we had to talk about that. I had to say, you know, I really like to just go by myself, and don't put the dishes in the dishwasher. I'll do it. These are little things but those little things can grow into very big things, and if you don't like something the way it's said to each other then you say, "Why are you speaking that way? Don't say it like that," and that's still constant. We still, you can, it still can happen that you say something and you annoy, you annoy your spouse. You have to say, "That annoys me, okay." Story_ID: 644996 Speaker 1: Okay well thank you very much, your better half. So, okay well we're gonna do photos now. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You forgot to ask her if there's anything she wants (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh is there anything--thank you-- Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: --thank you. Is there anything else you would like to cover that we didn't say or talk about? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't think so. Speaker 1: You had mentioned your father [William Streeter]. I don't know, you said there was a story about him, you were saying--I don't know, maybe it was because you moved him with you. Speaker 2: Oh, my father moved with us to California, to Atlanta [Georgia] and he, I tried to get, after my mother's [Anne Johnson] husband died, she was married for about twenty years to him and twenty years to my father, I tried to get my mother to move into assisted living, she refused, and she fell. And so she had to go into a nursing home and then I was going to try to move her to Atlanta, but I never could do that before she died, whereas my father I moved him with me, then in an assisted living and that and he would go wherever I said to go. And my, one of my friends said, "You have an obedient parent," because if I'd say, "We're moving," he'd say, "Okay, we're moving." But the thing that was really funny, we moved to the dean's--well the president's house at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and he had been living in a dorm room at Morehouse and he would walk up and down and talk to the students. Now he's in, you know, he's in his eighties. So we move to the president's house and he finally says, "How are we gonna afford this? I feel, how am I gonna, I can't help pay for this," because he did give me his, his social security. I said, "You're fine, don't worry." And then I moved him to an assisted living when a place became available that was new because we started traveling and he couldn't be by himself and he was getting older. But he would sit on the porch at the president's house and students would come and talk. And he just loved that and the students loved coming and sitting and talking to my father about times long gone, and then I moved him to an assisted living and he was fine. He moved, we moved the cat with him so he had some company and then he got, he got old. He had to go into a nursing home for about six months 'cause his body got old 'cause he was ninety, ninety, ninety-six. And I got to the hospital and they have a tube down his throat and they have his hands tied down, and his, and I said to the doctor, "Why do you--?" Well first, when he went there at first the doctor said, "How are you feeling," and he says, "I feel with my hands, how do you feel?" (Unclear) And so then they, they--he's having trouble breathing, they put this tube down, they tie his hands and I says to the doctor, I said, "Why do you have his hands tied down?" He said, "Because he's pulling the tube out," and he's trying to tell me he doesn't want the tube. I said, "He doesn't want the tube." He says, "Well if I take the tube out he'll die." I said, "He's ninety-six years old, he doesn't want his hands tied, take the tube out, untie his hands." And I had the two housekeepers from Morehouse because they would go visit my father when we traveled and he said, "I've got my two babes," and he died, that afternoon. And it was like, he was peaceful and I kept thinking if I hadn't been there, and I say to people you really ought to have some rule over medical of your parents and find out what they want. He would have laid there for who knows how long. So that was what I was going to say before about my father. And he just did what I wanted to do and my mother said at some point she should have listened to me, and I said, "Yes, you should have." Speaker 1: You know the thing is Shirley [HistoryMaker Shirley Anne Massey], this is what others say this, you have always been a wonderful gatherer of people and always reaching out to people and that's what I think, you know, in many ways your legacy is and when you talk about your father and that's a wonderful thing, you know, so I just wanna-- Speaker 2: That's right, I just like putting people together that might not be put together. No, you're probably right. Speaker 1: And you've made Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] better too. Speaker 2: I think so. (Laughter) He knows that and we talk about that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no you made him, you made him better, um-hm. So thank you. Story_ID: 644997 Speaker 1: This is me when I graduated from grammar school in 1956 from Holy Cross [Holy Cross School, Chicago, Illinois]. We graduated in caps and gowns. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is my mother [Anne Johnson] holding me as a baby, 1942, on our back porch. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 1: This is me, I think I'm age five. Four, maybe I'm four, four years old. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, got it. Next. Speaker 1: This is me dancing with Ray Charles at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is me dancing with [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy at Morehouse College. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Zhu [Zhu Sun] take your hand of the corner there. Okay that's it. Okay great, next. Speaker 1: Whoops, they're gonna fall. This is when I'm nineteen and I was doing some photography modeling. That's a nice picture (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on one second, Zhu. Okay, we're good. Speaker 1: This was taken in Providence, Rhode Island, where again, that was probably 19--1970, where I was doing photography modeling again. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This was presented to me at Morehouse College when they did my portrait for the college. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This again was taken at Morehouse College, which they used to, the photograph that was taken to do the portrait. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, that one accompanies the previous shot then with the certificate. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Then they create an oil from that. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. So some day when I go to Morehouse next I'll see that hanging there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That, that one, that's, there'll be two, that, there's one in the chapel in the Martin Luther King Chapel [Martin Luther King Jr. International Chapel] and then for the Shirley A. Massey Executive Conference Center, which I forgot to bring that picture. I might, I might have one there somewhere. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The chapel is where they have all the photos, paintings all along the hallway outside the (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's it. That's where that one is. Speaker 2: And this is 1948 where I am playing the bells in the St. Anselm's band [at St. Anselm's School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Zhu, do you remember which one is Ms. Massey [HistoryMaker Shirley Anne Massey]? Speaker 2: I'm over to the right, far right. I'm, that's me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is the graduation photo from high school, 1960. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is my wedding photo to Walter [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey], 1969. Speaker 1: Did you get daddy [William Streeter] up top? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Well, I, I wanna go back and do--that, this is the photo of my daddy and I can't remember the year, but it's in Acapulco [Mexico], but I don't remember the year. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's fine. Speaker 1: And then go back, leave it the way it is and then lift the page up, right and I want the one with daddy and me going down the aisle. This is my father taking me down the aisle when I married. Oh something else I forgot to tell Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson]. Okay, well, forgot. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You can say it now if you like. This is being recorded for video (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. We were married at Bond Chapel [Joseph Bond Chapel] at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and I was married by the dean of the Divinity School because that was somebody that my father used to work for on the side so he arranged for, to be the person to perform the ceremony and arranged for the reception, arranged for the use of Bond Chapel and the reception at the Quadrangle Club at the University of Chicago. Speaker 2: This is, this is Providence, Rhode Island probably about 1974, and we were with friends there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is me with my mother and I can't remember the year. Story_ID: 644998 Speaker 1: This is Walter [Massey's husband, HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] and I at a party at Argonne National Laboratory [Lemont, Illinois]. It was probably a Christmas party and that would be around 1980, '81 [1981]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 1: This is me waiting to board the Orient Express in Venice [Italy] going to London [England]. Speaker 2: This is Walter and I at the Ascot races [Ascot Racecourse, Ascot, England] about six years ago. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is Walter and I in Sweden at the Nobel Prize dinner that our friend who's a physicist received the Nobel Prize in Physics and we were his guests. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That was fun. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I had no idea they had dancing at those. You always imagine this very formal and structured-- Speaker 2: Oh no, it was a party like you--wait, wait, wait. That one. Speaker 1: This is the family with our two dogs, Inca [ph.], the Shepherd[AB1] and Coco [ph.], the Afghan Hound and Kelly [ph.] the cat, and Tiffany [ph.], the other cat. And this is in Chicago [Illinois] in the early '80s [1980s] with our two sons. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is my father [William Streeter] with our oldest son at his graduation from Colorado College [Colorado Springs, Colorado], oh god, let's see, that must have been in 1980, 1981. Speaker 2: This is my father and his sister, Aunt Minnie [Minnie Streeter], who's still alive and loads of fun, and Walter and I. And that was at a dinner for Eric's [Eric Massey] graduation from college. Speaker 1: This is at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant, myself, and the far right, Butch Lewis--oops! And I can't think of who the other man is. Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] would probably know. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is at Morehouse College with Ray Charles when he donated $5 million to us. Speaker 2: This is at Morehouse College with our two sons, Keith [Keith Massey] and Eric and that was in the mid-ninety, about 2000, maybe about 2000, 2007 maybe. No I'm sorry, 2000. Speaker 1: Let's see, they were four, that's twelve, let me see, he's--she's five, so this was seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, seven years ago. This is Walter and I with our grandchildren Eric's children, Artum [ph.] and Eva [Eva Massey] and that is about 2006. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 1: This is the same year with the same event, Candle in the Dark [A Candle in the Dark Gala] with our grandchildren, and then our two sons. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Thank you. Next. Speaker 1: This is at the high school graduation of our oldest son, grandson rather, Kenyon Massey [ph.], at Cape Cod [Massachusetts] where he went to school. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And this is my father, probably about 2000 'cause he died in 2002...