 Story_ID: 487451 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Rosetta Miller-Perry. R-O-S-E-T-T-A, M-I-L-L-E-R, P-E-R-R-Y. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Seven, seven, nineteen thirty-four [July 7, 1934], Coraopolis, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: How do you spell Cor- (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's C-O-R-A-O-P-O-L-I-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a publisher, I'm a journalist. Speaker 1: Okay. You're the publisher of the now? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tennessee Tribune [The Tennessee Tribune]? Speaker 2: Tennessee Tribune. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, wh- what is today's date? Speaker 2: What is today's date? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: March 17--March 18th, 2007 (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Nashville, Tennessee. Oh, Nashville, Tennessee, and you're in my office, The Tennessee Tribune building-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --on historic Jefferson Street. Story_ID: 487452 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. My favorite food is chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite color is red. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is Christmas. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite vacation destination is Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrase is things get better with time. Story_ID: 487453 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Anderson Irvin] side, but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Mary Hall [Mary Hall Irvin]. M-A-R-Y, H-A-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I need my sheet, I can't remember all the dates. Speaker 1: Well, ge- get us close to it. Speaker 2: Oh, it's way back there. Speaker 1: About how old was she when you were born, would you say? Speaker 2: She died in nine--she--oh gosh I can't tell you that. It's on my sheet. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I mean, we'll just skip past it then, and you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The--so, what do you know--and where was she born? Do you know? Speaker 2: She was born in New Orleans, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. What do you know about her side of the family, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: They came out of slavery. Her--her parents came out of slavery. And I know little about them. I never saw my grandfather. And I was very small when my grandmother [Rosie Hall] died. I vaguely remember even what she looks like. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about slavery passed down in your family? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: They just--they just passed down that they know that were from slaves? Speaker 2: They were slaves, yes. Speaker 1: Do they know who they were slaves of? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was your grandmother like? Speaker 2: I remember her being a very tall, stately woman, and I don't remember her talking very much, she was very quiet. My mother was very quiet. So, that might, might just be a trait in the family. Speaker 1: I think, your mother from what I looked at, I guess she must've been born about nine--1900, I guess. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighteen ninety-nine [1899], 1900. Okay. Now, now--did your mother--oh, what did your grandmother do for a living? Did your grandmother raise her by herself or did she, was your grandfather alive--yeah? Speaker 2: No. Grandfather was there also. And they--they raised them together. My grandmother was a maid. My mother was a maid. Speaker 1: What did your grandfather do for a living? Speaker 2: Worked in the cotton fields during that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this would be not in New Orleans itself, but I don't know? Speaker 2: No, by that time they had moved to Hughes, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Oh okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they worked in the cotton fields. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did your--was your mother rai- raised in Hughes? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, is that H-U-G-- Speaker 2: --H-E-S. Story_ID: 487454 Speaker 1: Well did your mother [Mary Hall Irvin] talk about growing up, what it was like growing up in Hughes [Arkansas]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Nothing at all? Speaker 2: Nothing. Speaker 1: And do you think she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, she--she talked about--that's where she met my father [Anderson Irvin]. And you know his family was a little different from her family. Speaker 1: Di- did you get the impression that she liked Hughes, Arkansas? Speaker 2: No she didn't. Because they, they, they married and moved to Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, did she have a chance to go to school in Hughes? Speaker 2: Yes. She, she finished high school. Story_ID: 487455 Speaker 1: Give us your father's first name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Anderson Irvin, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, I-R-V-I-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Early 1900s. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was he born? Speaker 2: New Orleans, Louisiana, but raised in Hughes, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Is, is Hughes close by the, the Louisiana border or something, or? Speaker 2: Pretty close, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there--is there a connection between him being raised in Hughes and your mother [Mary Hall Irvin] being raised in Hughes too? Speaker 2: No. They just met. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: My grandfather [Wilson Irvin] came out of slavery when he was fifteen years old. My grandmother [Ruth Lockart Irvin], my dad's mother, also came out of slavery when she was very young. And it was a large family. And they all, all the boys, there were a lot of boys, they all spell their name different for some reason. One's I-R-V-I-N, one's I-R-V-I-N-E, others are I-R-V-I-N-G, but it's all the same family. I mean, we never understood why. One brother in Arkansas had a store. He was a more prominent brother and had lots of children. And one day he packed all his children up in a carriage and his wife, and went to Missouri and they never heard from him again, so. Speaker 1: And what did--what did the family suspect happened? Speaker 2: I guess he felt superior to the others because they worked, you know, labor, cotton fields. And at that time if you owned a store you were a better class African American or black then the others. Speaker 1: Yeah but you, you'd also have more at stake it seems and, and you'd be doing fairly well to just pull up stakes and leave all of a sudden? Speaker 2: Right, but he did it with all his children, and as I said he had quite a few. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you suspect there's any pressure on him, you know-- Speaker 2: It could've (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) by somebody to leave? Speaker 2: --could've been. He might have been in competition with a white store. You know, you can't tell. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. I wonder because if you have a store you have something at stake to just get up and leave-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --with all your kids, you know. And he went to someplace in Missouri? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But the family doesn't know exactly-- Speaker 2: We don't know where. We have--my daughter [Victoria Miller Deberry] out of New York was in Missouri years ago and was at someone's family reunion and ran across some people that looked--well the young men looked just like my brothers. You know, and she did have correspondence. We were thinking they may have been a descendants, but we didn't follow up on it or she didn't follow up on it. Speaker 1: Okay, so some of them could be Irving with I-N-G, or Irving with an I-N-E (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, E, uh-huh or just I-R-V-I-N. Story_ID: 487456 Speaker 1: Now my dad's first wife was Indian [Native American]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they had one daughter. And then he married my mother [Mary Hall Irvin] because the first wife died. Speaker 2: Do you know what kind of Indian she was? Speaker 1: Sioux. Speaker 2: Sioux? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So, so that was in--that was in Hughes, Arkansas-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --when he, he married her? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 1: No. Everything was very quiet and very--my mother held a lot of things within her. She was just a quiet woman. You really never got to know her real good like you would a mother. She was very religious, but almost like a quiet Muslim. She was Baptist. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, did, did your father [Anderson Irvin] have a chance to go to school? Speaker 1: He finished high school. Speaker 2: Okay. Di- do you know the name of the high school in Hughes that they came out of (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, it probably--it's probably not there. There's not much there now. Story_ID: 487457 Speaker 1: Now, at some point they pack up and move to Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is there--do you know why they would--they, they left, why or--? Speaker 2: Because he [Miller-Perry's father, Anderson Irvin] heard about making a lot of money in the steel mills. So they moved to Coraopolis, Pennsylvania. And he went to work at J and L Steel [Jones and Laughlin Steel Company], and that's where he worked all of his life. And my mother [Mary Hall Irvin] was a maid to a judge. She was a maid and a companion to this judge's wife in our town. Speaker 1: So, wha- what was the name of the judge, do you-- Speaker 2: Judge Dietrich [ph.]. Speaker 1: So as far as being a maid, that's a pretty good job I guess if you were working for the judge? I guess it depends on how the judge paid? Speaker 2: It was a good job, because she basically watched TV with, with her. She was a companion really. And she did some ironing or something like that, but not heavy duty maid work like you would know, today. Speaker 1: Okay, so that made things a little easier? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. But I imagine it kept her away from home a lot, I guess? Speaker 2: She worked during the day. She was there, you know, she was there to have dinner ready for her nine children. She too-, she really took care of us. Story_ID: 487458 Speaker 1: What were your parents' personalities like and who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My dad [Anderson Irvin]. My dad, he talked a lot. He liked to travel. My mother [Mary Hall Irvin] was very religious and very quiet. And she was just a real mother. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Now my father, with all of his children, today you would call him an abusive father, because if you did anything--if the neighbor said you did anything wrong, he didn't ask you, he just started beating you with, with a leather strap that he took a razor blade and you know, sharpened it or whatever they call it. And we were whipped very (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, a razor strap is a thick--pretty thick strap. Speaker 2: Right. But can't do that today, he'd be in jail. He beat us all the time, for anything that we did wrong. But we didn't think it was cruel. We were afraid of him until we became adults. Speaker 1: So you were just kind of used to it after all? Speaker 2: You do. Uh-huh, we did. Speaker 1: Was that--was that unusual for the neighborhood you grew up in? Speaker 2: Unusual? No. A lot of the people in that town [Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] came from the South and I guess they all had the same method of dealing with their children. I know in our town, if there was a fire, the whole town ran to the fire. So, one afternoon there was a fire about three blocks away. So, we had babies on hips, you know, the other--younger siblings, we ran to the fire. Well my dad had a second job, was a few blocks away. He, he knew we would have gone to the fire. So when we came back and opened the door, he started the strap on all of us. I mean, he was beating us. We were up under the beds and everything. And that's the way he dealt with us. And if we would get in a fight, he would put boxing gloves on us and we--boys or girls--he'd make us fight, the real fight. Speaker 1: So that could be unfair to some of you all. I mean, if they have the biggest person. Speaker 2: He didn't care it was unfair. You know, even just fighting the boys, you know, you don't have the same strength. Speaker 1: Yeah, the smallest person would get beat twice in that situation. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. So, I was--that--that part was tough. And then Christmas was tough. Even though I say it's my favorite part of the year. He didn't believe in Christmas. He felt that he worked very hard. He worked two jobs all of his life. And he said--my mother would have toys from the front door to all over the house. And he said he was only working to buy something and it would be all destroyed the next week. And then she's taking the next year to pay for it and then she starts over in this cycle. You know, he couldn't deal with that. My father hated Christmas, you know. So part of that, I like Christmas because when you have children you have to, but I'm--I don't spend a lot of money. You know, I just don't do it. I mean I won't go in debt, so. Speaker 1: Okay, you kind of take after your father in that way. Speaker 2: On that one, yeah. Story_ID: 487459 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: There, there are nine of us. There are five girls and four boys. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he [Miller-Perry's father, Anderson Irvin] had a thing about A's. He named them all--he was Anderson, there's a Anderson, Jr. [Anderson Irvin, Jr.], and an Andrew [Andrew Irvin], and an Anthony [Anthony Irvin], and an Albert [Albert Irvin]. Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess so, I mean all the A's are Anderson Irvin, Albert Irvin-- Speaker 2: Anderson, Albert, Anthony, Andrew. Andrew's a twin. My mother [Mary Hall Irvin] had twins. Story_ID: 487460 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memory I have is our town [Coraopolis, Pennsylvania]--we were located on the Allegheny River and it flooded. And you know where most of us lived, below the tracks near the river. So of course your houses would flood and your basements would flood. And my earliest memory was a boat coming up to the second floor window in the first house we lived in and I think it was a rental house to get us out, to take us, you know, to the uptown part of our city. Story_ID: 487461 Speaker 1: And then, I have--I had an aunt--an Aunt Mildred [ph.], my mother's sister, who did not have any children. And one day she asked my mother [Mary Hall Irvin] could she take me for a weekend. And she kept me three or four years. And she lived in I guess in a riverboat, I think it's what you would call it, she and my Uncle Jim [ph.]. And we were right on the river. And I remember never being able to play or have any friends or anything. She just kept me dressed like a little doll all the time. And then, my parents liv-- Speaker 2: That was--wait a minute now, let's go back to that a little bit. Tha- that must've been a stra- how, how old were you when that happened? Speaker 1: I was under--I wasn't even school age. I had to be three, four. Speaker 2: So your aunt just borrowed you for three or four years? Speaker 1: And my mother didn't--well she could've tried to get me back, but I don't know whether she ever did or not, but-- Speaker 2: Did she--did you see your mother from time to time as you got older? Speaker 1: She kept me away. I didn't see anybody. I didn't even remem- I didn't even remember I had brothers and sisters. So one day she took me--my parents then had moved over a grocery store that some Italians owned, the Sardellos [ph.]. And she took me there. And I saw all these kids running around having fun. The twins, Joann [Joann Irvin] and Andrew [Andrew Irvin], were swinging on a refrigerator door and the refrigerator pulled over and my mother ran and grabbed it 'cause it probably would've done something to them. And that was so much fun that I wouldn't go back with her. And that's how (laughter) I got back with my family. I mean, it killed her they tell me, but I just remember I wouldn't go back 'cause I found out that was my family. Speaker 2: Okay. And she wouldn't let you play, she would just dress you up? Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Just dress me up on that little boat and I didn't, you know. Never took me to church or nothing. She just--I must've been her doll. She never had children. She wanted children so bad, you know, so. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So, so wha- how old were you when you got back with your mother? Speaker 1: About five or six, I might've (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --been six 'cause I was getting ready for school. Story_ID: 487462 Speaker 1: Now, when you were growing up what did you like do--what were the things that you liked to do? Speaker 2: Oh, used to play kickball, kick the can, ride a bike, things like that, when I was younger. And then when I was older, I spent a lot of time with my dad [Anderson Irvin] and his brother, my Uncle Joe [ph.]. You know, I remember just walking with them. I--I always ended up being the favorite niece for some reason. And when, I guess I was seventeen, eighteen, I learned how to fish, used to fish. You know, things like that. And went to parties. That was very embarrassing because my dad worked at night, one of the, the main job at the steel mill. And he always said at ten o'clock you all have to be in the house. And of course you're having fun at ten o'clock, it's just beginning. And then I remember ther- there was an Elks club and they had the teenage parties upstairs. All at once all the lights would come on and they'll say, "The Irvin children," (laughter) and that became the standard joke in the town [Coraopolis, Pennsylvania], when the lights would flip everybody would say the Irvin children and he would make us go home. But, the other thing, you know, a lot of church activities, the choir and things like that. And you know, the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)]. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Oh the Y too. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. They--we used to go to the Y dances, you know. But the town was white, a few blacks. So, it wasn't a comfortable feeling, but-- Speaker 1: Were those dances i- integrated? Speaker 2: They were integrated, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So, now, now did you have a radio growing up? Speaker 2: Radio? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, TV too. We had one of the first televisions in to--town, a little small screen, you know. 'Cause I remember it was Joe Louis or somebody fighting and it seem like half the town was there trying to get in the house to look at this little screen, you know. Speaker 1: And Joe Louis and Rocky Marciano fight in the early '50s [1950s] I think. Yeah, he was too old to fight him. He lost, I think, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I used to listen to basketball games with my dad, 'cause he, he liked that. You know, I was kind of tomboyish, you know, he liked that. Story_ID: 487463 Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school? Speaker 2: Right there in--where? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean I want the name of the school? Speaker 2: Coraopolis, C-O-R-A-O-P-O-L-I-S. Speaker 1: Was it just one elementary school there in Coraopolis [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Wait a minute, let me back up. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: The elementary school was McKinley Elementary School [Coraopolis, Pennsylvania]. And then I went to Coraopolis Junior High School [Coraopolis, Pennsylvania], and then Coraopolis Senior High School [sic. Coraopolis High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania], that's where I graduated from. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Ho- how did you like school? Speaker 2: Oh I loved it. It, it was--it was good. The teachers were good, you know. Really never knew much about discrimination in school. But the experiences out of school, like all of my--our girlfriends, there were two or three blacks and the others were all white. We, we slept at each other's houses, everything. The moment you graduate, they don't speak to you anymore. I mean, it was--that was a shock to me that I couldn't get over. Like one girlfriend, Mary Jane Schmetzer, I'll never forget. She just lived in the same block, she was always at our house and I was always at her house. We stayed with each other. Would never speak. They speak now when I go to the reunion. They wouldn't speak. And I didn't understand that. I mean that was a shock, you know. Story_ID: 487464 Speaker 1: And the other thing is, when the like the five and ten cent store and so forth started hiring young peo- you know, they're hiring cash register, they would never hire us. So my experience was working for fifty cent a night washing dishes for a Wickenheiser [ph.] family and I was in school. My classmate was the daughter, Susan [Susan Wickenheiser (ph.)]. And my--I had a horrible experience because when they would, you know, I had to set the table and I did the dishes basically and all that. And then if they wanted butter, they would ring this bell. So I'd have to take the butter. And then they ring another bell and I go to the door and--, "Would you please bring two slices of bread and all that." And when I go back to the reunions, I tell them that was the most humiliating experience. And I tell them I felt like a slave. It was a horrible feeling. And this is--and, and the daughter was my classmate and she's sitting at the table, you know, but. Speaker 2: How, how did you get that job, I mean, well, how, how was it arranged? Did they--did they ask you to do it or? Speaker 1: Well there were five--no, there were five houses in a row and four of my girlfriends and myself, one girlfriend went and got a job, fifty cent a night. So I guess the next house was the Wickenheiser's, so they wanted someone to do their dishes. So then she told me and you know, how that goes. So there were five of us. We all got fifty cent a night go wash them dishes. Just five days a week, we didn't work on the weekend. Speaker 2: So these are the black girls that got those jobs, fifty cent? All right, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, we were all black. So, but it's just something ju- that I'll never get over, I'll die with that. You know, I felt like a slave, it was just awful. But the other thing is, when I left, I took the bell. And I used to have it. I--one of my kids must have it. But, it was just awful. Speaker 2: You took the bell with you, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I took that bell with me (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 487465 Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in--in the grade school [McKinley Elementary School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] in the early days? Speaker 2: Ooh, I can't remember that. You know, in high school [Coraopolis High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] it was chemistry. Speaker 1: Okay. Well that's, you know, chemistry is-- Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's exciting, I mean, you know. It was--it was good for me. Speaker 1: Yeah, a chemistry major is--gets set above the rest, because most people don't get the math to be able to do it-- Speaker 2: Right, right. That's true (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to be a chemist. So, so you were a good student I take it? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in high school? Speaker 2: Mrs. Stone-Sepher [ph.], she's dead now. And then when I was growing up, you know, our teachers couldn't marry, they had to be single. You know, so some of those teachers never married. And I remember one teacher, I can't remember her name, she did get married, they fired her. Speaker 1: And that's a strange rule I think. They, they were still enforcing that in that town. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because they didn't even hire black teachers in that town. There were no black teachers 'til way after I left, you know. Speaker 1: About how many, what was the percentage of black people in town would you say, or in school? Speaker 2: Oh, in school or the town? Speaker 1: Well school wou- would be representative of the town probably more than likely. Speaker 2: I think less than 1 percent. We had about maybe five to seven in our class, but normally it's one a class. We had the largest class ever. I mean, it's different now, but we had the largest class. Story_ID: 487466 Speaker 1: A horrible memory for me is when, I think it was World War II [WWII], and all the--all of the young men in our town [Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] that--that was--I think they were drafted. They were on the train. And I can still see when the train pulled off, all of these mothers, most of them were Italians, that--our town has Italians, Russians, Polish people, all that, running after the train and that's embedded in my memory. You know, just running after their sons, you know. And I'm sure there were some African Americans on the train, but I can't remember that part. I just see these folks running, but. Story_ID: 487467 Speaker 1: Well, I didn't ask you this, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh wow. I, I guess smells would be in my house, my mother [Mary Hall Irvin] baking the breads that we would have on Sunday or the rest of the week. You know, the big loaves and all that she could--she could do all of that. Speaker 1: She'd bake your own bread. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. She, she was a wonderful cook. Speaker 1: You know, my mother, she did feed the pastor, like almost every Sunday. Now, my dad [Anderson Irvin] resented that. He hated it with a passion. But Reverend Wilson [ph.] would come, and. Speaker 2: Di- did he have a healthy appetite? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah. He just didn't like that. You know, and he had a wife, I mean, you know, they, they were nice people. But he liked mama's food, so you know. Just one of those things. Speaker 2: Now, did the children resent the pastor coming over to eat on Sunday? Speaker 1: Well, we resented it because we couldn't eat until they left. You know, it was horrible, you know. Story_ID: 487468 Speaker 1: The other thing is that like at dinner, my dad [Anderson Irvin] liked to drink. And when I became an adult and I would come home, you know, I'd bring him something to drink. So we--we always had the big dinners and my mother [Mary Hall Irvin] had beautiful china and everything. And so, one time we had, you know, the tea. So I fixed my dad a drink and put it in the tea thing, not even thinking. And we sat down and they blessed the table, everything. And my mother looked up and said, "Now Rose [HistoryMaker Rosetta Miller-Perry] get that alcohol off my table, get it off my table" (laughter). Because I looked and the color was different (laughter) from the rest of the tea, she knew, you know. But he, he drank a lot. He wasn't an alcoholic, but he drank a lot. Speaker 2: Okay, right. So he worked long hours, I take it, with two jobs and-- Speaker 1: Oh two jobs. But the, the second job at a hardwares up the street, he didn't do much. They just love, you know, how wh- sometimes when white people fall in love with people, they just keep them around, and they really loved him. Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. So it's like a hangout, the second job in some ways. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause, you know, I told him, how could you just get off from work and then go up to the hardwares. I said when do you sleep? He said I sleep up there (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, though, did he have a tough job at the steel mill? Speaker 1: Oh yeah. I think it was very tough. And I think it was tragic also because every now and then somebody would get killed and he would tell us that they fell in that steel down in there and you know, and, and that was tough loss of people like that. Speaker 2: That's--I believe that's the second story like that we've heard this week. Speaker 1: Oh really. Speaker 2: There--someone else told of their father seeing a man fall into, a Mexican fall into a vat of molten steel and he quit that day, he walked away. Speaker 1: Well, he stayed on, retired. But you know, with us, when he'd go to work that's what you think about, is he coming back. You know, so it wasn't a good feeling, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't unusual to hear about somebody getting hurt, you know, killed (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh no. There were always black guys. And when I think of things today, now I'm wondering if somebody pushed them in (laughter), you know. Speaker 2: How was the--you have any idea of what the union situation was for him? Speaker 1: They, they had a strong union. 'Cause I remember them going out on strike and everything, and several times. They had a real strong union. Story_ID: 487469 Speaker 1: You said your favorite in school [Coraopolis High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] was chemistry? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: But because you are now a pub- publisher, I have to ask you, you know, were you, were you writing at all--were you concerned about--did you read a lot of newspapers in those days or did you? Speaker 2: Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, the Pittsburgh Courier was the reason that I said down the road--I, I had a lot of aspirations and goals, and I knew down the road I wanted to do something, you know, for a black newspaper. You know, like write if I could. But I also wanted to be a mortician. Don't ask me why, but I did. And-- Speaker 1: Was there a black mortician in town? Speaker 2: No. Still isn't one. We, we have--well, then we had two funeral homes. Only one would bury black people. The other one, never, and they still don't. But the other one makes all the money. The closest black mortician was in Aliquippa, Pennsylvania. And, and of course you don't want your body way down there when you, in our town you just walk up the street to, you know, a wake or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you know any--did you know the mortician or? Speaker 2: I knew the one in, in Aliquippa. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So, I just wanted to be a mortician. And I wanted to be a lawyer. You know how it is. You, you have all these dreams, you know. Speaker 1: These are different things that you thought about you know? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Thought about teaching. Speaker 1: These are all professions, you know. So you were thinking about more than just getting a job somewhere, right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I wanted a profession. Story_ID: 487470 Speaker 1: You got the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier], did you get any of the other black pap- papers? Speaker 2: Not until I, you know, moved south when I was--oh you mean to read. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. No. I only knew about the Pittsburgh Courier. Speaker 1: Did your family keep up with the news? Speaker 2: Oh yes, uh-huh, definitely. Speaker 1: Now I imagine because your mother [Mary Hall Irvin] worked for a judge. She, she probably knew of some things going on in town [Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] or some of the news that other people didn't know? Speaker 2: Well she did. But he was a Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Pennsylvania] judge, and he worked in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. And she did. But it--and I'm sure she did, but she wouldn't discuss it with us, you know. So, but other than that we, you know, we had a little paper in our town. Couldn't get a job there either. You know, Coraopolis Record [The Coraopolis Record], it's still there. Story_ID: 487471 Speaker 1: All right, so, when you were a senior in high school [Coraopolis High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania], now were you--were you an honor student in high school? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. Speaker 1: But you're a pretty good student apparently (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, above average, yeah. Speaker 1: Were you a member of any high school clubs or organizations or activities or school special? Speaker 2: Not really. I was--in the community I was a member of an organization with the same five females I told you worked in the houses. We organized because somehow we thought we were better than other black folks, okay. So we organized a club called the Socialites [ph.]. We (laughter) had gray silk jackets with the Socialites (gesture) up here and our name underneath. I look back now and it's kind of sickening I guess. But somehow, we felt we were better than the other black kids. For what reason I don't know. I mean, all of us lived average, we weren't poor. But we were no better than the other kids who lived like us, but. Speaker 1: But you wanted to be a--I don't know, if you think about it, is that really bad to want to be--I mean--I mean, if it's just so you can be better than somebody else, but if it's to make yourself better that might be not so--that might not be so bad. To, you know, see something better and to-- Speaker 2: But, you know, call yourself the Socialites in Coraopolis, Pennsylvania. But you know where I got it from, Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]. You see, what would I know about a socialite. They had those social pictures, and you know. Speaker 1: That's right, they do have a social page, show who's in the Links club [The Links, Incorporated], NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I said when I grew up I wanted to belong to all these different things. And believe it or not, I belong to them. Not even thinking about when I'm going into the organization that that was on my mind years ago. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And you know, but they--they're organizations that have something to do with striving, you know, for-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, independence and power, and education, all those kinds of things. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 487472 Speaker 1: Were you very involved in church as a youth (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I used to play the organ for the church. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a mu- musician too? Speaker 2: Yeah I play, yes. Speaker 1: So did you take piano lessons when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I took piano lessons. At that time, you know, they have a little German lady that would go from house to house, and I think she got fifty cent. That--that's the thing, fifty cents for everything. She would come. We had this upright piano. Speaker 1: And you got good enough to play for the church? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how old were you when you started playing? Speaker 2: Oh, probably sixteen. Speaker 1: Okay. That's pretty-- Speaker 2: I had to be sixteen 'cause I know with that organ my, my, my legs were short, you know, trying to reach, hit those pedals. Speaker 1: What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: Mount Olive Baptist Church [Coraopolis, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a favorite church song? Speaker 2: 'Jesus, Keep Me Near the Cross.' Speaker 1: Okay. So was--did the church afford, I--you know, I guess opportunities for youth to be, you know, recognized and nurtured, and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, they did. We had youth programs and you know, quite a few activities for young people. Story_ID: 487473 Speaker 1: So, when you were a senior then in high school [Coraopolis High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania], what were your prospects in terms, did you think you were gonna go to college or--? Speaker 2: I knew I was going to college. I applied to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. I was accepted at Howard. I worked in Lebanon Hills [sic. Mount Lebanon, Pennsylvania]. I stayed on the job taking care of a child who had cerebral palsy, and they paid me well and so forth. And you know, prior to that time when I was in school, I was getting that fifty cent a week. And so I was accepted at Howard. And--and I was encouraged by our family doctor, Dr. Crampton [Harrison Crampton], 'cause he graduated from Howard. My mother [Mary Hall Irvin] brought me a trunk to put all my clothes in, you know those trunks they used to take to college, I don't know what they take now. And the day before I was to leave for Howard University, and--and I ha- gave my mother all the money that I made. You know, I didn't open up a bank account or anything like that. She, she had it all to keep for me. And the day before I was to go to Howard University, my mother told me she had spent the money that I could not go. So, that was another shocking thing in my life. I mean, it just killed me, you know. 'Cause everybody in town knew I was going to Howard, the church had announced it, they had given me a check. I was embarrassed. Speaker 1: So she--did she have an explanation for what she spent it on? She just-- Speaker 2: Oh, the house I know. My mother had a thing about every, every year she got a new living room suits. She would trade it in, and we weren't even allowed in the living room, she kept it covered with sheets. She would trade it in, the guy would take it and then she'd start all over again. I mean, she spent twenty, thirty years buying living room suits. You know, one would have a high-back chair and then this--next year it would be low and all that, you know. Course that stuck with me all those years. And I, when I would go home, I would be so angry at the man, the guy who owned it, Mr. Starling. And one time I went up there, I said, "You, you ripped my mother off all these years." The furniture was new, she kept it covered. So what he did was sell it to somebody else and made their money over, triple, you know. So, that--that's another thing. She just had a thing about a living room suit. So, part of that money probably went there, I'm sure, on her bill. So I left, I went--I went to Chicago [Illinois]. I never lived home after that. Speaker 1: Now, well, so that--that created a pretty--I mean, did that create a rift between you and your mother? Speaker 2: Oh no, unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay, but you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I just thought she did what she did and I, I had to get on with my life. Story_ID: 487474 Speaker 1: So I went to Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: So, why Chicago, now how did you--who--did you know somebody (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I had a sister, my older sister [Marion Irvin] lived there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I went there. And that wasn't a good experience. When I went there I thought I was gonna stay with her. She was married. But she was living in this building where everybody shares a bathroom and everybody shares a kitchen. Now you know I came from a one-family home with grass, so this was a nightmare to me. And then, she gets me a room, like a bedroom. And it was frightening for me 'cause I--I mean, I was protected and then I come there suddenly, you know, and you can't sleep 'cause you don't know if somebody's gonna be banging on your door or--it was a nightmare, I--you know. So, finally I, I was going to a church and the pastor and his wife took me in. So I stayed with them. And I got a job at Spiegels [sic. Spiegel Inc.]. Speaker 2: Now, now what year is that--that you graduated from high school [Coraopolis High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] what year? Speaker 1: Well if you ask me these years I'll die (laughter). Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I graduated from high school in 1952. So it was '52 [1952]. Speaker 2: Okay, 1952, okay. Speaker 1: And then, I worked at Spiegels and I went to--there's a college called Hertzl or Herzl Junior College [Theodore Herzl Junior College; Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois]. They say it's not there now, but it was a junior college. So I went. I still tried to keep my education going. Speaker 2: Named for Theodore Herzl, the-- Speaker 1: Herzl. Speaker 2: Yeah, I suppose. Speaker 1: Is it still there? Speaker 2: No, there's a Herzl High School [Herzl School of Excellence] down in Chicago. Speaker 1: No, this was a junior college, yeah. Speaker 2: I mean it's--well a grade school in Theodore Herzl on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah, West Side. Speaker 2: Okay, and a Jewish community on the West Side. Herzl is considered one of the followers of Zionism, and you know. He had de- had designs to go to Uganda, believe it or not to something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Really. Yeah. Well I went there and you know, to keep trying to keep my education going, you know. So, I stayed there, I guess I stayed in Chicago five or six years. Let me get my dates right. Okay, before I came south when I--I joined the [U.S.] Navy, that's what happened. Story_ID: 487475 Speaker 1: So you stayed in Chicago [Illinois], how long (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just a couple years. And then I went into the [U.S.] Navy. Speaker 1: Now did you--were you stationed out of Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois] in Chicago or--? Speaker 2: No, I--I went into the Navy and I was at Quarters K in Virginia [Arlington, Virginia]. And I worked in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay, now that's something. Now, how did--how did this happen? Now you joined--why did you join the Navy fir- first of all? Speaker 2: I joined the Navy just so I could get educated 'cause then they were paying that G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944]. I was trying to figure out anyway that I could get my education. So that's why I did it. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were stationed first at this place called Porter's Bay? Speaker 2: No, Quarters K. Speaker 1: Quarters K? Okay, I got that, okay. Speaker 2: In Virginia. Speaker 1: Quarters K, Virginia, okay. Speaker 2: And I worked in the Pentagon. I was assigned to the Pentagon, in clerical (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Now, what kind of a--okay, so you, you developed clerical skills, okay? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Yeah, I worked for an admiral, Admiral Bush [ph.]. So I remember his name. And it--and it was good experience. Speaker 1: So you worked for A- Admiral Bush at the Pentagon? Speaker 2: At the Pentagon, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. What was that like, you know, going to the Pentagon? Speaker 2: You know, at first it was so huge, frightening, but then you just adjust, you know. I didn't particularly like working in that department. I felt--I always felt he didn't want a black person I that department. He was nice, but distant. So you know, you can get the feeling. But I mean, he was nice to me, but. Speaker 1: Now, you must've been a good secretary, a good type- typist-- Speaker 2: I--I probably was. Speaker 1: Now, how many words did you type a minute then? Speaker 2: Ninety. Because once in Chicago, I went to Cortez Peters [Cortez W. Peters Business College, Chicago, Illinois] I can't remember all that. Speaker 1: Right, right. Cortez typing school, Cortez Peters. Speaker 2: They--to work at Spiegels [Spiegel Inc.] they had to find out your typing speed and all that. Ninety words, he couldn't believe it. 'Cause he said he was the fastest in the world or something like that, you know. Speaker 1: So, yeah. 'Cause they weren't--there was no affirmative action then or anything. So if you, you had a job at the Pentagon, you must've been-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --I guess you'd be pretty good. Were there many other blacks in the? Speaker 2: Not many, unh-uh, unh-uh, no. So that was a good experience. The Navy was good with one exception, they make you swim. And I remember the lady, I guess my boss or one of the chief said, you've got to swim. 'Cause you can't get out of training unless you swim. And she threw me in the pool and as I was going down, I came up and I said, black people can't swim, they can't swim. And she had a long stick and she pushed me down again. But I got across the pool. So I, you know, I got to graduate, 'cause they wouldn't graduate you unless you could swim. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter) so. You, you actually believed that black people couldn't swim or? Speaker 2: Yeah I did. I was always told that. 'Cause we lost a lot of black kids, right down the street from where I lived in that river [Ohio River]. They used to go down there and try to--but there was something down there would suck them under, I don't know what that thing was. Speaker 1: Undertow they call it. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: The different whirlpools and undertow in, in rivers, 'cause it goes over rocks and debris and create--creates these little vortexes and so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, we always thought black folks couldn't swim 'cause they drowned down there all the time, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so. I mean, was, was--now this is like in the early '50s [1950s], how, how was--how were you treated in the Navy, you know, pretty much? Speaker 2: It was--it was nice. I didn't really have any problems. The only thing I didn't like, when I--when I was getting out, I wanted to go into the Reserves [U.S. Navy Reserve], of course and that wasn't racial, you just couldn't, not a woman. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, how, how long did you stay at the Pentagon? Speaker 2: I stayed in the Navy a year, five months and seven days. That's embedded on my brain, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: So, so most of that time was in the Pentagon. You know, after the training. Story_ID: 487476 Speaker 1: Where'd you go, must be 1955 now, I guess when you--? Speaker 2: I got a husband. Speaker 1: Oh okay, now how did you meet your husband? Speaker 2: Where did I meet that man? I'll tell you. I should remember. Some things I don't wanna remember about it. I met him--I had to meet him at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] 'cause he worked there also. He was in the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So-- Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: Well how long did it la- I mean, did, did it, I mean was it a successful marriage or did? Speaker 2: Well, we were married twenty-one years. It was kind of successful. But he stayed in the service, you know, and basically I raised the children. And as you move up the ladder you're saying why do I need this, you know. I'd see him every two years or something, I just got tired of it. Speaker 1: Really, that--that seldom, every-- Speaker 2: Well, he went to Korea, he stayed over there. He's, he's been all over the world. So, nice guy, but he wanted to be out there, so let him be out there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you couldn't persuade him to, to quit or anything or, you know? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. Story_ID: 487477 Speaker 1: So my children are descendants from his [Miller-Perry's ex-husband] side. They're out of Virginia. His father's father--grandfather, Charlie's [ph.] father was white. All these folks, white and black. They liked plantation life, okay, they were all up there together. You know, he had the white brothers. They're all buried together out there in Barren Springs, Virginia. And, and the mother, she was really the maid. So he was having children by his white wife and then children by the maid. And, and they all knew about it and the kids all played together and all that. That's, that's what that is, that picture over there. That's the descendants there, and that's my husband and me and our children. Speaker 2: Okay. Barren Springs, Virginia, okay. All right. So that's--and we've heard other stories, similar stories like this but (unclear). This is a--so he had a white family too and an alternative family with the maid at the same--okay, all right. Speaker 1: Right, yeah. And they all when they die they get buried in the family cemetery. And their house was like fabulous, the one he had for the maid, I mean they just lived different. A big white house, a big farm up on the hill, it's gorgeous, you know. Speaker 2: So, he took care of his black family too, just like the other one? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And they had the white family, they, they wrote a book. I don't have a copy of it, but they wrote a book and they're all in it, the black family and the white family. I mean, its--they're all accepted. Speaker 2: Okay, is that--that's not the book, 'Slaves in the Family' by Edward Ball is it? Speaker 1: No, unh-uh. No, no. Speaker 2: Do you know the name of it? Speaker 1: Don't know it. I can get it from my former sister-in-law. Yeah, yeah. 'Cause I, you know, was kind of out of the family, so. Speaker 2: Does that seem strange to you that whole set up? Speaker 1: Yeah, I couldn't quite get it together, you know. But over the years as I would read, then I could understand, you know. But he was very prominent and very wealthy, so they did what they wanted to do. You know, and people just accepted it. Speaker 2: Okay, what was his family name? Speaker 1: I don't know that either. Oh, why ge- oh you meant my-- Speaker 2: Yeah, your ex-husband-- Speaker 1: Miller. Speaker 2: Miller, okay. Speaker 1: That's the Miller part, uh-huh. Speaker 2: All right, okay. There's a book about them you say? Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 487478 Speaker 1: So what did you do when you got out of--well you raised--you got married, raising children, did you have to work during this period of time? Speaker 2: I always worked, yeah. You know, I just went on in government then. Worked for the adjutant general's office. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what is the adjutant general, wh- what do they do? Speaker 2: That's the [U.S.] Army. And then after that, my husband went overseas to Germany. So I went to Germany, stayed over there a while. And the German women sent me packing (laughter). Speaker 1: The German women did? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Well, they like black guys. So I, I, you know, it was just too much, because I didn't work over there. So that meant I spent all this time with the kids, I was always alone. So, I just said I was--that's where, you know, I decided I am really gonna get a degree. And I came back to the states. Dropped the children off with my mother-in-law and went on to college. Speaker 1: Now, what year is this? Speaker 2: Oh, 19-- Speaker 1: So we're approaching 19-- Speaker 2: Well is should've been about '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958], okay. Speaker 2: And I started at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] in '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: Now why Tennessee State, now--why did you come back to Tennessee? Speaker 2: Because when I checked all the different schools, it was the cheapest school I could go to. So that was a matter of finance. 'Cause it hardly cost anything and, and you would pay by the quarter. Speaker 1: Now did you have relatives (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so I had the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944]. Speaker 1: Okay, you had the G.I. Bill. Did you have relatives in, in Nashville [Tennessee]? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. No relatives. I stayed on campus. Story_ID: 487479 Speaker 1: So, Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] 1958, I guess, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, so what was your major at Tennessee State? Speaker 2: Chemistry. Speaker 1: Chemistry, okay. Speaker 2: Gonna be a chemist then. Speaker 1: All right. Okay, so, now this is a time when Nashville [Tennessee] is going through some political change--changes here, but were you a part of any of the-- Speaker 2: You mean the movement? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The movement really kind of started some of the--it hadn't reached full bloom yet, but it was starting, you know, with that. Nashville was dynamic in that there's so many forces here, you know, James Lawson and, you know, was a--the attorney Avis Williams. Speaker 2: No, Avon Williams (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Avon, Avon Williams, yeah, yeah. So just tell us what was going on? Speaker 2: Well, I went to Tennessee State and then I decided to go on to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] to nurses training. Speaker 1: So you graduated from Tennessee State? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, one year. And I, I went long enough to pledge a sorority, so I got that one thing under by bet- belt. I went to Meharry to nurses training and I--I stayed there a year. But while I was there, one morning I was kind of thrown out of the bed because the KKK [Ku Klux Klan] had bombed Z Al- Z. Alexander Looby's house, the attorney. 'Cause it's right there by, you know, the hospital. That's when they tried to kill him because he was defending some of the civil rights folks. And so-- Speaker 1: So, so you actually felt the percussion from that blast in bed? Speaker 2: And so, you know, after that I was just part of the movement, marching, doing all those things. And-- Speaker 1: Now, instead of--some pe- people would've, you know, gone in the opposite direction. They would've say I'm afraid now, 'cause I'm just--I was so close to a blast. Speaker 2: Oh no, I, I was angry, yeah, very angry. So then I decided after that-- Speaker 1: So, well, so what--I just wanna explore the details of this. Did you--did you go to a meeting of, of an organization? Speaker 2: No, we've had meetings. The church I belong to now, First Baptist Church, Capitol Hill [Nashville Tennessee], Reverend Kelly Miller Smith was the pastor and he was part of the movement, one of the leaders with James Lawson. And that was--that's where we used to meet all the time. You know, to organize. And Meharry was very involved, all the medical students, dental students, nurses, and everything. Speaker 1: Okay, First Baptist, Capitol Hill. Now that's--now is Capitol Hill right, right on Jefferson Street too? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. It's not far, it's right below the capitol [Tennessee State Capitol, Nashville, Tennessee]. It's on James Robertson Parkway, yeah. Speaker 1: So you were--what--did you have an organization that had a name? Speaker 2: It was--it was really run out of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] office. Called DCPI [ph.] or something. These were--these were all adults and that was a very strong organization for the movement, and they had like--my husba- my current husband [Ludwald Orren Pettipher Perry] was part of it. And some of the other doctors and a Curley McGruder with the NAACP, they planned everything 'cause we were just students. They were the leaders, and of course Kelly Miller Smith and James Lawson. Speaker 1: The Reverend Kelly Miller Smith. Right, named after Kelly Miller I suppose? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Named after the famous Kelly Miller, Kelly Miller Smith? Okay. Okay, so, so the organization--so you got involved in the org- well, what was your roll? Speaker 2: Just marching and protesting, you know, going to the mass meetings and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay. So you didn't do any clerical things for the organization or anything like that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh. Unh-uh. Speaker 1: So wha-- Speaker 2: And then soon after that, the nursing school closed. Story_ID: 487480 Speaker 1: Just, back to the movement, some of the details of this. I mean, did you have--what would a meeting be like? I mean, what would--what would, would take place at a meeting? Speaker 2: Speeches and psyching up the crowd and you know, just talking about what went on. You know, we couldn't eat at the downtown counters and we couldn't go in a store and try on a dress or try on shoes. And in the middle class black neighborhoods they would send them out to--the clothes and things out to your house, and you can try and buy what you wanted, but you couldn't go downtown. So, it was all about things like that. Speaker 1: Okay. That was probably, I guess, on the--on the sly, I guess if they would send the clothes to your house. If white folks knew or thought that black folks were trying on the clothes in that atmosphere that probably would've been-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they didn't know, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, but the--so, the merchants of the City of Nashville [Tennessee]--well do you suspect that the merchants of the City of Nashville really liked segregation or--? Speaker 2: No, they liked money. That was--they wanted the money, 'cause they never would've sent those clothes up. They nee- black folks spend a lot of money, still do, you know. Speaker 1: So, segregation kind of worked counter to the interest of merchants on some level? Speaker 2: Yeah, it hurt them. Speaker 1: But they--it was probably difficult to get out of I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, they had to go with, you know, the crowd or the chur- the white churches, and you know, the white mayor. Story_ID: 487481 Speaker 1: Okay, so they would give you at me- at the meeting they'd give you information, some exhortation, get you excited. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And-- Speaker 1: What kind of instruction would you get? 'Cause I know they couldn't let you just go into a place (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they would say we're gonna march downtown Monday. Tell you where to be, what time, what to wear. We're not fighting anybody, it's a peaceful march. You can carry your signs. That type of thing. You know, and they would lead the march. Speaker 1: Now, would they tell you what to do in case say somebody in the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] threw a, a rock at you or something? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they'd just say don't, don't--they would always say don't fight back. You know, the police wanna put you in the paddy wagon. Sit down, they can carry you to the paddy wagon, you know, make that part difficult for the police. So, they just gave us good instructions. Always do it peaceful, you know, that was always the instruction. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you have any intense nonviolent direct action training where they would--? Speaker 2: No, I never had any, no. Speaker 1: You know, you see the films of people sitting on a lunch counter and somebody's pouring tomato ketchup on their head? Speaker 2: But they had training. See, I didn't go that far. 'Cause I know me. If they put the ketchup on me, I've got to fight (laughter), you know, so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so would I be right to assume that certain people were trained to do those--you say everybody on a stool was somebody that had intense training about how to handle it? Speaker 2: I, I believe so. Right. 'Cause that's a difficult thing when someone's attacking you not to attack back, you know. So, I didn't have that type of training. Speaker 1: It'd prob- probably take a lot of training and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --mediation to be able to-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, definitely. Speaker 1: --withstand that kind of abuse. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 487482 Speaker 1: But you would be part of a demonstration--a march. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Definitely. Speaker 1: Carry a sign? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Were you ever-- Speaker 2: Singing. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you ever arrested? Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. I didn't take it that far either. But there were people that I knew that were arrested, thrown in the paddy wagons and taken to jail. Speaker 1: Okay. When you say you didn't take, take it that far, would--at a certain point the majority of pe- people turned back and go back to the church or something or what would happen, that--that you wouldn't get arrested for? Speaker 2: Usually when they were arresting, they'd get those up front. You only have so many paddy wagons, you know, and you can still just stay there, they couldn't take all the folks to jail. So what they're really was--they were making an example to frighten others. There were some others probably who would go, you know. But, I didn't wanna do that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, do you know of anybody that was arrested that wasn't expecting it that was out there and happened to get caught up in? Speaker 2: I, I can't recall, but I think it was on one march where Diane Nash went to jail, I'm almost positive where they took her to jail. Who else was here. Congressman John Lewis [HistoryMaker John Lewis] was here. I knew he went to jail. They--in fact, they beat him up. I told him they beat him up 'cause he probably talked back to them, knowing him, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But other than that, no. Story_ID: 487483 Speaker 1: What were some of the people like? Di- did you know Diane Nash well? Speaker 2: Not well, but you know, there in the movement with her. You know, you can talk to her, but I can't say she was a friend or anything like that, because she was at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], you know. And just ordinary students, just like these kids today. You know, seemed--those students then seemed more mature then the students today, you know. But that may because--be because I'm older and I think different, but they may still be on the same level, you know. Speaker 1: You know, you see the old films, you see the students that were arrested here and in Nashville [Tennessee] and other parts of country, but I specifically remember seeing the Nashville outlet, the men--the young men in college had on, the continental suits, ties and a hat to go with it. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Shoes shined. Young ladies dressed in, you know, smart dresses that you would see downtown, you know-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, right. Speaker 1: --high heels, you know, just something you wouldn't see today at, you know, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Well that's true. Speaker 1: Except, you know, you see their teachers dressed like that today, but not the students. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true. Speaker 1: The students tend to dress like the teachers in those days, or at least in those situations? Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's another thing, when you talk about dress. When I attended Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], I had saddle oxford and flat shoes and all that. And these girls had on heels, stockings, skirts, they had those petticoats underneath, you know, little bitty waist, and I couldn't believe it because I thought when you went to college, you wore saddle oxfords and brown and white things. You know, I, I really felt kind of out of place. All of the guys had beautiful hair, just crinkly and whatever flat. And I called my mother [Mary Hall Irvin], even though I'm grown now, and I said, "Mama all the people at Tennessee State, all the guys have good hair. All the girls are so pretty," and they were pretty girls. 'Cause you know in your little town, if you don't see any black folks, you know, so. She told me, she said, "Don't be foolish, they're putting stocking caps on their head at night, the guys." Well I didn't know (laughter). I just thought everybody had straight hair, Indian [Native American] hair, you know. So, it--that was the different. I, I just learned a lot coming south. I probably would not know much if I stayed up north, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're part of a larger black community then at? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause even though our church [Mount Olive Baptist Church, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] was all black, there's a lot of black folks, old folks, you didn't have all these young people. I never saw so many young blacks together, you know, looking nice, dressing nice, you know, so. It was a good experience. It was so good that I insisted that my children do their first two years, if they didn't wanna go to a black school [HBCU], in a black school. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know. Speaker 1: Now had you ever been exposed to a lot of black pro- professionals before like, like this (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They didn't have any in our town other than Dr. Crampton [Harrison Crampton] that was it. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And a preacher. I don't know how professional the preacher was, you know. Story_ID: 487484 Speaker 1: So well tell me, are there any other stories about the--any specific demonstration that you remember or activities that you think are important to--? Speaker 2: No, not in Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So how--di- did you finish up at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: No, 'cause the nursing school closed, I guess for maybe the lack of the right credentials or something. So then I didn't know what to do. So I said, oh, I always wanted to be a mortician. I'll go to John A. Gupton School of Mortuary Science [John A. Gupton College, Nashville, Tennessee], and I did. So that's how I got my D.M.S. from John A. Gupton School. Speaker 1: Okay, so you got a D.M.S. from John-- Speaker 2: A. Gupton School of Mortuary Science (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A. Gupton, okay. Is that here in? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, is that--that's in Nashville itself? Speaker 2: Yes. It's on West End Avenue now. Speaker 1: Okay, and that was in 19--? Speaker 2: I, I can't keep up with, unless I write those dates down. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause tha- we have a note you that graduated from Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee], I think in--was it Memphis State-- Speaker 2: Yeah Memphis State is my graduate. Speaker 1: --in 1960? And so, I just--does, does that sound right, 'cause I don't know if it is or not. I just got it-- Speaker 2: I don't know, I have to go back and do those dates. I'm--I've done so much and I really should put it in--and it's in writing somewhere. Speaker 1: Okay, so school, do you--which one came first though, the mortuary science school? Speaker 2: Before Memphis State? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. So I went t- t- there and that was another experience. It was a good experience. Speaker 1: The School of Mortuary Science? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Yeah. I, I guess this is irrelevant, but I can understand when you talk about crime and people killing over and over again. I can understand it a little bit why people can do it so easy. Because I remember the first time I had to cut the body to get the blood out and put the tubes in. I had to cut here (gesture) and I couldn't do it. I just, I mean it was just like me cutting a human being and then Mr. Gupton [John A. Gupton, Jr.] came over and he took my hand and he just (gesture) and I did it and put the tube in and everything. And after that, I could just do it, it didn't bother me. The first time I almost cried, I just couldn't cut this person 'cause I just knew I would be hurting the person. So, I guess if you cut one you just keep doing it, it won't bother you. You just make that first cut. It's a horrible thing, but it's true. Speaker 1: Was it--the people you were working on were dead though, that's the difference, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know but, but it's just-- Speaker 1: They're dead already. Speaker 2: --I know, but you still just putting the knife in, making that first incision. If I hadn't done that I would never be able to--I couldn't have gone through mortuary school if I couldn't have gotten that knife in the first time. Speaker 1: So, well you graduated, you, you were able to do all the functions of a--of a-- Speaker 2: Oh not only did I graduated--not only did I graduate I started to get--I was very smart, 'cause remember my chemistry, comes in handy. So I was punching these guys out, some of the kids, you know, how you--they do the curve. And I started getting threatening letters against my life. Speaker 1: Oh so you were graded on the curve and people that were--you made the curve too steep for some of the people then that were behind you-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that couldn't perform as well? Speaker 2: Right. So, the next thing I know. I mean I, I took the letters to Dr.--Mr. Gupton. Speaker 1: What kind of letters we- well what did they say? Speaker 2: Threated to kill me if I didn't get out of the class. So Mr. Gupton called the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. So, they did whatever they had to do and they found out it was some of the guys whose parents, they weren't smart guys, but their parents owned a funeral home, they were rich guys. And they were gonna be punched out of the class, 'cause they will put out. If you don't make it they put you out. They don't care whose son you are, you know. So, they found out who it was and they resolved it and all that. You know, and I moved on. And then I took my boards. I made one of the highest scores ever made in the State of Tennessee is what they told me. And I went--and then I went on to Memphis [Tennessee]. Story_ID: 487485 Speaker 1: What was your goal in going to Memphis [Tennessee], to--? Speaker 2: I worked at Southern Funeral Home [Memphis, Tennessee], I had a job. Speaker 1: Okay. So, is, is this 1960 or so, or--? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So, all right, so. Did you work for a black mortician? Speaker 2: Well, it was white owned, but it was a black funeral--you know, Southern Funeral Home, it's still the same one. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so. What was that experience like? Speaker 2: It was a good experience. It was a beautiful funeral home. The only thing I did not like, the woman whose husband owned--well they owned the funeral home, they would buy suits. You know, because the fellas went on funerals, so they bought their suits like in the fall, four suits. And any women that like they worked in the office and everything she would buy them clothes. So, they threw me in with the women in the office. Take me downtown and bought my clothes. But I kind of resented it because, again I felt like a slave. I mean, you know, you--I just didn't like it, you know. But of course, I wasn't gonna turn it down, you know. So, that was an experience. And then, I embalmed, I can't ever think of this, the person who sang 'Little Green Apples,' what's his name? Speaker 1: O.C. Smith? Speaker 2: No, I didn't embalm him, but I embalmed--he--the plane, wasn't there a plane crash. Speaker 1: Oh, oh you're talking about Otis Redding. Speaker 2: Yeah, Otis Redding, okay. I didn't embalm him, but whoever was on the plane, there was The Bar-Kays or somebody, whoever was on the-- Speaker 1: Oh The Bar-Kays were on it, yeah the plane too. Speaker 2: So, I, I embalmed a couple of them. We had the bodies, you know. And I--I've embalmed several prominent people and it was good experience, yeah. 'Cause sometimes when, well I shouldn't say this, I won't say that. Speaker 1: Yes you should, go ahead. Speaker 2: Should I? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I remember once, a very prominent person's mother died and he came in with another person. And usually if a woman's in a field that's predominantly male, people think you may be a little gay. So this woman came in and all that, and she kept talking to me. And I saw some of the guys snickering 'cause they knew who she was. And then after she left--and then she calls me back. They--one of the guys answered the phone. He stayed on the phone and he got me on the phone, I was upstairs, you know. That woman was hitting on me, which kind of shocked me, you know. So I'm saying this is an experience people will get if you're female in a funeral home. And the other experience was, a very beautiful black woman died. You know, she had straight hair and she had a braid down here and all that. And she died in childbirth. And her--the, the child's father came to look at the body and all that, and he's white and very prominent white doctor in Memphis, Tennessee was daddy. So you see all kinds of things. Speaker 1: So you learned some of the se- the secrets of what's going on? Speaker 2: Yeah, you do see secrets, yeah, definite secrets. So-- Speaker 1: Was that the most surprising thing, this or was there anything else that was surprising to you? Speaker 2: No, that was the most surprising thing. Story_ID: 487486 Speaker 1: All right, so how, how long did you stay in the funeral business as a mortician? Speaker 2: 'Til I went to Memphis State University [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you decide to get out of the business or did you just-- Speaker 2: I still, you know, I wanted that degree. You know, because I always felt if you don't own your own funeral home or even work for somebody else making nothing, I mean 'cause it didn't pay that much. So, I just--I really wanted that degree. I just was anxious to move on, you know, with my life. So I went to Tennessee State University [sic.] and at that time, the only way you could get in the university because they had very few blacks, you had to take this English exam, you know, and write that composition story or something. And I, at the time, wasn't very bright because I wrote about civil rights and how white people treated black people and all that. Which a professor could've kicked it out because they could've been a racist, and just because of the way I was talking, angry, you know. But, you know, I got a high score so I got in. And that was a good experience until I was making good grades in a geography class. And then suddenly it went down to like a C. I was--I was being punched out and I didn't know what was happening. So one day I went to the class before an exam early and these guys were all standing around in this circle. Now I'm short, so I kind of scooted to see what was happening and they didn't pay me any attention. They had the exam, they had the exam. So, you know, me and my mouth, I told them either you give me the exam or I'm going to the president of the college, I wasn't going to the teacher and all that. So I got the exam. So I went back up to my 90s. But that, I mean, and then afterwards I did--I didn't talk to that professor because I didn't wanna get them in trouble, but I talked to a professor and they said the students at Memphis State that are in fraternities get copies. They said they keep those exams for years on file, and you know, I didn't know. Story_ID: 487487 Speaker 1: So the other thing is--well while I was there, my husband was on a plane and the Russians shot the plane down, but he didn't die, you know. So I, I got that tel- telegram. It was kind of terrible, but I went through that experience. And then, when I graduated [from Memphis State University, University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee], there were three white female professors who wanted to honor me because, you know, everybody knew I had my kids, everybody knew I was working and all that, and I still had good grades. So they put--have a scholarship in my name, Rosetta I. Miller scholarship [Rosetta I. Miller Award Fund], they give every year; they still give it. Now for years it only went to white females. So then the black students got angry about it. But the scholarship was for anyone, you know, regardless if they had the grades and you know, and they had--they could be a mother, divorced, you know, raising a family alone, that type of scholarship, you know, hardship. Speaker 2: Okay. Now that's quite an honor, so. Speaker 1: Yeah, it is. Speaker 2: Now, you, you could've used probably when you were in school (laughter), I guess, but. Speaker 1: I'll tell ya. Speaker 2: Did anybody help you when you were in school? Speaker 1: I had help from a neighbor. She fed my children and charged me five dollars a week. That was pretty good. But other than that, no. And I never asked my parents [Mary Hall Irvin and Alexander Irvin]. You know, they--you know, they could send me something. I was just determined I was gonna make it on my own, I was grown, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. So you were such an example that they, they created this scholarship fund in your name? Speaker 1: Well, my mother was upset because she, she felt I never knew what I wanted to do. She says, "One day you're clerking, the next day you're in school, and one day you're in Nashville [Tennessee], the next day you're moving." She just felt my life was going nowhere because, you know, most people just get on a job and stay fifty years, and I did so many things that it was hard for her to understand how my life would end up. You know, where would I really end up, so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 487488 Speaker 1: But while in Memphis [Tennessee], I got involved in the movement and in the garbage strike. Speaker 2: Okay. This is 19--starts up in what--does it start in '66 [1966] or was it--King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed in '68 [1968] so we know about what time it was really hot-- Speaker 1: It started about sixty-- Speaker 2: --but, but when did it start? Speaker 1: A, a--probably '65 [1965], '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: Okay. Now what happened what, what was? Speaker 1: In, in the mea- before I got into that though, I started working for the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I did a lot of investigations and so forth. Story_ID: 487489 Speaker 1: Okay, the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, and you said that that was headed up in those days by [HistoryMaker] Frankie Freeman? Speaker 2: No, she was a commissioner. Speaker 1: She was a commissioner in, okay-- Speaker 2: Powell [John H. Powell, Jr.] headed it up. Speaker 1: A guy named Powell and locally then in--in Tennessee? Speaker 2: Not here, no. Speaker 1: Not here, in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: I was living in Washington then. Speaker 1: You were living in Washington, okay, so okay. Speaker 2: Wait a minute, let me get it straight. Speaker 1: All right, so you got me-- Speaker 2: I was--my headquarters was Washington, I worked in Memphis [Tennessee] under Jacques Wilmore, he was my boss. J-A-C-Q-U-E-S, Wilmore. Speaker 1: Wilmore, okay. Is he related to the theologian Gayraud Wilmore [HistoryMaker Reverend Gayraud Wilmore]? Speaker 2: Brother. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact, they've just done the bi- we--he has a biography out and they tell me I'm in it. I haven't seen it. He lives in Africa now. But he's in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] now 'cause he has cancer of the pancreas. Speaker 1: Oh that's Jacques-- Speaker 2: Jacques, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Jacques Wilmore, okay. So you had a local office in Memphis, the U.S. civil rights commission. And--so you started working for them in about--just well, this was the late '60s [1960s], mid-'60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, how did you get, you know-- Speaker 2: I just don't have my dates right, but go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay, but I'm just saying, well all right. So you're at Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] and you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I gradu- I graduated from-- Speaker 1: --what was your major, what did you graduate in? Speaker 2: Chemistry, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're a mortician already. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 487490 Speaker 1: So how did you get involved in civil rights? Speaker 2: Well, you know, at that time I didn't do bridge, I didn't only--I was in the sorority, and Memphis [Tennessee] was hot, you know. And when they started marching, I just got involved, started marching and getting angry. And you go to the movement. I mean, you went to, to, to all the meetings and you get stirred up. And then I lived in Lakeview Gardens [sic. Lakeview Garden, Memphis, Tennessee] and well, they were talking about other people, we are consumers, we are spending our money with other people. And then we had this Chinese store out there and the people weren't nice to us, but we spent our money there. So, it started making me angry and I just got involved 'cause I want--I used to put my kids in front of that store and marched, just the four of us (laughter) telling people not to shop there. So you just keep getting yourself involved, one more thing and then the bigger thing and so forth. I talked my sorority into participating in the marches, you know. They didn't wanna do it, but we, you know, eventually everybody in town, basically. Speaker 1: So what sorority were, were you in? Speaker 2: Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. Speaker 1: Okay, AKA. Story_ID: 487491 Speaker 1: So you got involved in, in--well so did you--did you come to the atte- attention of the U.S. civil rights commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights] people there in Memphis [Tennessee] because of volunteering or? Speaker 2: No. Oh, no. How, how, no. They advertised for a clerk-typist, okay. And I was told to apply. So I did apply. But you see, I still had worked, remember, in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.], so I had a little bit experience. But I was told that there were a lot of women in Memphis who had worked in the post office, so they would have more experience than me. So I had to dress right for the interview and so forth. Now, this may not make any kind of sense, but I was told to buy a dress two sizes larger, don't wear any makeup and all of that. I did exactly what I was told, and, and really a white guy told me this. I went on that interview, just like he told me. And you know, I was all business like and everything, plain Jane. And Jacques Wilmore told me he didn't hire me for my skills, he--'cause he felt I could do it, he said but the other women, Joyce Springfield [ph.] and some of the others, had more experience and that's what they needed. He said but he thought I could do the job, but they came to the job he said sharp as a tack, makeup and all that. And he said it might have been a distraction, so he said, "I was hiring you because, you know, frankly you were very homely and seemed religious and all that." I said, "Thank you sir." And then I went to work the next week, and he said, "Oh my god," (laughter). I put the makeup on and everything, you know, and I wasn't big as it looked. So, that's how I got that job. 'Cause I wasn't the best qualified, and they knew it because they filed a, Joyce Springfield, and see I knew her now, filed with the government discrimination, but it didn't go anywhere 'cause they knew they were better qualified, they were. Speaker 1: Okay, but did the people in the civ- in the office want you to apply, is that how, how they--I mean, were they advising you wha- what to do to get the job or was it? Speaker 2: Nobody in that office. It was somebody on the outside. Speaker 1: People in the movement on the outside? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, just a white guy. Speaker 1: Oh just a whi- okay, all right. Speaker 2: That I always, you know, talked to. Speaker 1: Okay. But did, did you consider that a time of ideal kind of job to have to work for U.S. civil rights commission? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Because you know, it was involved with that movement. It was--in--doing the investigations we knew everything that was going on, you know. And at that time that was excitement. That was better than teachers school, you know. And then there's a lot of contact and, and you would get to meet lots of government officials. You know, normally you're not gonna do that. And you might be a clerk-typist, but they would treat you different, you know, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's the way that went. Story_ID: 487492 Speaker 1: You're hired in the mid--this is late '60s [1960s] I guess. Now, tell me about the--was it--so the garbage strike occurred while you were working for the-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, oh yeah. Speaker 1: --the civil rights commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights] there in Memphis [Tennessee]? And I know from other interviews we've had that there was a housing crisis and stuff. I know we interviewed Russell Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon]. He was telling us about the housing struggle and, and some of the other lawyers they were involved in, in, in that housing struggle with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and other struggles going on, you know, police brutality and other things. And so what--how did the garbage strike get--how, how--tell us about that, what that was about? Speaker 2: Well, the, the City of Memphis just treated black men like children. You know, no respect, even though they were picking up your garbage and so forth. The pay was horrible. I think if they had people--I can't recall whether they had black men driving the trucks or white men, probably they just had white men driving the trucks. And I guess they just wanted to be treated like men. And the role of the civil rights commission, you know, what we did was follow the movement and write reports and so forth. We went to a lot of the activities. One of the activities that I went to was in a house, I don't know where in the city now, where the Invaders, that group to me got King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] killed, they had a meeting and what they were saying that they wanted to start--there was gonna be a march around city hall the very next day. And they wanted to start, I guess a riot, words to that effect. Well, the other guy who was the field rep under Jacques [Jacques Wilmore], Bobby Doctor, you know, we just sat there and then after they finished talking, one guy's name was Cabbage [Charles Cabbage], I can't think of the other guy because I think he was a FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] informant, but I went on home I lived in Lakeview Gardens [sic. Lakeview Garden, Memphis, Tennessee]. And the next morning, before the march started, here come detectives and everything in my house and wanted me tell them about the riot. Well I didn't know what they were talking about, I did--but I did know what they were talking about (background noise). I just found out--I mean I found out later that they could be out in the car and they can record what's going on in your house. Of course we didn't know all that. So, I guess they had me, in fact I know they had me because I got called down out of Washington [D.C.], my boss up there in the legal, you know, wanted to know the FBI told him I was involved in a riot that's being--that was being planned, which I really wasn't. I was just there as an observer and we would write our reports and send it up to Washington. So I got out of that. And you know, I just participated in the march. Story_ID: 487493 Speaker 1: We had a hotel room, the civil rights commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights] right next to King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] where he got killed, right next to his place. Speaker 2: Next to the, the Lorraine Motel [Memphis, Tennessee]? Speaker 1: Yes. Not only did I stay there, everybody knew I was formerly a mortician, and oh I can't think of her name, she die--Mrs. Bailey [Loree Catherine Bailey], she died sitting on a toilet. And so they came and got me 'cause I was female, to get her off the toilet, you know, to lay her down. And I did. Speaker 2: That's the woman that ran the Lorraine Motel? Speaker 1: Yeah, she had a heart attack, she died. Speaker 2: The day that King was killed (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. I heard that story. That's--isn't that kind of a strange story. Speaker 1: Yeah, she had a heart attack. Story_ID: 487494 Speaker 1: So this is in '68 [1968]-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed? Now in, in retrospect when you look back on the activities of the Invaders, do you think that they were a, a--group that was part of a COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program] with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] or--? Speaker 2: I don't think all of them. But I will die thinking some of them. I can't think of the one guy, I still see his face, but he's now a Ph.D., I think he graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. You know, you--how are you sudden--you're poor, you have no money, you're in a movement and then you're gonna have--where do you get the money for the Ph.D.? How do you get to Harvard? You know. So many of us think that. You know, because the--the Invaders, King was over at the Rivermont [Rivermont Hotel, Memphis, Tennessee], whatever you know, I think that's the name of it over there on the river in that hotel, which was nice. And the Invaders kept insisting you stay in a black hotel, and then King moved. 'Cause there's no way that guy could've shot him if he was over there in the Rivermont 'cause there's nothing around for you to be in, you know. So, we all have our theories, you know. I hope I'm wrong, but I always felt that way. Story_ID: 487495 Speaker 1: But there were a lot of things going on. I met this woman called, I called, well, we called her Nuggie or Lukey [Lucretia "Lukey" Ward], Lukey, a white woman. Stayed with the movement. Friend of A.D. King [Alfred Daniel Williams King]. And we always felt she was the informer, and I--I'm positive she was an informer. You know, and but that--she was dating A.D., 'cause I was in that inner circle. Speaker 2: A.D. was staying in--in the Lorraine [Lorraine Motel, Memphis, Tennessee] too, right at the time? I've read that he was downstairs when-- Speaker 1: And Senator Joan Davis [sic. Georgia Davis Powers]. Now you know she came out with a book that she dated King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and people doubted it, she did. Speaker 2: This is senator--who is this? Speaker 1: Joan Davis from Kentucky. She did. She was always there. Sharp, sharp as a tack. So, so, they say that's not true, it is true. And Lukey was going with A.D. Because when I went to the funeral, she had on a yellow outfit in Memphis [Tennessee] when King was killed. I get to the funeral, she down there at the hotel. You couldn't even get a room in those hotels, you know, they just got booked from all over the world right away, and there she was, but she had never gone home, she still had the same yellow suit on, pantsuit, yeah. So, I was told later she was an informer. So, you know, FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations] pays well. So that--that was a real crucial-- Speaker 2: Now, what did you--now did you read Abernathy's [Ralph Abernathy] book? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: 'Walls Came Tumbling Down' ['And the Walls Came Tumbling Down: An Autobiography,' Ralph David Abernathy] Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: 'Cause he describes some young woman that, that Dr. King has an argument with on the morning that he was shot, I mean, you know. Speaker 1: Oh really. Speaker 2: Yeah, somebody who was looking for him the night before and couldn't find him, and you know, 'cause I think he--I think they went out to eat at this lady's house and they didn't get back 'til real late. Speaker 1: They went to Billy Kyles' [HistoryMaker Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles] house. Speaker 2: I don't think it was that, they were supposed to go I think the day he was shot and supposed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And killed, yeah, okay. Speaker 2: But they was at another, another woman's house the night before. Speaker 1: I need to get that book. Speaker 2: Yeah it's inter- well yeah, for any--anybody who'll hear this years from now, you know, I guess all this literature, they can form their own opinion about what happened when they look at everything. You know, yeah. It's hard--so many different pieces of it. There's an interview that we did with Reverend Kyles too, about three years ago, ago. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a great guy. And he was right there on the scene, yeah. And Bishop Patterson [Gilbert E. Patterson], he's passed now. Speaker 2: So, well for sure the FBI was involved in some way, so you know they're either spying or something, you know, in some capacity there. Speaker 1: Yeah. They knew everything that I had done, wherever I had been. I was just shocked and I really was scared I was gonna get fired. Speaker 2: You're not suspecting in the future more information will be revealed from the files that not yet opened, so. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 487496 Speaker 1: Did you know Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] well? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and some other things happened. I used to be at all the meetings. And we were in the minimum wage building and Reverend Jackson, Ralph Jackson, he--he usually conducted the meeting. And there was a little boy shot, killed, the first one killed up in the projects. Okay. Ford, you know, Congressman Ford's granddaddy, N.J. Ford, had the body. Well, I talked to the mother and she told me, charged a whole lot of money, maybe fifteen thousand, but a whole lot of money. So, at, at the meeting that night I just brought it up at the--I told Dr. King what happened. And I said it's unfair for this woma- she didn't have any money, they live in the projects, they're poor, she can't pay fifteen thousand, but I was stupid, I forgot money would come in from around the world and they're gonna get a hundred thousand. So I, I--and I really should've stayed out of that and it was like 12:30, 1:00 in the morning and King summoned N.J. Ford to come down. And he came down, and he was explaining why this costs this and why that, and gotta have a good casket 'cause the whole world's gonna be looking, all that kind of stuff, you know. I can't remember how it was resolved, but I'm older now, I didn't know the game. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but she wasn't gonna be paying it. And I guess he, he had to tell her what it cost, it scared her, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so what you're saying is, now we reconstruct this is that--that this is Ford knew that pe- people would send money to the funeral home from all over the world, which he would collect? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause at first I thought you were saying that SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] knew that-- Speaker 2: No, would have to come to him 'cause he, he had the contract. Speaker 1: So would any of it go back out to SCLC or would it just-- Speaker 2: Oh, I doubt it. Speaker 1: --this is Ford's own? Speaker 2: That would've been his. Speaker 1: His? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, 'cause there would've been an appeal, they do that all the time. They do that here, you know. But sometimes I think it's a game. You feel bad and you'll send in five hundred dollars, you know, but it's not all going in the casket, going in, you know. I know that game--that game too. Speaker 1: There's no point where they, they stop sending money? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, 'cause at that point it would come from Denmark, Sweden. And the other thing, when I was in that minimum wage building, they would bring in sacks like this, oh just many, many full of money and checks. But I wasn't privy to know what happened, you know. Speaker 1: Hm. Okay. Speaker 2: Just lots of sacks, lots of money. Story_ID: 487497 Speaker 1: What was Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] like, what was your impression of Dr. King? Speaker 2: You know, he was very intelligent, but I, I just saw a little fear in him, you know. You know, sometimes--just like Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], I don't see any fear in him yet 'cause nothing has happened, okay. So he's all out there, you know. But King had fear in him. You could tell from the way that he talked, you know. Even in those private meetings, you know, he'd laugh and talk, and so forth. But just seemed pensive, you know, you see it in the face. You have to be worried if your life's been threatened, you know. 'Cause you don't know who mi- around that table set you up as you walked out that door, you know. So, that's what--you know. Speaker 1: So you met him later in life when he--I mean, towards this--you know, when he was-- Speaker 2: On the movement, uh-huh, uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: So you wouldn't be able to say he was like this at one time and now he's like that? Speaker 2: No, I can't say that. Speaker 1: Okay, but he did seem a little pensive to you? Speaker 2: Yeah, uptight (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And apprehensive and uptight, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: It does seem that way when you hear that--when they play that speech he made the night before, you know, he seemed like somebody (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'I've Been to the Mountain' [sic. 'I've Been to the Mountaintop'], uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah, you see somebody like-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was standing right under him when he did that taping him, yeah. Yeah, and, and to me, there wasn't, you know, sometimes when people just preach and you can see them happy in their face and all that, I didn't see that. I saw fear. You know, and I don't think he would've said what he said had he not been afraid. Story_ID: 487498 Speaker 1: After he was--well, wha- so you were close by after he was--you were close by the Lorraine [Lorraine Motel, Memphis, Tennessee] when he was-- Speaker 2: No, I was working downtown in the German building. And I was going to go to dinner at Billy Kyles' [HistoryMaker Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles] house. We were gonna go over to his house. And when I came out, I mean out of the building and got in the car, nothing was--everything was still. I didn't--no cars were moving or anything, you know. And I just started driving and it just seemed a eerie feeling, but I still wasn't thinking. And when I got over to the Lorraine, there were policeman out there and they told me I couldn't come in because Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been killed. And I said, "Well I'm sorry I'm with the federal government," and I showed them whatever, and then they let me go, go in and, and park. But, the town was quiet, yeah. So, it was just terrible. Speaker 1: Okay. So you just, just missed the, you know, just missed it. Speaker 2: Yeah, but they still when I went up to the room, they still had--the blood was still down there, you know. It was something. Story_ID: 487499 Speaker 1: And so, and he was, he was sharing a room with Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy]. You know, that's another story. But-- Speaker 2: Well, what is it (laughter)? Speaker 1: Can't tell that one (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't know why not? Speaker 1: No, he, he--Abernathy--I--because I think in whatever he wrote, he wasn't too, too kind about King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], was he, as I recall. Speaker 2: Well he, he was--no, he actually-- Speaker 1: He was telling some secrets I thought. Speaker 2: I read the book and he said that Dr. King had some girlfriends-- Speaker 1: Did he say he had some girlfriends? Speaker 2: He didn't mention himself in terms of that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well he did. Speaker 2: But, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, he did (laughter). Speaker 2: He mentioned Dr. King having girlfriends, but he--I think he, he basically vindicated Dr. King as somebody serious about what he was doing. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And he said that he had more energy than anybody he'd ever seen in his life. King could, you know, stay up all night and preach all day and organize, and he just like--he couldn't be stopped. Speaker 1: Couldn't do it. Speaker 2: Yeah, said he was amazing. Speaker 1: But about the men in the movement, all of them had girlfriends. All of them were married, most of them were married. You know, and that--that part I didn't like. They had girlfriends in every port, city. They had the Nashville [Tennessee] girlfriends, went on to Mississippi, the Mississippi girlfriends, you know. A big party, you know. You just--but some things I could never tell, but it was a big party. And if King had girlfr- I don't know anything about girlfriends, I know about Senator Joan Davis [sic. Georgia Davis Powers], is the only one I knew about. But, you know, Abernathy had them too, you know. So, now I guess that's just the way it goes when you have movements and lots of women. You know, a lot of pretty women follow the movement and all that, you know. Speaker 2: Well that's not unusual in the life of preachers, maybe I shouldn't say that but-- Speaker 1: Yeah you should, that's true (laughter). Oh that's true. Because some of them were ministers, you know. And I just saw a lot, you know. Some people tell me I should write a book, but I don't think I could do that, you know. Some things you take to the grave. But you know, I saw where--I mean if you--if you--if you're raising money from the community, then you shouldn't take part of that money and buy some pretty girl a watch, you know. I saw all that. I was close enough to see it. You know, 'cause it--it kind of turned me against some things, you know. And you know, lots of parties, and lots of drinking, and these are preachers. Of course they're human beings, so. Now I can't say that about Billy Kyles [HistoryMaker Samuel Billy Kyles]. I think he was--he was all right, you know. He was--I never saw him take a drink, I never saw him with another woman. I was around enough that I could tell you who, who was with who, you know, so. Story_ID: 487500 Speaker 1: Did you interview the other person I the movement was Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks], did you interview him? Speaker 2: Yes we did, yeah. He seemed to be--he seemed to resent those who marched and stuff. He said he, he said well--and I say--he said that the Civil Rights Movement was about legislation and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and it was not about marching. He said, I mean, it wasn't--I mean, the marchers get more credit than they deserved. I--I'm just paraphrasing what he was doing. He seemed to be very adamant about that, you know, point. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was involved. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter), I'm afraid to ask in--in what (laughter)? Speaker 1: No, (laughter) no he's all right. He--he's kind of in the family so, you know, one of them things. I mean, he's a great guy, he really is. Speaker 2: So when you--well wh- what do you think about his concern that the legistla- that, that the legislative activists don't get enough credit, you know? Speaker 1: They don't. An--because I think the white community will let marchers and everything kind of sway them. They get all the publicity, you know, that's what goes in the newspaper 'cause that's what sells newspapers, you know. But he's absolutely right, they don't get enough credit. We don't know anything about it really, most black folks, that part of it, they really don't know. 'Cause if you ak- ask a black person he'll tell you about the march, what else can they tell you. Nothing, he's right. Speaker 2: Okay. You have to be--you have to, I guess, read deeper to understand the other part of it? Speaker 1: Uh-huh, you know, we had the march, but came of the march? Like he's saying, what came--so many people don't know. Speaker 2: The negotiations and the legislation and all that sort of thing is probably more obscure to people than-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah. 'Cause they're, they're thinking whatever we got, we got it because we marched. That's not so. We can march forever and get nothing, and that's why we're not marching today, because they have learned, the other folks have learned, let them march. Speaker 2: Now, that--what role did the media play in, in the Civil Rights Movement? I mean, it's been said that--that the demonstrations were successful because of the coverage they received, not only here but around the world? Speaker 1: Well, I, I think if you didn't have that coverage, people would not know and you wouldn't have gotten pressure from different places to do the right thing. So, the media is def- very definitely needed and it does have its positive effect. But, like Hooks said, that wasn't all there was to it. Story_ID: 487501 Speaker 1: Now you were involved--you stayed involved with the Poor People's Campaign after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] passed-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I went on the march, uh-huh. Speaker 1: SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], so was this in capacity of being an employee of the civil rights commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights] or? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, we just followed the campaign and wrote up anything that would be of interest to our bosses and what, just to let them know what's happening, you know. So it would be first-hand report, and went on to Washington [D.C.] and it was something else, another experience. Because some people I have a lot of respect for, and there was one minister I had a lot of respect for and I've known over the years. And I was saying one time, now I know this person would--does not date outside the race, 'cause the person was married and all that, and probably doesn't date. And somebody said, "Well you need to be at--," and I think it was--if there was an old Pitts Hotel [Pitts Motor Hotel, Washington, D.C.] or something--it was an old black hotel in Washington at the time. They said, "Go there at two o'clock in the morning and you'll see them come in with a white woman." And I couldn't believe it, so I did go there two o'clock in the morning, there he was on the floor dancing with a white woman. And just, just changed me, you know, I just. You know, when you're younger and you've got a mindset and, and you respect certain people and you don't think they're gonna do things, but did, so. That wasn't a good experience, but as a whole, Poor People's Campaign was pretty good. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know. Story_ID: 487502 Speaker 1: It was one of the dreams of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] that--to organize poor pe- people in the United States and after he died, well Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] basically lead this Poor People's Campaign, Ralph David Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy] was the new head of SCLC (unclear). After the funeral of Dr. King, poor people converged on Washington [D.C.] in--this was spring of six--of a spring of '68 [1968] or '69 [1969], I'm not sure, I guess it's '68 [1968], I, I--yeah. We then--we had the tent city, Resurrection City. That--that happened in '68 [1968], the summer of '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, somewhere in the fall of '68 [1968] I guess, right. Camped out. Did--so did you--did you stay with the group down? Speaker 2: No, I didn't stay down there, unh-uh 'cause I had relatives in Washington. But, I mean, I don't think any of the other leaders feel about poor people like King did. I really think he was sincere. You know, because King could've been in--taking into his organization millions of dollars, didn't do it, you know. Of--I mean for himself. And I look at some of the organizations, they've tapped into Toyota [Toyota Motor Corporation] and all these big companies. And since we're talking about civil rights and so forth, you know, I feel like as a publisher my civil rights are being violated by some of these organizations and the other black papers. It's difficult for us to survive because you've got the brothers who have organizations when we should be carrying Toyota ads and Chevron [Chevron Corporation] advertising. We don't get it now. Okay that money, they give ten, fifteen, twenty, thirty thousand dollars to these other so-called civil rights organizations, okay. So they grow richer and we go- grow poorer. And what I resent the most is, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Urban League [National Urban League], even though I'm a life-subscribing heritage whatever for the NAACP. Now, they go out and get 6 million or whatever from these companies. And then they come to these black newspapers and expect us to disseminate information about these companies to the black community free. Now they got $6 million, I'm trying to run a newspaper [The Tennessee Tribune] and that is a horrible, horrible situation. It's unfair, and that means, they don't care about us. Because they can't get this information and the white press not gonna print all this crap to come out every week. You should see the crap I get. These companies are paying somebody else and they wanna put it in our paper free. Well I don't run it anymore, run it in the foolish papers. 'Cause otherwise they can't get their money out. Black radio stations, there only a few, they're not gonna run anything free. They got more sense than these black newspapers. So if everybody cuts them off, they can't get the information out. Pay me to run it, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So they, they don- these corporations donate to civil rights organizations and expect those organizations to promote (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Disseminate, yeah. Speaker 1: --the, the company through its civil rights activities or through stories related to its, okay? Speaker 2: Or anything that they do. Even if--I mean, anything that they are doing related to the African American community they want us to put it in our paper free. My whole thing is, take me to the table with you if I were the president of NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association], you know, 'cause we don't have any sense either. Because they-- Speaker 1: Now that's the National Newspaper-- Speaker 2: Publishers Association. Speaker 1: That's the black newspaper association. Speaker 2: I don't know what it is. Yes, it's a black one, yeah (laughter). But, you know, it's just stupidity. And, and, and we're growing further apart from each other when we ought to be together. And if we aren't together, my Hispanic brothers and sisters take note, 'cause they we're--they support each other. Story_ID: 487503 Speaker 1: Well let's get you to the newspaper and so, 'cause I--we're talking about it already. So, you worked for the--how long did you work for the U.S. civil rights commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights]? Speaker 2: Maybe ten years. Speaker 1: Okay, so that would take, take us to what, mid-'70s [1970s] or? Speaker 2: About '75 [1975], yeah. Speaker 1: And--and then what did you do? Speaker 2: After that, then I worked for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission [EEOC]. I worked for Clarence Thomas. Speaker 1: Okay, now the EEOC, did you--see if you started in '76 [1976] you would be there at the--at the beginning of Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration. Speaker 2: I went to his inauguration. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you worked in the Carter administration for EEOC. But then you were there when, when Clarence Thomas was the direct- now when did he come in? Speaker 2: When did he come in? Speaker 1: Yeah to EEOC? Speaker 2: Oh I can't remember. Speaker 1: And that was like pri- he worked for EO- EEOC just prior to being nominated right for the [U.S. Supreme Court]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah-- Speaker 1: Okay so that would've been-- Speaker 2: --'cause I was at EEOC about sixteen years I believe. Speaker 1: Yeah, so that would've been late '80s [1980s] when he came in or, or during the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration right, or the Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] administration. I guess the Bush or Reagan administration? Speaker 2: Who brought him in, I thought Bush. Speaker 1: I guess it'd have to be Bush. Yeah, yeah, yeah in '88 [1988] I guess for me, yeah. Bush came in in '88 [1988] and he was there 'til '92 [1992] when Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was elected. So, between '88 [1988] and '92 [1992], you worked under Clarence Thomas? Speaker 2: Clarence. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything to say before we get to him? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, '88 [1988] and '91 [1991], 'cause I retired in '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Okay. Is there any--anything of note before we get to him? Speaker 2: Unh-uh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean-- Speaker 2: About? Speaker 1: About the civil rights--I mean, about the EEOC and activities of EEOC? Story_ID: 487504 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this, how did--what was it like under Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] and then how did it change under Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]? Speaker 2: Under Carter, we were doing systemic investigations, which was either good or bad. But if somebody came in, you know, you take the whole class. But then under, I can't even think of his name. Speaker 1: Reagan? Speaker 2: Clarence [Clarence Thomas]. Oh okay, under Reagan they wanted to make it more difficult for black folks. So we had to do the one-on-one. You know, somebody comes in and filed a charge, sexual harassment, you just take her charge. Before we used to go in and investigate the whole, though everything and it might've been too much sometimes. But it was a one-on-one. Well you know if it's a one-on-one and you getting ten thousand charges, you never get through, there's no way. Because they don't give you the people, you know, to do the investigation. So just tremendous backlog. Speaker 1: So it's a bottleneck under--starting with Reagan where it became a bottleneck? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, okay. Were any--okay give me an examp- now under Carter, for instance, what would be a successful investigation for the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] where someone's rights were vindicated as opposed to under the Reagan administration? Speaker 2: If you had--sometimes we would have an individual, particularly in the South, an older black man who had worked for a company right--let me see, thirty-nine years or twenty-nine, whenever you retire. One year before he would retire, the company officials would go back thirty years and say, you wrecked the truck thirty years ago, we found a beer bottle in the truck, that's it, they get no retirement. I mean just no retirement, no nothing. So, under the old administration you could go in and do a class action because they didn't just do it to that black man, they'd been doing it to black men forever, you know. So you just solved it all right there. You go back and get everybody and try to make them whole if you could. But under the next administration, that just didn't work because you have to deal with that one black man, that's it. You couldn't bring anybody else, you know, which was not good for black people. Speaker 1: So no class action lawsuits? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, I mean it was so limited. Speaker 1: Okay, so that basically nullified a view that--that racism exists in some ways, I mean it just nullified the whole idea that their system--systemic racism and saw everything as an individual incident. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Like this man named Henry Jones, regardless of whatever his race was or whatever is going on around him, he's--he had a, you know, he's got a problem and they--then they spend a lot of time fooling with his specific case without looking at the rest of them that are similar? Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: And then it bottlenecks the whole system, that's what you're saying? Speaker 2: Right, right. And some, some companies in the South historically never let a black man draw a retirement check. So that should've been a class action. You know, what could he live on? A hundred and ten dollar social security check. That means he has to go out and get a job, which is unfair. Story_ID: 487505 Speaker 1: Who was in charge of the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] when Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president, I mean I'm just, just for, you know, reference? Or do you remember, if you don't it's okay, we'll just move on? Speaker 2: I think it was Chairman Brown, Bill--William Brown [sic. Eleanor Holmes Norton]. I think he may be with, not FedEx [Federal Express; FedEx], UPS [United Parcel Service] now, attorney up there. I know he was there when I was there. Speaker 1: Okay, and then under Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], did he--now was that a job where you--the new administration can just hire who they want or--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: They put who they want in. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so under Reagan I'm sure somebody else was hired. And who, who was the person under Reagan before? Speaker 2: I'd have to think before Brown. Speaker 1: It might've been Clarence Thomas, I just don't know if it was Clarence Thomas yet or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it wouldn't have been Clarence. Clarence was later. Speaker 1: Yeah, I thi- I thought he was a Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] appointee actually? Speaker 2: I can't remember, I'll have to go back, I have to think. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So, well let's talk about--well tell us about Clarence Thomas' regime as the--or his stint, as he was the--what do you call, the chairman of the EEOC? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Well, you know he is conservative, but I, I have nothing negative to say about him since he saved my life, my career. I always ran one of the best offices in the country. I always got a 5.0 rating, and the highest you can go is 5.0. There was a white director who was my boss in district office who decided when he got the job in Memphis [Tennessee] that he had a Puerto Rican friend that he wanted to have my job. So, the first year I got a 4.0. The next year I had a 3.0, and now I'm still doing the same type of work. And so, one of my supervisors, a brother, said that's a pattern, you're gonna get a 2.0 and you're gonna be out the door. So you better start fighting. In the meantime, he started doing all kinds of things to me, having me investigated and just all kinds of crazy stuff. Trying to remove me. You know, with all the years' service I had and so. You know, I just started fighting him and it went to Clarence Thomas and Clarence Thomas sent it to an outside person in Virginia to investigate. And of course it came back just terrible on his part. And Clarence saved me. He agreed with the outside investigator. He didn't have to do that. They can say anything they want. I disagree, she's out the door, you know. So, but I have not heard that he was a bad chairman. Because once you're in the field you don't have the same connections in Washington [D.C.]. I don't know of too many people that he had removed. I just haven't heard anything negative other than that scandal. Speaker 1: Did, did you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I knew Anita too. Speaker 1: Okay, I was gonna ask you if you knew Anita Hill as well. Speaker 2: I mean, I believe everything she said. Now I'm not gonna say that, because I just believe in my heart she was a good person. And I guess just young, innocent and vulnerable. And I think she told the truth. But I think in a--in a--when he went from EEOC, I think, to a D.C. court and nothing ever came up, they didn't care. But then to become the [U.S.] Supreme Court person, that's when they cared, you know, 'cause there's too many other good black men out there that have nice clean background, you know. But he--I've been in Mexico at a conference and you'd always see him after midnight, you know how you stay up and party. Come on down there with the white women, dancing and carrying on, you know. He didn't have anything to do with us, you know. But he was respectful. He would speak and all of that, you know. But, other than that, you know. And he--I, I just didn't like him always talking about his, how poor he was and his sister was on welfare, and that was just demeaning to me, you know. Need to uplift her, you know. That was demeaning that he arrived and nobody else could make it out of the family. I think that was terrible. Speaker 1: So that's kind of contradictory to say your sister's on welfare and then not try to help her get off of it, if you're making that kind of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. My sister would've had a job if I were up there, you know, as a clerk-typist (laughter). So, but I, you know, other than that, I, I wasn't, I just wasn't close to him. Story_ID: 487506 Speaker 1: Why did you leave in '91 [1991], did you--? Speaker 2: Well, you know this guy in Memphis [Tennessee] then had me investigated so much that I just said, I was gonna retire. I was gonna work two more years, but I had started a magazine, not the newspaper, I started a magazine. And then I started thinking. Speaker 1: Now, when did you start the magazine? Speaker 2: Ninety [1990]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's the name of the magazine? Speaker 2: Contempora magazine. And a-- Speaker 1: Now, how did--I mean, that--that's quite an undertaking to start a ma- magazine, so what--what happened? Wha- what would you--how did you get in the magazine business? Speaker 2: I helped a black newspaper get started here. I helped another black guy who had a magazine. I helped him with his magazine, 'cause I always wanted the journalism part. In fact, I invested thirteen thousand dollars, I thought I was getting some stock, you know, scam. And so I decided--I just saw how they operated and I said I'm gonna do a magazine, you know, but I'm gonna do it right and honest, and all that. And so I just did it. Very foolish, you know, I didn't--I didn't do anything, no investigation, didn't know anything, I just knew how to put a magazine together. I knew how to get the stories and everything. Didn't know the advertising was down all over the country when I started. Here I went all across to the major cities in Tennessee and all the hotels, you know, having a big reception unveiling the magazine, and I just did it, you know. So, it wasn't a good move, but I still have it. Speaker 1: So, so what was the theme of your magazine, what was it? Speaker 2: It was kind of like, it was like Ebony but on a lower level, lower scale (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A local, local level you mean? Speaker 2: Yeah, local and I do--no I do Atlanta [Georgia], regional, yeah. So, and, and I still do a quarterly. And then I got bored and I did a business magazine, but I do that annually. Story_ID: 487507 Speaker 1: But the reason I ended up with the newspaper is because when we tried to get advertising for the magazine, we were always told but you don't come out often enough. You know, that's just an excuse. Speaker 2: What were you--was it [Contempora] a quarterly or? Speaker 1: A quarterly. Speaker 2: Quarterly, okay. Speaker 1: So I said okay. So then I started publishing a newspaper and that was a monthly. Speaker 2: Now when did the newspaper come out? Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991]. One was '90 [1990], one was '91 [1991]. Speaker 2: Well, did, did it start off as The Tennessee Tribune? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And I didn't research that, but once I was down in the archives downtown library and there was a Tennessee Tribune a hundred years ago, a white one (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One hundred years ago? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. So I guess I'm still safe, nobody's come after me yet. Yeah. So anyways, I started doing a monthly and we started picking up a few more ads 'cause it was tabloid. And then I said maybe I need to let--it needs to look like The Tennessean, do a broad sheet and maybe I'll do--and so then the next year I started doing it weekly and just really picked up the advertising. So it ma- it really made a difference. The first year I was in business with nobody knowing me, I made a hundred and forty-nine thousand [dollars], now that's weird. They didn't even know who I was or what I was. And since then, we- we're close to a half million. We should do more, but when you got slow, slow salespeople. Speaker 2: So now a half million dollars in--? Speaker 1: Close to, uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 2: Wh- what's the circulation like now? Speaker 1: Forty-five thousand. Speaker 2: Okay (makes noise). Speaker 1: Is that your stomach telling you you're hungry? Speaker 2: I suppose (laughter) I don't know. I guess. So forty-five thousand circulation, and, and you--and the paper serves Nashville [Tennessee] and--? Speaker 1: And I have out-of-town subscribers. 'Cause you know people go to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and different place, they get used to it so. And then other people see it on the Internet and they send in for a subscription. Speaker 2: Okay so you have a web- website too? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: All right. Now was it, was it hard to assemble a group of writers in, in the beginning? Speaker 1: No, they came. Speaker 2: Really, okay. Speaker 1: They come through the door in droves, you know. Yeah, you know, somebody might want to pay a bill off and they are writers. So they'll come and they'll write a while, and then you don't hear from them anymore, that kind of thing. Somebody's trying to get through grad school and all that. Some people I've had a long time, you know. One guy, he used to be my editor, but works at a white paper now. So he writes freelance every now and then and so. Speaker 2: So do you have a con- do you have a consistent core staff that stays with you? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, uh-huh. Been here fourteen, fifteen years. Speaker 2: So who are some of your, your core staff people? Speaker 1: Steve Benson, he's the sales manager. He's been with me since I started. Janice Malone, she does that entertainment section. Jason Hughes, he does everything. He does the paper. We do another paper for a Chattanooga [Tennessee] paper, we do their paper. And he just does everything. And then my nephew's with me, he's in sales. So that's my core and my dependable people. Oh and then there's Connie [Connie Kinnard] 'cause she does--deals with the mail and the distribution, and then Gloria [ph.] who does the citywide distribution. Story_ID: 487508 Speaker 1: Now you've done some things with the paper [The Tennessee Tribune] that--now one thing I read, that--that I guess we have to discuss this, the voter, voter turnout (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you're gonna ruin my day (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a lot of flak about this, but you--tell us what happened with this and what (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it wasn't a lot of flak. You know, it was not an original idea of mine. There was a newspaper in Texas that does that every year. Speaker 1: Well tell us what you--wh- what happened, what you did? Speaker 2: I just went and got the list of the people who did not vote in that August election. Speaker 1: Black people or as far as you-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. I just did district--I only did one district, District 1. Speaker 1: That's the district that just happens to have more black voters or what? Speaker 2: No, there are three that have more, yeah, yeah. District 1. And you know, which I think I have the right to do that and they can't hide that information. And so I really didn't catch a lot of flak. I bet we got four phone calls, that's a lot of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now let's, let's just get--let's go back to--so you, you, you can actually find a list of people who did not vote? Speaker 2: You just go down and they give you a disk and I just pop it in and print it. You don't type it, just plop it in. Speaker 1: Okay, so you get it from the board of elections or, or--? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, and so you ran this list in the paper of those who did not vote? Speaker 2: Yes, in the August election. And what I'm saying is and I put in there, Cheney and all these folks who had died, and these folks can't get up and go to the polls. Well some people have excuses they're sick and all that. But I mean I wouldn't know who's sick. Speaker 1: You're talking about Jane Cheney [ph.], right? Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. So I ran it. And course the TV stations were parked out here, I wouldn't talk to them, you know. I told them I'll talk to you after the election, because, because of Harold Ford [Harold Ford, Jr.] I didn't want any controversy. But I, I went to all the luncheons and Harold Ford was there and they were holding up my paper and praising me (laughter) and all that. But, I think, people were upset. Well one thing, one woman called and she said, "Well I'm--the government's hiding me out and my name's on the list." I said, "Well they're not hiding you very well if you, you--if your name is on the list, I'm sorry." I mean, I said, "Anybody can get this list, if they wanna find you, you're on a list, you know." My grandson was on the list. I didn't take him out. You know, he lied to me, he told me he voted, you know. And then there's some ministers on the list who, who every Wednesday, down here at the church, they have their big meeting talking about voter registration and all that, but they didn't vote. Of course they got--they got upset, you know, but. And then what happened, we vote 34 percent in that district, and the other two district 37 percent. Okay, that, the election after that came out, that district that I put in the paper was 65 percent, 67 was Green Hills [Nashville, Tennessee] where all the rich white folks live. They were number two in the city. And one was 55 percent and the other one was like 60 [percent]. So it did help so--you know, people were scared. People were calling me, asking me are you're gonna print another district, you know, 'cause they don't wanna be on the list. But I still may do it again, but I probably wouldn't put the addresses in there. Speaker 1: So you had their addresses on there--in it, okay. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Story_ID: 487509 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that's not the first time I've gotten flak now. The other time oh, I don't know if you know about it but, the Nashville Post here, you know, how white people are always deciding who are leaders are, they tell us. So they had this nice picture of T.B. Boyd, III and Francis Guess, and nine or ten black men that they decided were our leaders. Well people got upset, but you know I got mad. So in my paper [The Tennessee Tribune], I came back with headlines, you know, attacking them and had a picture of a white man and with telephone cord and so--tape around his mouth telling them to shut up, don't tell us who our leaders are and all that. And oh, and then--and then I have a girlfriend, the girl who wrote, 'Wind Done Gone' ['The Wind Done Gone'], [HistoryMaker] Alice Randall. Well, she was in there as--she's elite now and they had in there because they joined the Richland Country Club [Nashville, Tennessee], you know, and I--she's my friend, but I said, it's important about education, we don't care whether she joins the Richland that's, you know, they put her in there. She made the list because she joined the white country club, not. And I just attacked, attacked, you know, must've been one of my bad months. And gosh I'll tell ya, I, I lost a ninety thousand dollar contract from Publix [Publix Super Markets, Inc.], my grocery chain. 'Cause they said--well I know what happened, some of those black folks called down there and raised heck, said I was causing a riot and all that. I didn't cause a riot. That man sold more magazines, people running everywhere trying to get it (laughter). But, I mean, we got it back, but. So, I do things, but sometimes I'm punished for it, you know-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which I don't think-- Story_ID: 487510 Speaker 1: We were talking about the voter registration campaign through the paper [The Tennessee Tribune] and how it made a difference. Now, how, how else, I mean, is, is there another story about how the paper made a difference in the community? Speaker 2: Well, we partner with a lot of health organizations. You know, we have the health section and normally our papers don't do that. We just do a separate section, you know, on health which we get lots of calls about. Unfortunately or fortunately, we--a lot of our information comes from Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee] even though I'm sitting in front of Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee]. But somehow our people can't seem to get it together to give information about their institutions, you know, to, to the black press so that we can disseminate the information. So consequently, when I put things in about Vanderbilt has, this clinic and that clinic, you know, people are going there. 'Cause otherwise they don't know, because none of the papers do a whole health section like we do. And then, we do the legal section, which for, I guess, a month we didn't run the legal section because we got so many calls. So people are reading it, because apparently they're getting something out of that legal section. So you know, we just put it back in last, last week. Speaker 1: Is there anything that you could consider the most popular feature of your paper, other than, you know (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Entertainment. They like entertainment because it tells you what's happening, you know, down at the performing arts or the opera, et cetera and so forth. Story_ID: 487511 Speaker 1: The other thing that we have done, we have a journalism center here called the Anthony J. Cebrun Journalism Center [Nashville, Tennessee], and every summer we have students come in and we teach them about the paper, and we take them on field trips to other newspapers in Birmingham [Alabama], Memphis [Tennessee], and Chattanooga [Tennessee]. And we-- Speaker 2: So, so is this for high school students or college students? Speaker 1: High school students, but we do have interns. Speaker 2: And it's called the what, again the? Speaker 1: Anthony J. Cebrun, S-E-B-R-U-M [sic.] Journalism Center. Speaker 2: Okay. Now who-- Speaker 1: He was--he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) who was Anthony J. Cebrun? Speaker 1: He, he had the largest healthcare company in the United States and he's African American. But he made so much money and he hired so many black folks that, you know, that were making a hundred, hundred thousand, hundred twenty-five thousand dollars a year that they figured out a way to take him down, and they did. They took his company. And, and that's--Nashville's [Nashville, Tennessee] good for that. Maybe he was too successful. He was very private, but Black Enterprise came here two years, I guess, in a row, you know, for their event. And they insisted on, you know, an interview with him and he finally gave in. And after that interview came out, the state started really working on him and just took him down. You know, there--he may have had some flaws in the company, everybody does, but it was just terrible, that was a big fight too. Speaker 2: So is he--is he still with us (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He lives in Africa. Speaker 2: He lives in Africa, okay, moved to. Speaker 1: Yeah, he has healthcare over there now, where he's respected. Story_ID: 487512 Speaker 1: Tennessee's a pretty racist tow- state. I think Mississippi is a little more liberal than Tennessee now. Speaker 2: That's, that's (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: That's hard to believe. Speaker 1: Well it's true. It's very true. We--our city government, they have three positions that they rotate with black folks, just three, you know. And every major that's--that comes in the office--this current mayor, Bill Purcell, you know, we all supported him, twice. When he was running the first time, he--you know, we told him with all those folks sitting--there's lots of top-level jobs, you know, that we need to see some blacks in there. And he said, and I know what you mean, I can't push them out but as they retire, I will replace them with African American. They've repla- they've retired many since he's been in service. Not one African American has been placed in any of those positions. Now we got people running for mayor again. It's gonna be the same story and it's just tragic. This town has an awful lot of educated black folks, so there has to be more than three top positions in city government. Speaker 2: That--wh- what's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That--huh, to head up some of these divisions, you know. Our parks commission, he's black, you know. But I'm talking about working down there around the mayor free, it's an insult. Speaker 2: What's the percentage of black people in Nashville [Tennessee]? Speaker 1: We're about 23 percent. And see, I can't even te- tell you what the percentage of white folks are. We have so many everything else that's in here (laughter) so, you know. It's hard to tell. Speaker 2: Okay. Well you said there're a lot of institutions of higher learning, a lot of expertise here you would think? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, definitely. This is--this is an educated town. Story_ID: 487513 Speaker 1: We were noticing the layout of the paper [The Tennessee Tribune], you have a lot of nice big pictures in the newspaper. Do you have a philosophy about how newspapers should be laid out, the visual side of it? Speaker 2: Well, personally I feel like my people won't pick up a newspaper if they don't see a picture. You know, they don't wanna read all that, whatever it is. But what--and people have told me this, tha- when they get my paper, they go to the social section and they read, 'cause they see the pictures. And then, they're relaxed they read the news, you know. But basically in black papers, you know, our news is old news, so we have to do other things like say who's who in business or you know, what things are happening in the community because we're weekly, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, a weekly paper, I guess any weekly paper now would not be news oriented, because you--everything is already over with by then? Speaker 2: But we do a lot of national black news that these folks would never see. And that's what people like about my paper. They would never even know what's happening in New York [New York] or Chicago [Illinois] unless they read my paper, because they're not gonna read it in the white paper. Speaker 1: Yeah, I just was reading an extensive article on the res- resignation of the director of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] just now that I didn't know anything about. That happened on Ma- March the 4th and it's the first I've read about it. Speaker 2: Right. So those are the types of things, you know, the people need to know. And then people are doing creative things in other communities. And pe- excuse me, people can get ideas from what's somebody's doing in New York, you know, instead of us doing the same old thing over and over again. Story_ID: 487514 Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite story that you've covered in the paper, in the, in The Tennessee Tribune? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Reverend Henry Lyons. Do you remember him? Speaker 1: I remember the--yeah the president of the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.], the former president. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was very in depth, you know. And you know, how someone you trusted, a man of the cloth could manipulate so many women and his wife, you know, and buy all these homes and everything with our money. You know, and it just shows you it's not just African Americans do it, white preachers do it too. You know, how that system works, this religious system, you know. And that was my favorite story. And eventually I'll do something on the megachurches. Speaker 1: Okay. So what do you think about the megachurches just off the top? Speaker 2: Oh, I have a friend that has a megachurch, I better be careful, huh. I, I guess they're okay if the right person is, you know, the minister or bishop. But I think megachurches are not--they're not for me. They're--to me they're for young people because they need to be motivated, and these guys are really motivational speakers. You know, they can tell young people what to do and we need that today, you know. But for, for my spirituality, they can't do that for me. You know, I can't go to church with seventeen thousand folks, I just can't do that. Speaker 1: It's too in--it's not personal enough I guess? Speaker 2: No, I have to have the small church. I gotta feel like I belong. I have to feel like the pastor knows me. If I die tomorrow, he knows me. I don't want him getting up in the pulpit lying about me and he didn't even know me. And in the megachurch, there is no way the pastor could know all these folks. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Story_ID: 487515 Speaker 1: Now does, does the pa- paper [The Tennessee Tribune] kind of take on a task of dispensing African history and culture too? Through, through the--? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, we do that. And then--and we also--we get a lot of news out of Atlanta [Georgia] also, yeah. Their culture, it's a little different than ours. We haven't grown up yet, we're trying, you know. So, and you know, like we get involved in like the Trumpet Awards and Essence pays our way to their thing in New Orleans [Louisiana]. You know, we cover that. We do those types of things. Speaker 1: How is it for, for the black press at events? Do you, you get, you know, I've heard mixed stories about people from the black press getting into events and not being able to get into events, and nobody knows who their paper is, and you know, there's different? Speaker 2: Into major events? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Like-- Speaker 1: Well, first there's--well Trumpet Awards are something that, you know, well known, I'm sure that all the black papers know about. Speaker 2: Yeah, you don't see many. The Trumpet Awards right, it's just closed right now. It's the people who've always been coming. And I don't know if I would've gotten in, but I happened to know her. So she's always invited my husband and I-- Speaker 1: Is this Xernona--this is [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton, oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. So, we're on the list. It's hard to get on the list now, 'cause everybody wants to go. And she just seems to send invitations to the same people over and over again, you know. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was it tough to say, say you wanted to cover the Super Bowl or something, you know, the sports reported wanted to go? Speaker 2: Oh no, you wouldn't get in, unh-uh. Maybe Chicago Defender, but not us. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: It was--it's tough to get in the Titans [Tennessee Titans] game and we're right here [Nashville, Tennessee], you know. At first, you know, we did have passes, one pass to go, a photographer, you know, and a writer. Now they've cut that out. They send us what they want us to have, so. Story_ID: 487516 Speaker 1: Do you have a staff photographer here [The Tennessee Tribune]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And then I use freelance. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Who--well who is your staff photographer, just for the record? Speaker 2: James Artis. Speaker 1: Do you have a cartoonist? Speaker 2: No. We--I usually get my cartoons out of Chicago [Illinois], you know. But one of the things I found out about when I try those types of things, sometimes they work for a while and you're paying and then you don't get them or there're problems, it just doesn't work, you know. You'll get them for a while and then maybe, maybe the guy gets a big contract somewhere and you--you're dumped. So, but there was a guy in Chicago, I think we used him about two years and I don't know what happened. I guess he just stopped. And then for my entertainment, I pay a guy out of California. You know, he sends things in, sometimes I get mad because it's like this. But it's--and I hate to cut him out 'cause some people send me some of that same stuff free. But you know, you get to working with people and you just keep working with them, yeah. And then I have--I don't know if you know, Kam Williams, Kam-Kam, he does a lot of writing. So he's been with me for years. He's out of Connecticut, so he sends articles and so forth. I mean, entertainment articles and you know. Story_ID: 487517 Speaker 1: What segment of the business community is your biggest advertiser in the--in your paper [The Tennessee Tribune]? Speaker 2: You mean other than foods, other than Publix [Publix Super Markets, Inc.]. Speaker 1: So foods are, Publix's the biggest? Speaker 2: That's my biggest. Yeah, they're my biggest, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, but-- Speaker 2: Now this guy, Tony [Anthony J. Cebrun], when he was advertising, you know, I, I really got started at the right time because he was there, you know. And, and he was paying me like a hundred and eighty thousand a year. Not just me, all the black newspapers, you know, across the state, you know. And when he--when they took him down, I'm gonna tell you, I didn't sleep 'cause I didn't know how I was gonna survive. You know, you get used to that money, but we didn't have Publix then. So we picked up Publix and picked up Harris Teeter [Harris Teeter Supermarkets, Inc.], the other food place. So things tend to work out when you think they won't work out. 'Cause I, I was having a nervous breakdown. That's too much money to lose. Speaker 1: And Tony, you're talking about Anthony Cebrun? Speaker 2: Cebrun. Yeah, oh yeah, he was just good to us. That's why I named the Center [Anthony J. Cebrun Journalism Center, Nashville, Tennessee] after him and you know. He, he would fund the center in the summer and all that, so. I'd be so rich now if he was still here. Story_ID: 487518 Speaker 1: What are your future plans for the paper [The Tennessee Tribune] now? Speaker 2: My future plan is to retire, I'm tired of this (laughter). I'm just trying to get it to the point where there this--I bought this building. They, they were selling it for like three hundred and fifty thousand, and I--my contract was a hundred and twenty-five thousand, of course they turned it down. And so, two years went by 'cause I knew nobody would pay three fifty on this street. And I saw this for sale sign in--I mean sold and I really got kind of mad, but I called a realtor guy and he told me a beautician, they got the contract. I said, "How much?" A hundred fifteen thousand which made me so mad, you know. So, anyhow I said wanna put a backup contract. Well he didn't want me to put the backup contract, he said because I gave you confidential information. I put it on there anyhow for a hundred and two. And so, he had to accept it 'cause I was gonna take him to the board. Of course you know we don't speak now. I said, "Because she's not gonna get it, you know." I said, "With whatever I have, I can't get a mortgage through the bank, SunTrust Bank [SunTrust Banks], she's not gonna get it." And she didn't get it, so I got it. And now I owe thirty thousand. That's been--I think I've had--I haven't even had this loan ten, ten years. But I, you know, I pay extra and all that. I was trying to get it paid off, computers and stuff paid off you know. And then I'm gonna let the guys have it. Yeah, again, I'm just tired. 'Cause I do a, a lot of other things. And they can run it anyhow without me. Speaker 1: Okay, so you got people in place that'll-- Speaker 2: They're associate publishers, yeah. In fact, I gotta get my will together 'cause, well one of them is my son-in-law and the other one is a guy that came to me from Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and asked me could he just work and learn how to do the paper and I didn't have to pay him. So I didn't for months. And my husband [Ludwald Orren Pettipher Perry] said, "You're making a fool out of him, you're using him." I said, "He didn't want any money, give the man some money." I gave him fifty dollars a week for some more months, and it went on. And my husband kept telling me off and you know, 'cause the guy was good. We'd be down there at two o'clock in the morning, he'd be right there, he wasn't married then. So then finally, you know, I kept increasing his salary, you know, he's up to forty thousand now, that's pretty good isn't it just coming in. I told him he put me in a trick. I said, "You were just getting yourself a job." He made himself a job, but he's so good and so pleasant, you know. So, but the other good thing is that we write about automobiles and then we get two and three cars a week free to drive. So, that's good too. And then I have, you see the little girls with the violins? I had for like seven years Suzuki classes for little girls. Speaker 1: Here in the building, okay? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. But my teacher moved to Atlanta [Georgia], so right now I'm just holding the violins to see what I'm gonna do, you know. If I don't get it back here, I'll give the violins to the charter school, you know. Speaker 1: So, you're the only tenant--you're the only occupant in the building really now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --but the, but the community does get some use out of this too, I guess with the classes? Speaker 2: Yeah, when--sometimes if we just move everything in the back. I've had book signings, things like that, yeah. Story_ID: 487519 Speaker 1: Do you have an editorial board or anything that meets? Speaker 2: Yeah, we're the (laughter) editorial board. But the community doesn't know who they are (laughter). Who we are, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you have, ever have some lively debates about what to-what, what you ought to do and print [in The Tennessee Tribune]? Speaker 2: No. I have very mild mannered employees that don't talk back. No, we do discuss things, you know. And, and I--they pretty much run it if I'm not here, and you know like that legal section, I had no idea it wasn't in the paper until somebody called. And I said, "No it runs every week." And the lady said, "No, it has not been in your paper." So then I call a staff meeting. "What happened to the legal section?" "Well, we just thought, you know, we'll cut down on expense." Hell you know what expense is, you're not in my bank account (laughter), you know. So we put it back in. Story_ID: 487520 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. Wh- what are some of your hopes and concerns about the black community in Nashville [Tennessee] and the nation? Speaker 2: I guess I'm concerned that we don't really care anymore about us collectively and I don't think we're gonna get anywhere individually. I mean to me, most of us are interested in how much money I got and what I'm gonna spend and what I'm gonna do, what trip I'm gonna take. There's no real--I mean there is some concern out there. I'm with some groups that work with young kids, that's where I was a few days. But just not enough of it. We're, we're almost afraid of each other it seems, you know. And even nationwide, that guy's picture near the--was on the wall, the Hispanic, was my best buddy and he died and had a heart attack. It nearly killed me. But we were always peas in the pod everywhere stirring up trouble with everybody. And I just watch how they work together. In every function I go to that's theirs, so many of them there, you know. Like I'm a part of where I help sponsor part of the Nashville Film Festival. Well the Hispanics have their day and you can't even get out in Green Hills [Nashville, Tennessee] when they have their day, just millions of them. I don't know where they come from, supporting their film. When we have our films, most of the people there, 99 percent, they're white looking at our films. Where are we? So we're not supporting the black films like they support, they're just more together, you know. And I, I was in leadership, Middle Tennessee [Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro, Tennessee], with a Hispanic woman and we got in a big debate. And she told the whole class, that we're together, your people are together. If, if I want a restaurant, two or three of us will go in together and pool our money or we'll all stay together, you're people don't do that, you know. And she was telling the truth, I didn't wanna admit it, you know, but she was telling the truth. So, and a lot of times when--we run out of here sometimes, which disease is it, maybe sickle cell and I have the radio show and all that, and people are supposed to come by, you know. We try to do our part and you can't get the people to come for support unless the person's in their church, and then they may not come, you know. Or you know somebody personally that has sickle cell, you know, just don't get the support. Speaker 1: It's not like a collective consciousness of what our condition is would you say? Speaker 2: And I ran a lot of free ads, you know--you know, for the community. Story_ID: 487521 Speaker 1: Do you see your paper [The Tennessee Tribune] as a instrument to, to--of, of unity or to try to foster more unity in the community-- Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: --around, around key things? Speaker 2: I do. It's a well-respected paper I have to say that much. And we do, you know, on certain issues, we try. The political issues we come together, you know. But otherwise you don't know what's happening politically either. You know, you hear the other side and we had a problem with the last president of TSU [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], this guy back here and you know, my paper was a vehicle for him 'cause every time the white paper would attack him, then I'd have to come back, you know, and fight them. And I do that and I'm known for doing that, 'cause I won't let them take down any of our black people like that. You know 'cause they destroy the, destroy their reputations. These folks have kids, grandchildren. They don't care and they just stay on it every week they're pounding the same thing over and over again. 'Til finally it has to convince somebody this guy's not any good 'cause The Tennessean said so, you know. So, so, you know, we fight that type of thing. Story_ID: 487522 Speaker 1: There's a Rosetta Miller-Perry film award [Rosetta Miller-Perry Award for Best Black Filmmaker]? I mean, you mentioned the festival [Nashville Film Festival], but there's a--there's an award or something right? Speaker 2: I give a thousand dollars to the best black film, yeah. Where do you pick up all my stuff (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, wha- who have been some of the, the--? Speaker 2: This is, well I gave it last year and Oscar Brown [HistoryMaker Oscar Brown, Jr.], wasn't he the--? Speaker 1: Oh it's for the Oscar Brown, Jr. film? Speaker 2: Yeah, I gave that last year. I don't know who's gonna get it this year. Speaker 1: That's, that's--I know his name too, he's from Denver [Colorado]. Betts, Donnie Betts--Donnie Betts won that. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that was a good film. Speaker 1: Yes, right, yeah. 'Music is My--' ['Music Is My Life, Politics My Mistress: The Story of Oscar Brown, Jr.'] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so I do that. You know, 'cause nobody else is gonna do it. So you don't have any choice. I mean why--there should be some incentive for people to wanna even submit films. They get quite a few though. Matthew Kennedy ['Matthew Kennedy: One Man's Journey'] is--his film will be shown, it's real good, I've seen it. Speaker 1: Okay. That--that's gonna be shown this year at the festival? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, April 21st, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So it's every April that--that your festival takes place. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Story_ID: 487523 Speaker 1: So, we always ask this question too. When you look back on everything you've done to this point, and you've done a lot of different things, would you do anything differently? Speaker 2: I probably wouldn't have started a magazine [Contempora]. I really wouldn't have done that. And I really would like to quit, but I can't. You know, and you just get in it and people expect it and you just can't, because it's never made any money. 'Cause you can't, it's too expensive, you know. So, that's the one thing I wouldn't have done. The newspaper, well I'm, I'm pretty satisfied with it, but I guess I would like it to be disseminated a little bit further, but we can't go into Memphis [Tennessee] 'cause my friends have newspapers down there. So that's a fight. I went into Jackson, Tennessee once and a guy had a fit 'cause there was no comparison in the two papers, and that was hurting him. So I pulled out, you know. So, I guess that's my human side, 'cause I could've said to heck with it. Speaker 1: Yeah, and just trounced him or something (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I didn't wanna do that. So other than getting, you know, I'm just sorry I started the magazine, even though it's fun to work on, you know. But you can't keep giving and I keep giving, you know. So I give every month to five nonprofits, you know, and I'll probably keep on doing that. But if something happens to me, it's probably going to end. Story_ID: 487524 Speaker 1: So you have a policy, you say you don't run negative stories about black instit- institutions as such? Speaker 2: Yeah and there's a problem now, because the alumni of Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], they're fighting with the president. Well they want me to do a story, which I've refused to do. So now they wanna put--put a ad in the paper [The Tennessee Tribune]. Well, you know, I don't think I'll turn down an ad, but at least I wouldn't be the one putting the story out there. 'Cause I told them, I have to get the other side, you know. But I don't, I try not to attack black institutions because the white papers do it well here, you know. Speaker 1: But if you--if you had an investigative--do you have any investigative rep- reporters (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. I have people that I can--no--I mean, I have freelance, yeah. Speaker 1: Do they really do an in-depth investigation? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: They're, they're, they're white and from the white paper. They, they do good stuff. And the one guy I was telling you about he used to be my editor, he's real good. Speaker 1: So, if one of your investigative reporters really found out something that was really kind of bad about a black figure in town, would you publish it? Speaker 2: A black what? Speaker 1: A black figure in town, a black leader or a political figure, or? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If, if I didn't--if I didn't like him I might (laughter). No, I wouldn't. I just abou- and that happened to me. We had a black museum and this guy published books for people. Well, he was dishonest. He would take your money and you'd never get your book. He did the black Bible here and he--and these investors are rich white men out in--out in Brentwood [Tennessee]. They didn't get their money. I mean he was just crooked. Then he had--we don't know how he built this building, but he got some grant money or something, built a museum. And real nice and everything, and the artwork was supposed--from Africa and all that. Course my husband [Ludwald Orren Pettipher Perry] said, you can put that artwork in the ground and leave it for a while and it will come out however it comes out. Found out later that was true. So, some black writers came to me because they had paid him and then--he never published their books, and I mean thousands of dollars, and would I do the story. I told them no, I couldn't do it. You know, and I know that's wrong, you know. And I said furthermore, if he loses his building and everything because I did that story, he's still has a lot of credibility in this town, people like him. He's been in the community and all that. Goes to church here and all that. I become the enemy, I'm dirty, I took him, I made him lose his business, you know. So, so you gotta go to the white folks, I'm not doing it. They did. Speaker 1: The white press will. Speaker 2: Oh Lord, they took that man down so fast. He was gonna go down anyhow, I didn't wanna be responsible, so I just refused to do it. You got all these white folks to be glad to do it, you know. They got him. Speaker 1: So you think this--if there was somebody that really was doing something that was detrimental to the black community and they were black, I mean, would you--would you hesitate to expose them (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I have to know that it's true. I doubt it. I just don't have that type of newspaper, now for this community. Now I do write about other communities, especially preachers, you know, the guy that was down there in Texas that went from nothing to multimillion dollars and was raping women in the church and all that. I, I--that was big time, I had to put that in there, that soap opera, had nothing else to read so I put it in my paper and it was good reading. And then the minister out in Denver, Colorado who, and, and I know this minister, who had six hundred and seventy eight insurance policies on people in his church. They're supposed to be employees. Hundred thousand dollar policies on each one of them. Just so happened one of the women died, she had five kids, and you know, ten thousand was gonna go to the family, he gets ninety thousand. So that was a red flag for the insurance company. And then when they checked it out that newspaper out there, just awful. But what they were also saying is technically what he was doing wasn't illegal, so I guess he can still do it. Speaker 1: So he just took insurance policies on his parishioners and who was paying the premium? Speaker 2: I guess he was, he had to. They didn't even know--this woman's mother didn't even know she had an insurance policy. And then in the same article, I put his son, who is a minister, who was a brilliant attorney in Ohio and started dealing with the cocaine, all that kind of stuff, you know, and he went to prison now. And I just put it in there, 'cause he's, he's preaching now and so, you know, he's gonna make it again. He'll probably have a megachurch and by--I'll give him six years, you know. So that type of thing I just put in there so these preachers don't wanna do this. But, but they don't live here, so, you know. No, I really couldn't do it to people here, my heart wouldn't let me. You know, even though as a journalist I know that that's wrong, you know. But I, I couldn't expose them. Story_ID: 487525 Speaker 1: You think that maybe being here, I've often heard Nashville [Tennessee] descr- described as the Bible Belt, in the Bible Belt by everybody we've interviewed here pretty much. Do you think that maybe black people have put too much trust in the church in ways maybe--well not as critical as they, they need to be? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think until something happens, like this preacher out there. You know, you hear a lot of people cite in Nashville oh they're a bunch of crooks or, you know, he has an airplane, and you know, he--he's not a real Christian and all that. But until something really comes that someone has really done something, like that pastor in Denver [Colorado], then it's--they're always gonna believe, I mean this is always gonna be the Bible Belt. It's not as, I guess, as strict as it used to be, because I think some of the preachers fought the lottery but we still got it, you know. And some of them fought the Titans [Houston Oilers; Tennessee Titans] coming here. But, you know, it just shows that they don't have the power they think they have, you know, so. And eventually we'll probably have gambling here. They'll fight it, but we'll probably have it. You know, so it's not, you know. Story_ID: 487526 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy. Well, I'm too young to have a legacy (laughter). I guess, my legacy will be my newspaper [The Tennessee Tribune]. I am the only African American woman in Tennessee, or the first I'll say, to actually start a newspaper from scratch. You know, I started it from scratch. I didn't take somebody else's or buy it with my daddy, so whatever, you know. So, I, I think the legacy, and I do with my newspaper, I do my justice fighting through my newspaper. I do a lot of articles. I do the It's a Shame [ph.] column, you know, and I point out things that are shameful, you know. So, and, and knowledge in the village, really giving information that you ought to know, you know, so. My legacy would be, I guess, a positive newspaper for African Americans and, and that's what I wanted to do. I didn't just want any old newspaper, I wanted--I wanted--I want people to go home and get a cocktail, sit in the bathtub and read without looking at somebody's been stabbed fifteen times and all of that--that type of thing. Just get tired of that, you know. And one of the reasons I started the newspaper because the other two black newspapers, a woman got killed. She shouldn't have been killed, but the cops killed her sitting in her car. And every time you would pick that paper up, you would see this woman and I can still see here sitting in the car. And they wrote it and they kept in on the front page. You know, that's overkill. Because my thing is if, if, if The Tennessean and, and the major TV stations they get that news, if she gets killed Saturday they have it, it's done and over with, except for a trail or something or catches somebody. Here comes the black press, everybody comes out on Wednesday and they start running the same story. Well, I think if you're gonna run it, do something different, talk to the mama, the kids, the neighbors, do a different story. They come with the same story, same picture. And then they run it over and over and over, and I--I just don't think it's good for our kids. You know, our kids ought to know something about education. But, but other than that, my journalism class--or interns, I have some interns that come in from college. One is big time in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], can't--don't ask me her name, but, but she has a big job in Hollywood. One fella, McFarland--Justin McFarland, when he came his dad didn't want him to come 'cause he lived in Madison [Wisconsin] and you know, this is over here in the ghetto. So, his father finally let him come. We got his internship with the Titans [Tennessee Titans]. Today he's a TV sportscaster in Huntsville, Alabama. And, and some of the kids have just gone on to nice jobs. I mean, I'm not saying we did it, we didn't do it, but we had a little input in it. And he never would've had that job had he not been with the Titans. That experience. So the whole time he went to college he was coming up here to the Titans games, you know, he would get in, special and all that and he would write about it and all that. So that makes you feel that, I don't care if it's one, you know. But this other girl's done well in Hollywood. Yeah, in fact she came--I--she even stayed with me, you know, for the, you know, summer that she was here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So and they, they come back through and say thank you and all that. Story_ID: 487527 Speaker 1: Well tell us about your family. You mentioned your husband a few times and--and you have children too? Speaker 2: My husband is, I don't even know how old he is, he's eighty-six, no he's eighty-three, he's in his eighties, and he is a retired physician. He worked at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], he was there when Dr. Elam [HistoryMaker Dr. Lloyd C. Elam] was at--was the president. He's a gastroenterologist. He's scoped for lots of cancer. And I think his dad went to--got his master's [degree] at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And you know, one of the first blacks that ever went to Yale. And his father has a school named for him, don't ask me where in North Carolina, wherever they grew up. He has a pretty prominent family. He has three children. And I, you know--I'm sorry, he has four, I have three. And one of his daughters, Janet [Janet Perry Hooks], is marry- has Ben- married Ben Hooks' nephew [Michael Hooks]. So that's how we connect. Speaker 1: Now, wh- what's your husband's name? Speaker 2: Ludwald, L-U-D-W-A-L-D, Orren, O-R-R-I-N, O-R-R-I-N [sic.], Pettipher, P-E-T-T-I-P-H-E-R, Perry. P-E-T-T-I-P-H-E-R. No, Ludwald Orren Pettipher Perry [Ludwald Orren Pettipher Perry]. Speaker 1: Pettipher Perry, okay. Okay. All right. Okay, and your children now? Speaker 2: The names of his children? Speaker 1: No, I--just, just your children just--what, yeah? Speaker 2: I have three. And I have twins. And my oldest daughter [Victoria Miller Deberry] is married to a surgeon in New York. And the twin daughters married two associate publisher here. Story_ID: 487528 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I hope it's not a bomber (laughter). No, you've asked me a lot. Speaker 1: Okay, well I hope they've been good. But the last question is similar to legacy. Ma'am how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That I established the first- I was the first African American woman to own their own newspaper [The Tennessee Tribune]. Speaker 1: Okay, here in-- Speaker 2: In the State of Tennessee. 'Cause they always talk about and I can't think of her name, the other woman. But she didn't own a newspaper, she was the editor, she wrote, et cetera. She didn't own it. The one they ran out of Tennessee, I can never think of her-- Speaker 1: Oh Ida B. Wells. Speaker 2: Yeah, she didn't own the newspaper. So, I'm unique and broke (laughter). Speaker 1: But you've got a good story, thank you for sharing it with us. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 487529 Speaker 1: This is my mother and father, Anderson [Anderson Irvin] and Mary Irvin [Mary Hall Irvin]. The picture was taken in Coraopolis, Pennsylvania in 1946. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead and tell us about this one. Speaker 1: These are the charter members of the Coalition of 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women] in Nashville, Tennessee in 1999. Speaker 2: Where are you? Speaker 1: On the third row to the left. To the left of me, right there. I guess it's third. Speaker 2: You look different in every picture. Speaker 1: I know that's what they always say. Speaker 2: This is 1970 on inaugural cruise for the opening of Contempora magazine. And this is [HistoryMaker] Rosetta Miller-Perry. Speaker 1: You started the magazine in-- Speaker 2: Ninety--'90 [1990], I'm sorry, 1990. Speaker 1: This is a coalition--this is the Greater Nashville Black Chamber of Commerce which I organized in 1998. And these are the board members. Speaker 2: And you're in yellow? Speaker 1: And I'm in yellow, I'm wearing a yellow jacket. This is a picture of my husband, Dr. Ludwald Orren Pettipher Perry and myself. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's it, do I need to say anymore? Speaker 2: About when-- Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, 1995...