 Story_ID: 85493 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewing today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Blanche M. Manning, spelled B as in boy, L-A-N-C-H-E, middle initial M, Manning, M-A-N-N-I-N-G. Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is December 12, 1934, born in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a Federal judge. Speaker 1: All right. Is that the--your full, I mean-- Speaker 2: I guess you could call it--I'm a United, United States District judge-- Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: --for the Northern District of Illinois. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 26, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're currently in my office in the Dirksen Federal Building, 219 South Dearborn, Chicago. Story_ID: 85494 Speaker 1: All right. Be--before we go into depth, there are five "People Magazine"-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the first one is and they just require a short answer, the first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Cheese. Speaker 1: All right. What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I think you would say the fall. Speaker 1: All right. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hawaii. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't recall that I do. Story_ID: 85495 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about your family history and not the whole thing right now, but I want to know how far you can trace your family back. You, you, know, how far can you, can you go, and go into the nineteenth century with a-- Speaker 2: My--no, my grandparents, and that would have been in the, in the mid-1900s. Speaker 1: Okay, you, okay. So your--you can only go back as far as your grandparents on both sides or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, I didn't know my grandparents on my mother's [Marguerite Anderson Porter] side. She was orphaned and, consequently, I never knew who her, her parents were, so I only knew my father's [Julius Lionel Porter] mother and his stepfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do they have any stories about how they were brought up or any, any stories for what life was like? Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I didn't spend a lot of time with them. They lived in Memphis, Tennessee, and the only time I saw them was every now and then. I went there for summer vacation, so I really--I don't have a, I don't have a really vivid memory of them. I just know that they raised chickens. Speaker 1: All right. Well, did your grandparents talk about their lives at all--how they were raised or-- Speaker 2: No, I can't say that they did. Speaker 1: But they were farmers basically? They lived on a-- Speaker 2: Actually, you know, now that I think about it, it was really in an urban area but in those days, they could raise chickens in their backyard. Speaker 1: So it was in Memphis itself, right? Speaker 2: It was in Memphis itself, right, uh-hum. Speaker 1: And do you know if they lived in Memphis--had they lived there a long time or-- Speaker 2: I believe they had, yes. Story_ID: 85496 Speaker 1: Maybe you could tell us about your--let's start with your mother. Can you give us her name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Her name, Marguerite, M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-E. Her maiden name was Anderson, and her married name was Porter, P-O-R-T-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us, when was she born and where? Speaker 2: She was born July 25, 1911 and she was born in Whitehaven, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about her, you know, did she, you know, how did she grow up and how, where did she go to school and, you know, what kind of person was she? Speaker 2: She was a wonderful person. She grew up in Memphis [Tennessee]. She was raised by another family, a foster family, who she spoke of very highly. She loved them as though they were own parents. Speaker 1: Now, did she know what happened to her parents? Speaker 2: She never mentioned it. She just knew that her, her mother had died when she was very young. And her father was not--he did not die when she was very young, but she didn't have very much contact with him. In fact, she had no contact with him. In fact, I recalled when I was a teenager, she and I made an effort to try to find him, to try to locate him unsuccessfully. And she grew up in Memphis, Tennessee. She went to school there. She went to Booker T. Washington High School. And she also attended a college that was, as I recall, it was Le Moyne College [Syracuse, New York], L-E-M-O-Y-N-E. She didn't graduate from, from that school, but she attended there for a while. And then she met my father [Julius Lionel Porter] who also grew up in Memphis, and they married and they came to Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any special stories you want to tell us that's associated with your mother? Any, any, memories that you want to share with us? Speaker 2: Well, she was a very gentle person. She was--she worked, she was not a housewife. She worked during the time my brother and I were being brought up. She worked primarily for governmental agencies and she was, like I said, just a real sweet, gentle person. And, basically, that's, that's it. Story_ID: 85497 Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us about your father. What was his name, and can you spell his name for us? Speaker 2: Yeah. His, his name was Julius Lionel Porter, spelled J-U-L-I-U-S, Lionel, L-I-O-N-E-L, Porter, and he, likewise, was raised in Memphis. He was born in Memphis, Tennessee, and he was raised by his mother and his stepfather whose name was Albert McNeil (ph.). And he had a brother and a sister. And he worked for--when he was in Memphis, he worked for the railroad, Illinois Central. He was what was called a roundhouse clerk. And he, apparently, at some point in that employment, something went awry, and he was--he, I think he wanted a promotion, and he didn't get it so he quit. And he had, he had married my mother by that time. And, I guess, the day or two after he quit, so that he could still make use of his pass on the railroad, that was when they moved to Chicago. And he came to Chicago and he, like my mother, was also a governmental employee primarily. And he also managed a hotel in later life and-- Speaker 1: Okay, now is it--do, did your parents have a story about how they met that they shared with you? Speaker 2: No, they really didn't. No, they never told me how they met. Speaker 1: Do you have any idea how they met, no? Speaker 2: I don't because my dad was older than my mother, and so, I don't think they attended school together. So I'm, I'm really not sure how they met but they never, we never talked about that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so your father worked for various governmental agencies and-- Speaker 2: Right. And-- Speaker 1: He managed a hotel as far as-- Speaker 2: --he managed a hotel on the South side. Speaker 1: Oh, was it one of the Roberts? Okay, so-- Speaker 2: No, actually, it was a, it was an apartment hotel. It was called the Miramar Hotel, and he managed it from, I'd say, roughly in the '60's [1960s]. I know I was in college at the time, so we're talking probably about '60 [1960], '59 [1959] maybe. And he, I think, he retired in '72 [1972]. Story_ID: 85498 Speaker 1: Now, can you reflect, I guess, back on your childhood, and give us an idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I grew up on the South Side. I recall when I was very young, I lived at 36th and Vincennes. And at that time and, I, I had, I had a brother also. And when I was growing up in that area, it was very urban. There were--it was a beginning of gang, the gang culture. I recall once going outside to play, and seeing a number of young men walking down the street in big numbers, maybe twenty, thirty. And I didn't know what it was about at that time. I later found out that it was a gang and they, and it was terrifying. And we lived in that area for maybe a couple of years. And then we were fortunate enough to be able to move further South in a nicer area. And, but there was our--I'll never forget that particular instance when I saw those twenty or thirty young men walking down the street and-- Speaker 1: Who were they? What gang were they, do you know? Speaker 2: I don't. I can't think of the name of it now, but I know they, they were really a very dangerous gang because they did actually murder one of our friends who lived there. So that was, that was a very terrifying experience for me but, fortunately, we moved away from that. Speaker 1: Was the person they murdered an older person or a younger person? Speaker 2: No, he was, he was a teenager. He was probably--he was older than, than I was, but he was--we knew his family. And they just, for whatever reason, they did kill him. Speaker 1: So how old were you when you, when you noticed this gang? Speaker 2: Well, I was probably about ten years old because, as I recall, that was the year that we moved to the location further South. And that was in 1944, as I recall, so I was ten years old at that time. And we moved to an area that was known as West Chesterfield, and that was in--it's 93rd, 93rd and Forest. And it was kind of, had a rural kind of atmosphere, at least by comparison to where I had previously lived. And we went to school, primarily went to school at the Catholic schools--went to Corpus Christi, which was located on 49th and King Drive. And then we--I transferred once to Burnside Elementary School which was a public school. And I only stayed there for a very short time because it was, it was not the best of times in terms of race relations at that time. And I recall, I recall a very terrifying experience even then, and that was at 91st Street. But one day, we had to be escorted to school by police officers because there were, because there, there was, there was racial tension in the area at that time. But, ultimately, that dissipated. And I went on graduate from Corpus Christi--I went back to Corpus Christi, I graduated from Corpus Christi, and went on to attend public high school. I attended-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now I don't want to get too far. Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: I wanna kinda get--go back to when you're a little kid. Story_ID: 85499 Speaker 1: Can you, can you tell me like what kind of or what, what were you like when you were a little girl? I mean, what did your parents say, say you were like, and what, what did you like to do for-- Speaker 2: I was very, very studious. I loved school. I loved to read. I went to the library. I was one of the few of my friends who had a library card. I went to the library and I, I just, I excelled. I don't want to brag, but I did excel in elementary school Speaker 1: Now which library did you go to? Was it the Hall branch over there on-- Speaker 2: No, there was a library at--it was not--there's a library now on 79th, but that one wasn't there. We went to a library somewhere in Roseland, as I recall. Speaker 1: That's after you moved, right? Speaker 2: Yes, after I moved, right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And that's when I, when my, my memories are more vivid about my reading after we had moved to the location further South. Speaker 1: Okay. So it was after you were ten years old or something? Speaker 2: Right, uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. So what, what were your favorite books. Speaker 2: At some point, I remember reading "Little Women". I think that was one of my favorites. That's the one that, that I think of most. I'm sure I had many others but that, that's the one that I think of at the moment. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what sort of games would you play when you were come, coming up? Speaker 2: Oh, just the typical games, hopscotch and jump rope, and that's basically those kind of games. I didn't--that, that's about it. Speaker 1: Were, were you a real popular little girl where you can-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't have a lot of friends. I was, like I said, I was kind of like a bookworm. And I studied a lot and I wanted to do well in school, and I did well in school. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had a family. It's just--your household consisted of your mother, your father-- Speaker 2: And my brother. Speaker 1: --and your brother? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. There were no grandparents living with you or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, my grandparents were in Memphis [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: In Memphis, okay, all right. Story_ID: 85500 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about school now. You, you went to a Corpus Christi Elementary School? Speaker 2: Well, even before that, I went to St. Elizabeth. I went to St. Elizabeth from kindergarten through third grade, transferred to Corpus Christi. I went to Corpus Christi [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] fourth and fifth grade. I transferred to Burnside [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and I went to sixth grade at Burnside. Then I transferred back in seventh grade to Corpus Christi, and that's the school that I graduated from. Speaker 1: Okay. And you say you really liked school a lot (unclear)? Speaker 2: I loved it, yes. Speaker 1: What were your favorite subjects in school? Speaker 2: Reading, English, geography, history. I didn't like math a lot. I was never really excellent in math, but that's another story. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there, were there any particular teachers there that, that gave you guidance or, or singled you out for, you know-- Speaker 2: Probably my, my fifth grade teacher and my eighth grade teacher. They were nuns. Sister Bertha (ph.) was my fifth grade teacher. And my eighth grade teacher was Sister Ione (ph.). And Sister Ione and I really--I guess you might say, bonded together. She was an excellent teacher. I thought she was--she probably thought I was an excellent student. And I wound up doing a lot for her in terms of helping decorate the, the room and that kind of thing. And we talked about careers and, and she was--I thought she was quite instrumental in, in my attitude about education. I thought she was an excellent teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. And she taught all the subjects or-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, we had self-contained classes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: All right. Well, is there anything you, you didn't like about school? Is there anything about it that you didn't like? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Nothing? Okay. Speaker 2: I loved school. That was my life. Speaker 1: Now, did you get a chance to get involved with music when you were in school? Speaker 2: Not at that age. I started my involvement with music when I went to high school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, is there anything else about grade school you want to tell us about, anything in particular that happened in grade school or-- Speaker 2: No, I had--that's basically it. I was just a bookworm, and I spent most of my time studying and-- Speaker 1: Now did you get a chance to enter spelling bees or early contests (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: We had spelling bees at the school on, at the school level, not, not outside of the school. And I was usually the winner. I was very good at spelling. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you the best student-- Speaker 2: That, that talent has dissipated in the later years. Speaker 1: But were you the best student in the, in your class usually or-- Speaker 2: I would say I was one of the top students. Story_ID: 85501 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about high school. Now you went to-- Speaker 2: I went to Fenger High School. That's Christian Fenger High School [Chicago, Illinois] which is a public school. And I spent most of my waking hours at the--in the band room. That's when I discovered music. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you hadn't played an instrument before you went to Fenger? Speaker 2: Well, I, I had taken piano lessons, but nothing serious. And when I got there [Fenger High School, Chicago, Illinois], and you talk to the counsellor, and found out what the various activities were at the school, I found out about band. And so, I decided that I wanted to play a wind instrument. I never played anything before other than tinkling at the piano. And my dad [Julius Lionel Porter] supported me in, in everything, and he went out and bought me a second hand clarinet. We couldn't afford for me to take clarinet lessons, so I was kind of self-taught at that level. And, of course, the band director and the orchestra director, they, you know, were--they helped me as well. But so I spent most of my time in the band room. I was in the orchestra. I was in the band and whatever other band activities existed. I was in the marching band, the concert band, and the orchestra. Speaker 1: And how, how long did it take for you to, say, gain some proficiency with the clarinet? Speaker 2: Probably, probably at least a year and then, you know, I got better as I went along, and but I never did take lessons. I never take, took lessons until I got to college. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, what else about high school? Now you, you're in the band. Did, did that mean you, that meant that you--were you, you in the marching band? Speaker 2: I was in the marching band and the concert band. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had a chance to go to all the games and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I, I marched, and we were champions at that time in football. So I had an opportunity to march with the marching band at Soldiers Field, and I think we were champions for two or three years and-- Speaker 1: Okay. So that was a big deal? Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was a really big deal in my mind. And we also had a symphony orchestra, and that orchestra, we played all the, the classical music. And so, I spent all my time, as much as I could, in the band room. In fact, I spent so much time in the band room that somehow it got past me that I was going to have to take biology before I graduated. And in my last year, it came to my attention that I wasn't going to graduate if I didn't take biology. So I wound up taking biology with a class of sophomores because I had just concentrated so much on music. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there a favorite piece of music that you had when you were coming, coming up or that, that you played in the band? Speaker 2: No, not really. I enjoyed Mozart and Beethoven back then. Mozart was--there was a clarinet, let's see, there was this clarinet--I can't think of the name of it now, but it was by Mozart. And that was really, that was my favorite. Speaker 1: You had a good clarinet part (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: I know people, people in the concert bands. They, they have favorite, you know, music that they play. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Story_ID: 85502 Speaker 1: Now what else about high school [Fenger High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Did you get involved in any other, like social activities in high school? Speaker 2: Not within the high school. I did, at some point in time, while in high school, meet other musicians from other high schools. And it was probably about my third year that I met a number of people who were playing jazz. By this time, my dad [Julius Lionel Porter] had managed to somehow scrape up enough money to buy me a second hand saxophone. And so, I started playing saxophone as well. And I started playing jazz with these other individuals, some of who, some of whom went on to become pretty well known. Speaker 1: Who were they? Speaker 2: Well, the, the one that comes to mind primarily is Richard Evans. Richard Evans played bass, still plays bass, I guess, and he's currently a professor at Berklee [College of Music] in Massachusetts. And Richard was--he was also somewhat of an inspiration to me in terms of the, the musical aspects of my life. And I played later, but this gets a little beyond, but what we're talking about now in college, I played with Eddie Harris. And, basically, what I was doing at that point, we had a social center, which was held at Gillespie. And it was, it would--in the social center, they had socials on Friday nights, and I would go up there sometimes and play. But primarily, my jazz playing days were with a group of--actually, they were all guys, now that I think about it. And we would meet at somebody's house and we would just play, jam, and that's when I started enjoying jazz. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Right. Now what did you--well, I guess you, you concentrated on English in, in high school, English and-- Speaker 2: English, yeah, that was my favorite topic, uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Any, any other aspects of high school that stand out? Did you run for class office, anything like that or-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't. Speaker 1: You're not, you're not-- Speaker 2: Well, I was kind of real introverted, just into my music world (laughter). Speaker 1: Now the music world was good to you though. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Isn't it something, yeah. Well, who was some of your mentors in high school? Any, any teachers that stand out now that, that impressed you or took an interest in you? Speaker 2: Yeah, the band director and the orchestra director. The band director's name was Mr. Lumbrazo. Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Lumbrazo, spelled L-U-M-B-R-A-Z-O, phonetically, I think that's the way it's spelled. And Mr. Tremble (ph.) was the orchestra director. And they were quite helpful to me in, in terms of my developing my musical skills. Story_ID: 85503 Speaker 1: Okay, so when, when you were on the verge of graduation from high school [Fenger High School, Chicago, Illinois] did, what did you think you would be doing career wise, or did you have any, had you developed-- Speaker 2: I was going to be a musician (laughter). That's what I thought I was going to be. And, consequently, that's what I, in, in my last year, I started preparing for college. And I applied and was accepted to Roosevelt University's Chicago Musical College, and so-- Speaker 1: Okay. So did you get a chance to go? Speaker 2: I did. For two years, I went there for two years until my dad [Julius Lionel Porter] started suggesting to me that I was probably going nowhere fast. Speaker 1: Now why did he say that? Speaker 2: (Coughing). Excuse me. In those days, there were obstacles, both in the classical and the jazz arena. The obstacle in the classical arena at that point was, basically, there were no women, or there were very few women, who had succeeded in the classical field, at least insofar as being a member of a band, a little different--suppose, you know, I suppose, for somebody who was maybe a singer. But for an instrumentalist, there just did not seem to be a lot of opportunity out there. And in the jazz arena, my dad didn't like it. At that time, we're talking about the '50's [1950s]. At that time, most, unfortunately, many jazz musicians were caught up in a fast world that he did not envision for his little girl. So I took his advice and I switched majors, and transferred to Chicago Teachers College. Well before that, I transferred to DePaul and I took education courses at DePaul. And then I ultimately transferred to Chicago Teachers College because it was cheaper. Story_ID: 85504 Speaker 1: And--yeah. Speaker 2: Now Chicago Teachers, Chicago Teachers College is now Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 1: That's correct, uh-hum. Speaker 2: Okay. Was is it still out at 95th and-- Speaker 1: No, it was on 68th and Normal-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --at the time I attended. And that's, that's where I graduated from the Chicago Teachers College-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --with a Bachelor of Education. Speaker 2: All right. So, well, how was college for you? And how-- Speaker 1: Uh-- Speaker 2: Did you stay on campus at any of these schools? Speaker 1: No, I didn't-- Speaker 2: And you-- Speaker 1: --no, I never stayed on campus until my old age. And then I went and got an advanced degree, and I stayed on campus at that time. So I worked and went to school. When I was at Roosevelt, I did not work and I went there for two years. And then I transferred to DePaul, and that's where I was employed full time. I was able to get a job teaching school before I graduated actually--teaching Catholic school. I taught second grade at Holy Cross School, which was located out on the South Side. And other jobs that I held were with the government. I worked for GSA [General Services Administration]. I worked for the Internal Revenue Service. I worked for the post office for three hours (laughter). And other, other little jobs, you know, Spiegel, that kind of thing. And I attended school at the same time. I also worked for--full time for Michael Reese Hospital as a secretary to the Director of Nursing, and that was immediately before I began college full time again. That was immediately before I went back to--well, not back to, but went to Chicago Teachers College. And I guess that's basically it. Story_ID: 86217 Speaker 1: During the time that you were in college, you know, the Civil Rights Movement was heating up, you know, and the Brown v. the Board of Education decision in '54 [1954]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the Montgomery Bus Boycott of '56 [1956], '57 [1957], you know, what was--did you take notice of all this? I guess you had to, but, you know, what, what were you thinking? Speaker 2: Oh, well, absolutely, I did take notice of it. And, and it was, actually, I believe, at about that time that I started thinking about the law because, you know, we, you couldn't help but hear about people, such as--well, one of my role models, Thurgood Marshall, and, and what he was doing in that connection. And, you know, as time went on, other people engaging in, in all of the activities that required the services of a lawyer. So I, it was at this point that I really started getting somewhat of an interest in the law. I hadn't really decided at that point but, certainly, I attended many things. For instance, I was at the, at Soldier Field to hear Martin Luther King's [Jr.] speech, the, you know, the famous speech, "I have a dream." And I participated in it to a certain extent. I wasn't extremely active. I wasn't a demonstrator, that kind of thing, but whatever, you know, whatever I could, could do within what I considered to be a reason at that point, I did. And so I, I definitely took note of it, and I think that is part of what inspired me to go and to become a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. And did you have any friends or associates who were involved in law at all at that time? Speaker 2: No. I had a neighbor who was a judge and I didn't really know him that well. Speaker 1: Who is that? Speaker 2: Judge Duke Slater. And I worked for a law firm part-time as a secretary. Speaker 1: Which one? Speaker 2: Stark and Anglin. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, in fact, that is really, I think, what did it in terms of going to law school. I decided that, you know, I, I can do this, I can do this. So that was back in, in the back of my mind at, at that time. I believe that was in, that would have been in the late '50's [1950], and right before I went to school, back to school full time to Chicago Teachers College. Speaker 1: Now, in those days, did, did you have a sense of, of what Thurgood Marshall was doing with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or-- Speaker 2: I did, I did. I was, in fact, like I said, Thurgood Marshall has been for many, many years, my, my role model. And so, and it was at that time, I was, I was in college at the time. I was in my second year. And I became aware of all the wonderful things he was doing and attempting to do so-- Speaker 1: Did you, did, did people know about--I guess the Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] in those days and Charles Houston and, and-- Speaker 2: Well, I knew about Howard Law School because I thought about going there but it just, economically, it was easier for me to go to school here in Chicago. Story_ID: 86218 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: All right. So after Chicago Teachers College [currently Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], you taught school here? Speaker 2: I taught school and I entered law school [John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: At the same time? Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I started law school in, I started in '61 [1961], as I recall, didn't graduate until '67 [1967], but that was because I took a slight hiatus from it when my husband and I suddenly became the proud parents of five kids (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, suddenly? (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Now when did you meet your husband? Speaker 2: I met my husband when I was in high school. And I was in, I was--had just finished my third year in high school. And I got a job for a publishing company for which he was a supervisor. And he ultimately became my boss, and we eventually started dating, and we dated for a number of years until when we got married. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Right. And so by '61 [1961], you had five children? Speaker 2: No, it was in '64 [1964] that I got the, you know, and it was by that time, we had, you know, it was a question of trying to find somewhere to move to that would take five kids. And so I dropped out of law school. And then when I went back, I didn't have much longer to go because I was going part-time to law school and teaching full time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Now what schools did you teach at? Speaker 2: I started teaching at Sexton, A O Sexton Elementary School on 61st and Evans. Speaker 1: That's Woodlawn, yeah? Speaker 2: Yeah. And I taught there for a year, and then I was transferred to James Wadsworth Elementary School. And I taught--at Sexton, I taught fourth grade. And Wadsworth, I taught sixth grade, and I taught there until I began a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you went to Kent Law School? Speaker 2: I went to John Marshall. Speaker 1: John Marshall, that's right, yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-hum, right. Speaker 1: All right. Well, how did you find law school? I mean, did you, what was it, challenging for you or-- Speaker 2: It was very challenging. It was very interesting. And there were, of course, some subjects that I couldn't stand (laughter), but by and large, I found it very challenging, very interesting, very stimulating intellectually. And I enjoyed it--generally speaking, I enjoyed law school. And it was difficult because most of the time that I went to law school, I was working full time. And part of that time, by that time, the end of it, we had inherited all these children, so and they were two, eight, eleven, fourteen, and fifteen. Speaker 1: Now, now tell me about how that happened, you know, how you inherited all these children. Speaker 2: Well, there were two sets. One set, the first set, were related to my husband. They were my husband's nephews, and their mother--their father died in June of that year. And in September, the mother died. And we took three of her four children--I'm sorry, we took four of her, four of her children. And then later, (coughing), excuse me, my brother's wife died. And then, we took their son so we had the five children. And it was a total change (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes, I guess so. Now, now, you didn't have any children of your own? Speaker 2: No, we, we don't have any biological children, but we consider them to be our children. Speaker 1: Yeah, and that, that all like--it would seem like it was a--well, seemed like a major challenge that you work full time. Speaker 2: (Laughter). It was a major challenge. Speaker 1: And you had five children, and to go to law school at the same time. Speaker 2: Right. Well, my husband was very, very good, too, in terms of he, he--before that time, he never went into the kitchen except to eat (laughter). After we got the, his set of relatives, he started cooking, and he was very good at it, as a matter of fact. And started doing laundry and, so he was very helpful, and, you know, obviously, that helped. We moved to the suburbs and because we figured that would be better to, to bring them up. And in, in addition to that, we were able to rent a house, which we needed for such a large family. And then when we got my nephew, we, you know, he just fit right in. Story_ID: 86219 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So it does, now it does sound, sounds like--what was your typical day like, you know-- Speaker 2: A typical day was he would take me to the train and I would take the train in. And then, I would take--after I finished, either that, or I, sometimes I'd drive. And I'd teach all day, and then I would leave my school and rush down to John Marshall [Law School, Chicago, Illinois] to make a 3:00 class. And I went to, to--I guess they called it afternoon class at that time. And I'd get home about somewhere in the neighborhood of 10, 10:30, and start all over again the next day. Speaker 1: Now when did you find time to study? Speaker 2: Well, in between, you know, there were times that I'd able to study while I was at law school in between classes, Saturdays, Sundays. It, it was challenging, but doable obviously. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds like a tough thing to do and it's wonderful that you could pull that off, you know, the (laughter), the children. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Right. Speaker 1: It's really something. Now, now did you--how was John Marshall Law School in terms of its, I guess, its, its diversity. I mean, did--were you the only, were there other black students there? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. There were--let, let me tell you how John Marshall worked. The first semester, huge class. There were usually about 200 students, so in that beginning class, it was extremely diverse. But as time went on, people dropped out for one reason or another and it became less diverse, but it was not due to John Marshall. John Marshall, in my opinion, has been the school that has always had a policy inclusion. And they let everybody in--everybody who could, you know, who could pass the, the initial test. And it was up to the student then to make it or break it. And by the time I graduated, there was one African American in my class. That was me, and there were two women, myself and another woman. And we only had a graduating class of twenty-two people. So that will show you what the difference was from the time we started until the time we graduated. Speaker 1: You had, like something like eighty-nine percent? Speaker 2: Something like that, right, right. Speaker 1: Attrition--yeah. Speaker 2: But now it's different in law schools, yeah. Usually the classes are half female and half male. And thirteen or fourteen percent, African American, and a lesser percent, but still bigger now than before percent of other ethnic, you know, Hispanics, and what have you and so-- Speaker 1: Okay. So you didn't, did you feel that you had to work harder because you were black and a female in the, in, in this program, or did you face-- Speaker 2: No, I--I think everybody was treated the same way. You, you did it or you didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. So what was accessible to--I mean the professors were accessible? Speaker 2: They were accessible to me, just as they were to anybody else. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 86220 Speaker 1: Did you have any, they, teachers there that were particularly outstanding as far as you're concerned? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Actually, the dean--I think he's leaving, as a matter of fact, but the current dean was my--he was one of my law professors. He taught me federal civil procedure, and he was extremely good and very helpful. And he, in addition, let's see, in addition to him, there were others. Professor Gordon, Professor Gordon is now on the Illinois Appellate Court, or he was--I'm not sure if he's still there. He was on the Appellate Court at the same time I was on the Appellate Court, but he was my teacher and he was very good. And Professor Burns, whom I had for constitutional law, I thought he was extremely good. Actually, I, I can't say anything negative about any of my professors at, at law school. I think they were all very helpful and they were all very knowledgeable, I thought. Speaker 1: Well, you, you were lucky in those days, I guess, to, yeah, to be at John Marshall, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, I, I've always, I, I thank God for that. I think that was one of the best decisions I ever made. Story_ID: 86221 Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you do after law school? Speaker 2: After law school, I, well, I started my legal career as a prosecutor. I was in the State's Attorney's Office, and I was there from '68 [1968] through '73 [1973], or to sometime in '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Now the State's Attorney's at that time was, wasn't it Henry Hanrahan? Speaker 2: He was at some point during my tenure there, but the State's Attorney who was there when I went in was James Stamos. And then, Ed Hanrahan became the State's Attorney, and then Bernard Carey. And I was only there for a short time under Bernard Carey. It was at that point that I went on to other things. I, uh-hum-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now you, were you, you were in the State's Attorney's Office, I guess, when Edward Hanrahan was embroiled in that controversy around the Black Panthers, right? Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: What, what was that like and tell me what you were thinking then? Speaker 2: Well, it didn't really, you know, it didn't really affect the assistants. We didn't really have anything to with it. At least, I didn't, and it didn't, it didn't affect us at all. Speaker 1: Well, I mean it didn't, I mean--I don't, I don't mean it directly affected you legally, I think, but I, I was thinking, what were you, what were you, and I know you had to be thinking something about somebody in the news like that, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Well, it was, you now, it was a very unfortunate set of circumstances and I think, needless to say, sometimes when you're in that kind of situation, in a position with somebody who's getting that kind of publicity, you, you hope that you're not being stigmatized as well as being part of it. And I never got that feeling from any, anybody or anything. And it, it, I really didn't, I didn't let it faze me really. I just went about what I had to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: I, I just want to get it as a history, I guess, that's shown that he was guilty of some abuses in office. At that time, did you, did you, what did you, I mean, what was your opinion of him at that, at that time? Did you think that, that he was telling the truth about what the office was doing, or did you think that, you know, did you have your suspicions or-- Speaker 2: Well, certainly, I mean you never know, you know. You just and, you know, not, not being involved in it, it is very difficult to tell and, you know, the ultimate finder on that would be the jury and-- Speaker 1: Well, I know that legally, but I'm-- Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: This was somebody you saw every day, I guess, on some of them, not that you--I don't know how close you were to him but, you know (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't close to him. I mean, he was just, he was the head of the office, and I didn't really have much contact with him. In fact, my only, my only recollection of contact with him in connection with any case was a case where there were two cases, two juries out one night. And both, in both cases, we, the office were asking for the death penalty. And each jury came back and gave the death penalty. And it was, you know, the kind of mentality that exists in a prosecutor's office, at least at that time, was kind of like us against the world. And when the verdicts came in, it was amazing and I didn't really relish this. It was amazing, however, how bonded everybody in the office was, and it was like a grand celebration. And that was not my feeling, even though I tried the case. I felt saddened. But I was about tell you about Ed Hanrahan that night. He, he was on his way home apparently, and somebody got him on the phone. And he called back and, you know, expressed, you know, gratitude and congratulated everybody involved in, in the process. And I guess there was nothing wrong with that. He was the head of the office, and it was our office's policy to do what we did. Story_ID: 86222 Speaker 1: And, although sometimes, you know, you can't always follow an office's policy. I have, have an example of that when I was in, still in that office. There was a case that I tried and I'm, I'm deviating a little bit if that's okay. Speaker 2: No, go ahead, sure. I mean, this is your life story. Speaker 1: I--there was a case that I tried. It was a murder case. And the defendant, when he was arrested, had--was found on railroad tracks. And he appeared to be either unconscious or semi-conscious. And when he was approached by the police officers, he threw his hands up in front of his face and said, don't hit me. And I always thought that was very peculiar. So when it became time to try the case, I--my supervisor, my immediate supervisor, told me to ask for the death penalty. And I said no. I said, we don't have any direct evidence. All we had were what was circumstantial evidence. I said there's no way that I'm going to ask for the death penalty in this case. I'll try the case, and the jury can make their determination, but I will not ask for the death penalty. So he backed down and allowed me to try the case without seeking the death penalty. It was something about the case that just didn't set right with me. It was nothing, you know, we had enough evidence to proceed. We had the, the defendant's--one of his shoes was found near the body, and the other was found on him. His blood type was found on the victim. Her blood type was found on him. It was something about that case that just didn't set right with me, and so I tried it. When it became time for sentencing, however, I had a partner, and I declined to participate in the sentencing. And my partner participated--made his recommendation on behalf of our office. And a year later, I had left the office. It was in '73 [1973]. I'd left the office--I think it was sometime in '74 [1974]. I got a call from the judge who had presided. By the way, he--I think he gave the young man 200 to 300 years in jail. The judge got me on the phone, Blanche, did you see the paper? "Well, no, what's up?" You know, the case we're, you know, the name of the defendant was found guilty, and I sentenced him to 200 to 300 years? "Yeah." Another man killed a woman in Grant Park, and he confessed to that murder also. And my then-partner, I mean my partner at the time, who, who tried the case with me, was still in the office when I got the call from the judge. And he was the one who had taken the confession from the second individual who had been caught in Grant Park after murdering a woman. And lo and behold, this person that I would not seek the death penalty for, was innocent. And he was ultimately released from prison. So, you know, sometimes you have to assert yourself as a prosecutor, or in any other position that you're in. And you can't always do what you're, you're asked to do. So that was--that, that sticks in my mind all the time. And, you know, as it turned out, my, my feeling about what was, something being wrong with this case, came to fruition. In fact, there was something wrong with it. We prosecuted the wrong person. Story_ID: 86223 Speaker 1: You know critics of the, the criminal justice system here in Cook County, you know--well, in the surrounding, the Chicagoland area often talk about how single-minded prosecutors are around here. They get a conviction and how they sometimes, they ignore evidence and bulldoze over people, you know-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --there have been cases of, you know. I'm sure you're familiar with the Jon Burge case and torturing people, and then allegedly, the prosecutors actually know who--these people have been tortured. And before they sign a confession, and then they go to prison, and some get the death penalty, and then it comes, you know, years later, we find that some of these people, according to DNA evidence, didn't, didn't do it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: I would hope the prosecutors don't know. I think one of the things about being a prosecutor is you rely on what the police officers bring to you. So, you know, I, I hope because, you know, they're lawyers and they're sworn to, and as prosecutors, to administer justice and be fair to everybody. I hope that they don't know when they go ahead and prosecute. But, you know, I, you know, I'm sure there are some people who do that, hopefully, not a lot. Speaker 1: Have you--you don't have the name, names, but I'm just asking, and did, have you, like personally known about people, people that have, that you suspected were, you know, knew that the person was innocent and proceeded-- Speaker 2: No, no, I, I don't, I don't feel that I know anybody who did that. If they did, I, you know, it didn't get, get through to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 86224 Speaker 1: All right. What's, what's been, what were the toughest situations you were involved in, unless, unless it's the one you just described as a prosecutor? Speaker 2: Well, that one, plus the one where I had to ask--well, I did ask for the death penalty. It was, it was a heinous murder, and the defendant was guilty, but I just, at that time, didn't want to ask for the death penalty but I did. Speaker 1: Are, are you in favor of the death penalty? Speaker 2: Well, that's something that, as a judge, you know, you've, you abide by the law. And if you're in a situation where the death penalty is provided, and if the facts warrant it, then you have to, you know, you have to grapple with the law and your conscience and take each case on an individual basis. So whether you're for it or against it is kind of irrelevant. It's a question--it's something that you personally inside have to grapple with. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you feel you are mandated by the public to-- Speaker 2: No, I don't think, I don't think we have a mandate by the public to do anything. I think we, we, if, if you talk about the public, you talk about the people. I think what we have to do is there are laws on the books. And let's say that somebody is found guilty and I don't even know if there's any--I can't recall if there's any such law that would provide a mandatory death penalty. I kind of doubt it but if, if the law provides it, and if a jury has made certain determinations, you simply abide by the law. And, of course, if you don't want to do it, you, you walk away from what you're doing. You, you shouldn't stay in a position where, you know, you don't, you know, we're sworn to uphold the law. And, and that's what you have to do, but I can't envision a case where you'd have to impose the death penalty. And, you know, like I said, it's, it's between yourself, and, and, you know, your inner self and, and the law, and the facts of the particular case. And everything has to be based on, on the individual factual scenario. Story_ID: 86225 Speaker 1: When you were in the prosecutor's office, were there very many black prosecutors in, in the office at the time? Speaker 2: Not at the time I was in the State's Attorney's Office. I was, let's see, there was myself, there were, let's see, there was one other female, Lucia (ph.) Thomas, she's now deceased. She ultimately became a judge. Chester Slaughter (ph.), that's all I can think of at the moment. There had been one or two who preceded me. The names escape me right now. But there were not a lot in that office at that time. I think they have a substantial number in the various prosecutors' offices now. I don't know whether it's commensurate with our population, but there are more than were in there when I was in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 86226 Speaker 1: Now if--now I guess for the last, I know for the last thirty years, statistics constantly, I mean, periodically are shown where, that more black defendants get the death penalty than other people. I mean they, they get it more consistently than anybody else. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean, what's your opinion about that then? Speaker 2: Well, our--I don't really--my opinion is based on the statistics, and the statistics speak for itself, for themselves, you know. That, that seems to be what the stats show, that there are many more minorities on death rows than there are others, so that's, that's a fact. Speaker 1: Yeah, but, you know, very few of us have a chance to be a prosecutor and actually see, you know, from the other side. And you think it's, what, why do you think that's true, or was, was it true in Cook County? Speaker 2: There, there might be several answers to that question. One might be the availability--any one of the major ones has to do with the availability of competent counsel. I think, let's face it, I think many minorities, economically, are disadvantaged. And, consequently, they're unable go and hire, retain the top lawyers who, conceivably, might be able to do a better job, or may be in a position to plea bargain better than somebody else. So I, I think, I really think that has a lot to do with it, the availability or the unavailability of extremely competent counsel. Speaker 1: And I guess the type of counsel you get has something to do with your economic-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. If you don't have any money, you, you get appointed counsel, and you don't get a say as to which upon. And I, I'm not casting aspersions on appointed counsel because we have some extremely good appointed counsel and public defenders and, you know, so I'm not casting aspersions on them. I'm simply saying that if you have the money, you can go out and hire a battery of lawyers and, collectively, they may be able to do a much better job, whereas if you don't have any money, you get what you're given. And that may be great, and it may not be. Speaker 1: Okay. So the poorer you are, the weaker defense you're likely to get if you-- Speaker 2: It's possible. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. What, what other factors do you think bear, you know, come, come to bear on that death penalty situation with black people? Speaker 2: Well, I've, I heard, I've heard discussions that suggest that, that the prosecutorial discretion factors into this. And within their discretion, it's conceivable that some may decide to seek the death penalty in cases where, for instance, they know that, that a defendant doesn't have the wherewithal economically to really defend against it. And sometimes, you know, it just may be a question of numbers with certain prosecutors, you know, they want the numbers. I, I, you know, I prosecuted so many number, so many death penalty cases, and I got convictions and sentences in all of them. So, and it, and maybe they just go after what they perceive to be the weakest category. Story_ID: 86227 Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have any other recollect-, reflections about the-- Speaker 2: The State's Attorney? Speaker 1: -- the State's Attorney's Office here? Speaker 2: No, no, other than the fact that I thought it was a great office in terms of the kind of experience that I gained there. I think being a prosecutor is one of the best ways that one who aspires to be a trial lawyer can hone in on those skills because you have an opportunity to constantly try cases, as opposed to being maybe in a public defender's office, where you also have a chance to try cases. But it's not your call most of the time as to which the cases are going to be tried. So I, I thought it was a great office in terms of the experience that it provided for me. Speaker 1: Okay. I, I imagine that in a public defender's office, you don't get the same kind of support, I guess, that you, you get in a prosecutor's office in terms of-- Speaker 2: I think now you do. I think, I think they have a support staff. I think they have investigators and, of course, the court can always authorize that investigators be hired in the court, then can sign off on the order to pay, pay for them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they, they have a pretty, pretty good support staff, too. Story_ID: 86228 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you said offhand that, that you--there was a case where you, you were part of the prosecution team for a person who later wanted you to be his lawyer in appeals because he's impressed by your, your handling of him, right? Speaker 2: Well, I, I kind of was presumptuous in that regard. I, I assumed that, that might have been why he wrote to me. Yeah, I prosecuted him and he, ultimately, was sentenced to death. That sentence was overturned, however, and he was sentenced to a lengthy prison term. But after the case was over, I did receive a letter from him, and he asked me if I would represent him on appeal. Needless to say, I was a prosecutor, and that was something that I couldn't do. But I felt somewhat flattered because I, I-- hopefully, it was, you know, it was based on his recognition that I was just trying to be fair and, and was doing my job. Story_ID: 86229 Speaker 1: Is, is it real, was it real tough, make, well, did the atmosphere in, in the State's Attorney's Office make it--was it easy to be real fair or is it tougher? You know, to be, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, it was easy to be fair. You, you did what you thought was right, and nobody tried to pressure you. It, like I said, even my supervisor, you know, once I told him that I didn't think it was fair to, to ask for the death penalty for somebody against whom we did not have any direct evidence. He, he backed, you know, backed down and accepted that. So I think--it's easy to be fair. You can be fair, and you can't let anybody dictate to you whether or not you're fair. You be fair and then they'll have to deal with that. Speaker 1: Well, was the atmosphere in the office such that people who went for the kill, you know, most of the time, got, got moved up faster than those who didn't? Speaker 2: I don't think so. In fact, I don't, I don't really remember any promotions in the office for the entire time I was there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I think any time a prosecutor--well, I actually I got promoted. I was the supervising assistant in charge of the felony court when Bernard Carey came in. He, he promoted me. And shortly thereafter, though, I left the office because I think, I think you should stay in a prosecutor's office only so long. I think you might get a mentality that is not the best if you remain there too long--a hardening of, of the sort. So I thought that being there from '68 [1968] to '73 [1973] was long enough, and that I should move on, which I did. Story_ID: 86230 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, where did you move on to? Speaker 2: I became a supervisory trial lawyer for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. And in that function, I was kind of on an opposite roll. In an opposite roll, I was, I was prosecuting, but I was prosecuting companies for alleged employment discrimination. Speaker 1: Now this is a Federal position? Speaker 2: It was a Federal position, uh-hum. It was the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Speaker 1: Now is this in 1974 or-- Speaker 2: It was either '73 [1973] or '74 [1974]. I think it might have been mid '73 [1973], and I was there for about four years. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now what was that like and what, what did you-- Speaker 2: Well, it was a very, it was a real change of pace. Number one, it was a job that we--our office covered a region and we covered ten states in the Midwest region. So it required travel, so I was--most of my cases were not in Chicago. Most of my cases were in Federal Courts in other states, primarily Iowa and Missouri and Ohio. And, and I believe we covered a few, we covered seven other states. I just don't, right now, I don't recall that I had cases in those, those other states. And I had a team. I was a supervisor and I had a team of lawyers that worked with me. And there were maybe five or six teams in the office. And each one had a supervisor, such as the role I was in. Then the trial attorneys and paralegal and a secretary, and we all traveled together. We had big cases. We had cases against large companies, big corporations, and we were out on the road a lot doing what's called discovery, getting the facts, gathering what the facts were, deposing people, that kind of thing. And, ultimately, we would either settle the case or go to trial in the Federal Courts. Story_ID: 86231 Speaker 1: Were there any--what are the--can you talk about some of the memorable cases that you dealt with? Speaker 2: I can if I can remember them (laughter). I recall we had a couple of pattern and practice cases. Those were really the big cases against-- Speaker 1: Pattern and practice? Speaker 2: Yeah, basically alleging that there was a pattern and practice of discrimination by this employer. And the, like I said, they were some of the major employers. There was a railroad and there was another company. And I'm trying to remember why we were down in Louisiana because I know that wasn't in our region, but I do recall having a case that took me to Louisiana, and that also was one of the large corporations. And then we had--I'm trying to remember some of the other employers. One was a railroad. I remember that one vividly because that was one of the biggest cases that I, I had ever dealt with involving--one was, one other corporation was a, a--I guess you'd call it a brewery. They were in the-- Speaker 1: Made beer? Speaker 2: Beer, uh-hum, and that was-- Speaker 1: Was that in St. Louis or-- Speaker 2: It was in St. Louis. And, let's see, what are some of the others? Those two are more vivid in my mind because they were two of the bigger cases and we had other, cases were a little smaller. We had one stinging defeat in Iowa. We tried the case against a, a steel company, and we lost it. But, by and large, those kinds of cases generally are settled out of court. So once you get discovery and you sit down and talk with the lawyers. And usually you wind up settling, and coming to some kind of accord, usually getting back pay for some of the employees who were allegedly discriminated against. Story_ID: 86232 Speaker 1: The way it works is an, an employee at one of these corporations file a charge? Speaker 2: An employee would file a charge, employee would file a charge with the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]. The EEOC had an investigative staff and they would do an investigation. In the--once the investigation was completed, the commission then would make a finding of probable cause or no probable cause. If they, if it was sustained, they would then authorize us from Washington. We, we had to go through our headquarters in Washington. They would authorize us to file a lawsuit, and we'd--either before we solve the, I'm sorry, before we file the lawsuit, we would participate in what was called conciliation efforts, and what that meant was once the investigation had concluded, we would sit down with the other side and try to settle it, try to work it out. And by and large, it, it worked usually. But, you know, every now and then, there were some diehards who decided that, no, we're going to go for it. We'll roll, roll the dice, and so we go to trial and, you know, then the chips fall where they like. Speaker 1: Okay. In such a case, is it better for the--I, I guess I'm asking, is it better for the plaintiff in a case like that to take it all the way to trial? And is it better for everybody--say someone tried as a company with racial discrimination-- Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: --and they got a good case, you know. Is it better for them to settle out of court and get a, maybe get some sort of a settlement for themselves, and then the company not really be required to--I mean, is the company actually required to change the policy when you all sit down and negotiate? Speaker 2: Well, that's part of it, that's part of what the EEOC was looking for. Sometimes, see, the way it's done with, with Title 7 cases, and that's the, the statute under which these cases are brought. If EEOC pursues it, what they're generally looking for would be a change in policy, in addition to providing any back pay or, you know, rehiring or whatever. But, and then the other way it's brought would be the individual charging party--that's what they're referred to as--would file a charge with the EEOC. In the interim, they would be given, if they requested it, a letter, what was called the Notice of Right to Sue. And even while the EEOC is still pursuing the investigation, the charging party, if they so desire, they get the right to sue, they can file an individual lawsuit on their own behalf. Most of the time, they would probably be just looking for back pay, or for a promotion, or whatever it was they're, they're contending they were deprived of. So it works, you know, both ways. But EEOC, as a governmental agency, is actually seeking to change the, the policy, the employment practices of the particular company, whereas the individual charging party, most of the time, is only concerned with the, you know, being compensated for whatever losses they've suffered, you know, if they were not promoted or if they were terminated or whatever. Speaker 1: Okay. Did, did you find in most cases that people that charge a company with discrimination or something are satisfied to be rehired or, or to be promoted at that same company? I mean, the same-- Speaker 2: Sometimes maybe, but sometimes they'd probably just would rather take back pay and move on because, you know, chances are the atmosphere is not going to be that great (laughter). They're not going to be treated that well (laughter) in a subtle way. Speaker 1: Yeah, if was bad before, it could be worse. Speaker 2: It's conceivable, yeah. And, of course, there is part of that--what, what happens, even when they file charges sometimes, there's what's called retaliation. And that's an--that, that is also an individual claim that can be brought. It can be added to the lawsuit if, in fact, it happens after the lawsuit has been filed. So, yeah, I, I think, by and large, individual charging parties probably would just prefer to take back pay and move on. But, you know, that's--it may not be the case in every situation, but I'm sure in a lot of them. Story_ID: 86233 Speaker 1: Okay. So now, now what did you do next? Speaker 2: I left the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]. I was recruited actually. I hadn't, I hadn't planned really, didn't have any plans, immediate plans to leave. Actually, I, I was aspiring to become an Assistant United States Attorney and I interviewed, and I was actually hired. And when you're hired for that position, there has to be an FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] background check, and that takes forever. So while I'm waiting for this FBI background check to be concluded, I decide, I started working on the railroad case that I told you about, the pattern and practice. I started working on that case and I was so deep into it, so by the time the then US Attorney called me and told me, Blanche, you can come to work, I had changed my mind. So at that point, I didn't go into the US Attorney's Office. But in the interim, another company approached me, United Airlines. It just so happened that somebody in their human resources department, or in the labor law department actually, and I had worked together at Assistant State's Attorneys. And one day, he just happened to call and say, are, Blanche, are you interested in becoming a lawyer for United Airlines? Well, glamour suddenly appeared in my, in my eyes. I thought about, you know, the, the benefits that United has and it has a lot, you know, have decent salary. And the travel, travel benefits are phenomenal, especially in a position like that where you are considered to be an executive. So I went then to, you know, I quit EEOC, and went work for United Airlines. In the meantime, I had also been called upon to--don't you want to come to the US Attorney's Office? Well, that had really been one of my greatest aspirations. I, I still wanted to be a Federal prosecutor. So while I'm at United Airlines, I get the call to come to the US Attorney's Office once again. And because they had concluded the FBI background check, I got called very quickly. So I went ahead and quit United Airlines, notwithstanding that my husband wondered, why are you leaving all this great travel that we're doing? But I was a labor lawyer for United Airlines and it was very interesting. I did travel a lot all over, all over the country, and to Hawaii a lot. And my husband could travel with me free of charge and the kids could, could travel, so it was, it was great in terms of benefits. But in terms of my satisfaction, to tell you the truth, I really did not enjoy being a lawyer for a corporation. I felt that I was--and I'll never forget, it, it really focused in on me one day when I was representing United [Airlines] in an arbitration proceeding. And the individual, who was the grievant, had been terminated. He was in a menial job. I think he was a member of the Aerospace Workers, a machinist in Aerospace Workers, and he had been terminated because he had abused his travel privileges. What he did was all employment, employees at United, and, and in all airlines, I assume, get free, free travel benefits. But one of the rules at United was that if you even got free travel benefits, that is your fare, you could not order a special meal (laughter), and he ordered a special meal, and he was terminated. And, of course, he filed a grievance and then, consequently, we had the arbitration proceeding. And I'm sitting there, you know, representing this giant of a corporation, and wondering why am I doing this? This poor guy, you know, all he wanted was a vegeta-, vegetarian meal as opposed to, you know, a regular meal, and he's getting fired for it. And it was--that was the determinative factor that made me decide to go to the US Attorney's Office at the time that I did. I just decided, I do not want to represent a corporation. I do not want to be a lawyer, a lawyer going against these little people. When I say little people, I mean, people who had no resources. They didn't have a lawyer. They were represented by the union representative. Now the flight attendants were represented by a lawyer, and the pilots were represented by a lawyer. But the aerospace and machinists were represented by a representative of the union. And I just felt that it was unfair, and so I quit and went to work in the US Attorney's Office. Speaker 1: That's, you know, that's, that's an amazing story. Speaker 2: Uh-hum, it, it was amazing to me that, that I, you know, I-- Speaker 1: Do you have any idea why they would, they would marshal such resources for such a trifling thing? Speaker 2: I have no idea, no idea. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Was this a black employee or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Do they--oh, you have no idea what, what it was about. I mean seeing that-- Speaker 2: I don't. I never got any information that it was about anything else other than the fact that he had ordered a meal that was diff-, there was no evidence to even show that the meal cost more. It was just not the meal that was being served so (laughter). So I didn't want to work for--I did not want to represent a corporation after that. I just felt that it was like a giant, you know, a David and Goliath or something. Story_ID: 86234 Speaker 1: After leaving, I guess, the State's Attorney's Office, that seems like a (unclear) waste of your education to even fool around with that kind of thing, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we had other, well, you know, more meaningful cases, too. At United, we represented the company in actual employment discrimination lawsuits in Federal Courts but, still, I decided that I didn't want any part of it so. And I was very fortunate because the jobs were, you know, coming in, you know, and I got the call to come to the US Attorney's Office under a, a new US Attorney, and I went. Speaker 1: Okay, now, who was the U.S. Attorney at that time. Was it-- Speaker 2: When I went? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Tom Sullivan. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, well, how did you like the US Attorney's Office and what was it like? Speaker 2: Great office. It, it was (coughing), excuse me, it was one of the, it was one of the best offices. I, I shouldn't say that because the State's Attorney's Office provided me with great experience as well. EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], I got all my Federal Court experience there. But the US Attorney's Office, number one, under that US Attorney, we prosecuted cases that we had evidence for. We did not, you know, if we didn't have the evidence, we didn't proceed. And we were, you know, prosecuting cases in this building in the Federal Court. Every now and then, I'd get a case, or, or an opportunity to travel, take a deposition of somebody in some other district. But by and large, my work was right here in this building. And it was--we had many complex issues. I, by the way, was assigned at that time to the civil division of the US Attorney's Office. Speaker 1: Now, now what year is this? This is-- Speaker 2: That was '78 [1978] and '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. And I was assigned to the civil division although because I'd had an inordinate, I would say, amount of trial experience from time to time, my colleagues in that office would ask me to second chair a criminal case with them. So I did try criminal cases as well, and it was, it was fascinating. I've always encouraged--I encourage my law clerks to, you know, when they leave here, if they are interested in being trial lawyers, see if you can get a job in the, in the US Attorney's Office because it provides you with the greatest experience. And so, I, I thought it was a wonderful experience. Story_ID: 86235 Speaker 1: Are there any, once again, are there any memorable cases that, that you can tell us about? Speaker 2: Well, I remember trying a criminal case where the defendant was, he was an inmate already on a bank robbery charge. And he assaulted a guard that, you know, it, that was not a complex case of any, any sort, but it was an interesting, it was an interesting case. And it was one of them that I tried. I didn't try a lot of criminal cases but in, in that office, but in most of the civil cases that I handled were settled. I remember trying, I remember, I didn't try it, I remember having a tort case brought under the Federal Tort Claims Act. And it was against the--let's see, what was it against--yeah, I'm trying to remember why was it brought as a Federal tort? Whatever, well, I can't remember all the facts, but I do--the, the pertinent part that I remember has to do with where it took place and what my participation was. I had to go to Rockford to take some depositions of individuals and lo and behold, these individuals were members of a motorcycle club. I should say motorcycle gang. And it was kind of scary. I, I was, I remember staying at a hotel there in Rockford, and I was scared that night for waiting for the next morning but it was, it was interesting. But, like I said, most of the civil cases settled. And we would, you know, we'd handle cases where the post office--maybe there had been an automobile accident with an automobile and a postal truck, that kind of thing, where we handled forfeiture cases where there had been some allegation and proof of criminal behavior. And if the person wasn't invited, they would bring a civil forfeiture action. And we would handle that where we'd take--let's say that drugs had been found in, in certain property and we would file an action, forfeit the property belonging to the person where the drugs were found, that kind of thing. But it was, it was very interesting. I didn't stay in that office long either. It was like I couldn't keep a job (laughter). I left that office after about a year and became a judge. Story_ID: 86236 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Now, now how did that happen? How, how did you become a judge? Speaker 2: Well, I started at the entry level as an associate judge. In Cook, in the Circuit Court all over the state, an associate judge is an entry-level judge, and they are selected by the other elected judges. And what they do-- Speaker 1: These are county judge or-- Speaker 2: I was in Cook County, yeah. What they do is they will select two people for each vacancy. For instance, right now there are approximately twenty vacancies in the Circuit Court of Cook County. And I think they selected forty, forty people, so that twenty people will win. And what you have to do, once you've been selected, you have to be sure you get out there, and let people know who you are, what you're about. You do that by sending them your resume, and then calling and make an appointment to go and sit down and chat with them momentarily. It's, it's a very busy time for elected Circuit judges when it happens because they're constantly being bombarded with the candidates who are for associate judge. But in any event, the, the, let's say, there are twenty vacancies, forty people. The top twenty people, the ones who get the most votes, are the top twenty, are the ones who are selected. And that's for, for a four-year term. And then you, each four years you go back before these judges and ask for their vote, but you don't have to campaign as, as heartily as you did for the initial appointment. So that's what I did. And I did that, I did that four times before I was selected. I started back in '76 [1976], and I was not selected until '79 [1979] so I was persistent. And but, and that's, you know, basically, associate judges handle just about everything that Circuit judges do, other than felony criminals, criminal matters. And even, even those can be handled by an associate judge, but they have to have the permission of the Supreme Court, which is very easily obtained. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so-- Speaker 2: And then I, I was, I was a Circuit, an Associate Circuit judge from '79 [1979] until '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In '86 [1986], I ran for election. (Coughing). Excuse me. I ran for election to become a Circuit judge and I won. And then I was a Circuit judge in, I was a Circuit judge in duty, in terms of duty, for three months. Story_ID: 86237 Speaker 1: And then one night, I got this wonderful telephone call from Mayor Harold Washington, and he wanted to know if I was interested in moving on to the Appellate Court. And, needless to say, I was, so Justice Ward appointed me to the Appellate Court, and that was in '87 [1987]. That was, I was sworn in as a Circuit judge in December of '86 [1986]. In March of '87 [1987], I was sworn in as an appointed judge of the Appellate Court. And in '88 [1988], I had to run for election for that position to which I had been appointed. And I ran in '88 [1988] and I was elected. I got over a million votes. I had to run throughout Cook County. And I served on the Appellate Court until I came here in '94 [1994]. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, well, once again, I guess I'll ask you, like what, what are, what were some of the, yeah, the memorable cases that you tried that, that you can talk about from that, that era where you were an Appellate Court judge. I mean, I think, and people appeal, you know, to be right and, but basically, make, make decisions or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, basically, what happens is anybody who has a case in the Circuit Court has an absolute right to appeal to the Appellate Court if they did not prevail. And once it comes to the Appellate Court, the judges there sit in panels of three. And one judge is designated as the writer of the opinion, and the other judges either concur or dissent. And if two, if two, if one agrees with you, it will be the decision of the case, and the other person might write a dissenting opinion. (Coughing). Excuse me. I had a very interesting case that came before my panel where a, an individual, a male, broke into the home of a woman in Calumet City. I believe it was an apartment, not a home, and he was, he was terrorizing her and her children. And she was able to break away and run out of the building to seek help. In the meantime, the police had arrived. The police, after getting there, however, and notwithstanding her request to, for them to go in, break the door down, because her two little children were in there. They refused. They said we have to wait for the landlord. We don't want to be responsible for any damage, but her little kids were in there, right? And so, they did not break in. And I believe--my, my recollection of the facts might be a little fuzzy--I don't recall whether or not he, he assaulted the kids or not. But in any event, she filed a lawsuit against the City of Calumet City and the individual police officers. In the Trial Court, the Circuit Court dismissed it on a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim or something like that. It came before my panel, and my two colleagues wanted to uphold or affirm the Trial Court. And this was an outrage to me. The fact that it could--no, you know, I didn't--we didn't get into the merits of the case because it never got that far in the Trial Court. But the mere allegation that police officers would do that was enough for me to at least let it go through the process, and let there be a determination on the merits of the case. So I--that was my most memorable. Now, usually in, in the Appellate Court, you have so many cases that what will happen is your, your law clerks will draft an opinion, and then you look at it and you change it, and you re-, rework it. I didn't let my law clerks touch it. I wrote with a passion. Story_ID: 86238 Speaker 1: So in this case you just described, what, what reasoning did the other two judges have? Why, why did they think that was okay for the, these things? Speaker 2: That's, that's why I dissented. I couldn't figure why they were contending that it was okay. And I didn't--I thought it was an outrage. I--it--not that I was prejudging whether or not what was being said was true, but I think it's important that if there is a contest about facts that the facts be allowed to be brought out in a case in a court before a trier of the fact. And in this case, the, the judge didn't hear the facts. He simply heard a motion to dismiss, and dismissed it on a legal basis. And I didn't think the legal basis had any, had any, any merit. So I dissented. And would you believe once, once, once a ruling has been made by the Appellate Court, the losing party can petition the Illinois Supreme Court to hear the case. And lo and behold, they did that and the Illinois Supreme Court accepted the case. Now, keep in mind that the Illinois Supreme Court only accepts like ten percent of the cases that are brought before it, if that meant much. In any event, the Supreme Court agreed with me and sent it back to the Trial Court for a trial so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was one of them--that is the most memorable case that I had when I was sitting on the Appellate Court. Others, of course, too, but that was one. Speaker 1: Did she win the trial? Speaker 2: That I, that I don't know. I don't know, but at least she had her day in court. She had the opportunity to have her day in court. Chances are, they might have settled it after that. You never know but and, and my recollections is that the--one of the police officers was the son of somebody in Calumet City political circles, or he might have been the son of the chief of police. I'm not sure. It was something like that, something untoward (laughter). Speaker 1: There's a chain there (laughter) (unclear). Speaker 2: Right (laughter), right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 86239 Speaker 1: Well, you were on the Appellate Court until-- Speaker 2: I was on the Appellate Court until '94 [1994]. I, I went on in '87 [1987] as an appointed. I was elected in '88 [1988] and to a 10-year term, but I left in '94 [1994] when President [William "Bill"] Clinton appointed me to this position. Speaker 1: Okay. And this position is, once again, you are the-- Speaker 2: United States District Court judge. Speaker 1: Okay, for this Northern-- Speaker 2: For the Northern District of Illinois, although as a Federal judge, if there is a consensus between your chief judge and other chief judges, and you don't have too much work in your own district, you can be designated--sit somebody somewhere else as a visiting judge, which will be my aspiration at some point in my career. Speaker 1: Okay. So you can be assigned to the visiting judge (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes, right. We have visiting judges come here all the time. They usually come from areas where they are not as busy as we are. This is one of the busier courts, uh-hum. Speaker 1: Well, how has this been? I mean, what, what it can be? Speaker 2: Phenomenal. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's--the, the Appellate Court was very nice and it was laid back, and it was a situation where you didn't have the kind of--what is it--it's not--energy is not the word I'm looking for, but a fast pace. It's, it was a slower pace. This is a Trial Court, just like the Circuit Court, and the pace is very fast. You have a lot of cases. You have cases that need decisions now, and so, you're constantly busy. Speaker 1: So there's, there's not the urgency in the Appellate Court that's--you can take your time and mull over it? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, you, you can take more time than, you know--here, you need, you need a decision like yesterday. So it's fast paced, but on the other hand, the, the Appellate Court, while it was laid back, you didn't see anybody (laughter). It was very, you know, we sat once a week, and you saw only the lawyers. You didn't see the litigants most of the time. And every now and then, a litigant might show up and sit in court and listen, but it's only the lawyers who are arguing the law. It was intellectually stimulating as is this. I find many of the features that you have in the Appellate Court, I think, you also have in this court and then some because you have the opportunity to interact with people. You have the opportunity, not only to interact with lawyers, but with the litigants and with the jury and, you know, and the public. So it's, to me, this is, this is the best of all worlds. I love it. Story_ID: 86240 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what would have been some of the more memorable cases that you've encountered at, at this level? Speaker 2: Well, actually, most of them are pretty memorable. It seems that I don't know what it is, and we get our cases on the wheel, but it seems that I get a lot of the more memorable cases (laughter). I tried the largest price-fixing case ever to be tried in the United States. That was the ADM [Archer Daniels Midland] case. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Uh-- Speaker 1: Archer Daniels Midland, right? Speaker 2: Right, uh-hum. And I, I didn't have--there, there were different parts of that case. There was the case against the corporation, then there were, there was the case against individuals. And I had the one against the individuals. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, they, they grow--they, they're grain growers, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And they're warehouses and so forth? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They manufacture certain products out of soy-- Speaker 2: Soy, uh-hum, correct. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And I had that case. That was a very protracted--I think it took us like almost three months to try the case. And they had the best lawyers. Speaker 1: So the contention was, was they were fixing prices, right, in the grain business? Speaker 2: Worldwide. Speaker 1: Worldwide? Speaker 2: Uh-hum, yeah. It was, and very interesting in terms just of the evidence, of the kind of evidence that you had. You had like a lot of tapes, you know, videotapes, you had audio tapes. These were all done surreptitiously. And you had, you had the spy factor in there, and it was just very interesting, very interesting. And I have, I've had cases involving the mob, yeah. Speaker 1: Can you tell us which mobsters you were-- Speaker 2: The alleged mobster in the case that I'm thinking of was Marco D'Amico. He was from out in the Western suburbs, I believe. And then I've had the, you know, just the run of the mill. I had a lot of bank robberies. We have a lot of bank robberies in, in this, in the Federal system. And we have nothing but drug cases. We have loads and loads of drug cases, more since I've gotten here. I'd say it has tripled. And we had-- Speaker 1: You have, now it's still going up? Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Speaker 1: You know, I think we've been under the illusion that crime is going down or something or the kids are going (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think, what's happening is maybe they're just going after more people for cases that may have, at some point, been tried in the state court, and because we have dual, dual jurisdiction in many of the drug cases. So, you know, the state court could try it or the Federal court could try, and I think they cooperate with each other. And we have, let's see, what other kinds of cases? We have a lot of fraud, we have a lot of fraud cases involving social security, that kind of thing, postal thefts, embezzlements, bank fraud. We--you name it, we have it. And so it's, it's very interesting. I'm always busy. For me to have this afternoon (laughter), it's unusual. Story_ID: 86241 Speaker 1: Well, I'm glad you-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --had the time and now, in, in 1995, now you, somebody tried to send you a bomb, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, tell, tell us about that. That's a-- Speaker 2: Well, basically, what happened was when I was on the Appellate Court, I ruled--I wrote the opinion in a case involving a particular defendant and I ruled against him. He had been convicted of murder and sentenced to life, plus seventy-five years consecutive for murdering a woman down here in the Dearborn Park homes. And-- Speaker 1: Now that's, that's a middle-class, a new development and-- Speaker 2: Right. Well, I, I think what, what happened was he didn't live there. I think what he did was he was soliciting money for a marathon that he was participating in. These are, this is my vague recollection of the facts. And he went to her door, and she was nice enough to let him in. And once in, he--she was giving him a certain amount of money, which, and I'm, I'm gathering this from what I read in, in the opinion about when I was on the Appellate Court. She was nice enough to give him a certain amount of money but he didn't like it. He wanted more. And an argument erupted, and apparently, she tried to get him out of the house. And, and he wouldn't, you know, he was, he was a guy, and she was a frail elderly woman, so there was not much she could do with him. (Coughing). Excuse me. He then--she tried to hit him, and he took away whatever it was she had--I think it was an iron, and he beat her with it. And he killed her, and then I believe he then did other things, stabbed her, or something like that. Anyway, he managed to get away for a while. And he was arrested in California, as I understand it for another homicide. And they were able to hook him up with what had happened here and brought him back. He was extradited, and prosecuted, and convicted, and sentenced. And I wrote the opinion that upheld his life sentence and his seventy-five year consecutive sentence. Once I got over here, not thinking, I didn't pay any attention. It was, you know, it wasn't a very--it's kind of a common name, I guess. And I had his case involving an allegation that he was being denied medical treatment for some condition that he had. And I think I put the unfortunate word in of frivolous, and I dismissed it. I dismissed it on a motion. And the next thing I knew, I was getting a letter. I got a letter from him indicating that he was, you know, telling me how terrible a person I was and, you know, what happens when you get a little authority and that kind of rhetoric. And he indicated--it was some interesting things about the letter. He said something about my brother and I do, I did have a brother. And I think he said his father knew me and my brother or something like that which was true. And he was going to see to it that I got--that something happened to me. I don't know if he actually used the word kill, and he said if he couldn't get out and do it, he would have one of his drug dealing friends who would be released from prison to do it. He was in prison and some kind of way, he managed to get a bomb, a homemade bomb out. And I gave the letter to the U.S. Marshal one day. The next day, the U.S. Marshal appeared here at my door and told me that the bomb and arson squad was downstairs disassembling a bomb. And apparently, they blew it up and it, it was, it was a good bomb. So, fortunately, and I wouldn't have even gotten it because my staff gets my mail and they open my mail. So somebody else up front would have gotten, gotten it, gotten hurt or killed. But anyway, they detected it downstairs. And that was it. So he was prosecuted for that. He was given an additional fifty-two years or fifty-one years consecutive to the other terms that he has. Speaker 1: That's something. Story_ID: 86242 Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, here's a, here's a quick question here I neglected to ask, but how did you come to the attention of President [William "Bill"] Clinton in the first place? Speaker 2: Well, I just applied for the position. There were three vacancies in the US District Court, and there were 139 applicants. And what you have to do--it was during the terms of--the, the senators are the ones who usually have the, the authority to recommend. And it just so happened that Senators Paul Simon was the senior, senior senator, and Carol Moseley Braun [HM] was also, she was the junior senator. And what they had done was they put together a merit commission consisting of approximately forty people. They were lawyers and, and some lay persons in the community, including, I think, Jacqueline Vaughn, so she was one of the lay persons, Jacqueline Vaughn-- Speaker 1: From, from the Teachers' Union? Speaker 2: --of the Teachers' Union, and I think she was on the committee. But in any event, each of us who applied, and there were 139 of us who had applied, had to go before the commission. And before, I--I'm trying to remember at which order things occurred. In addition to going before the commission, you also had to go before approximately 11 bar associations, and be interviewed and evaluated. I went before the commission, and I was one of the 10 finalists. And after that, I believed we had to go before all of the bar associations, Chicago, Illinois, Cook County, Council of Lawyers, Federal, several others, Northwest. In any, in any event, I went before them. And then I had to go to Washington to be interviewed by the two senators and their staffs. I had to be interviewed in Washington by the, some committee that was part of the Department of Justice. And by the time I went through all this, the senators had to make a selection between the 10 of us who were finalists for the three spots. And they selected myself--there was Ruben Castillo and Alan Greiman, and for the three vacancies so. And then, after that, of course, you have to have an FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] background check. And once that is completed and it comes through okay, then the nomination is--the, I'm sorry, the recommendation is made to the President. No, I'm sorry, I think the recommendations are made to the President first, and then the FBI investigation. If that works out well, then the President nominates you to the U.S. Senate, and then you have to go before the Senate Judiciary Committee to be interviewed. And then once they interview you, if you get through the committee, then they take it to a vote of the full Senate. And once the Senate confirms, then that's it. And then the President makes the official appointment. And I went through all of that that I've just described (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 86243 Speaker 1: Now what, what would disqualify one--do, do you have any idea what would disqualify you when they do the FBI background check (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, just about anything (laughter). And if, if you, you know, let's say they found you're having an affair or, you know, you're married, or you've been convicted of something and you didn't divulge it, or you've done something dishonest or immoral and not, you know, even if you weren't prosecuted for it, if it's determined that you did it, and they have enough creditable evidence, they will bring it to the attention of the senators and, of course, the--they won't, you just won't get any further. I guess they'll bring it to the attention of the President. I think it's at that point. By that time, the recommendation has been made, I believe. Yeah, it has so. Speaker 1: That's one of the (unclear). Speaker 2: But, but usually, it's something, either, either criminal, dishonest, criminal, or immoral or something like that, that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Stuff is public knowledge and (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And stuff might not be, I guess, public knowledge that-- Speaker 2: No, it doesn't have to be public knowledge, no. In fact, I think that's what happens. It's not public knowledge, but when the FBI starts digging, they find out about it. And maybe somebody knew about it and they get enough details to, you know, to, to put a nail in the coffin. Speaker 1: Okay. I was wondering with all the activities of the FBI there, if the FBI during the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], when J. Edger Hoover was, you know, and some of the investigations that he was conducting. I was wondering how valid that FBI background check could be. Speaker 2: Right, well-- Speaker 1: And people with boxes of information about this erroneous and, you know, not necessarily true, so just wondering. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 86244 Speaker 1: Well, are there any, any other cases you want to talk about that, that you can talk about that (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, there, there, you know, the cases that are still pending, I can't talk about. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The cases that are even on appeal, I can't talk about. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there have been--I, I had a bunch of them right here. I'm trying to remember. Speaker 1: There's one thing I know about is (unclear) still in court, I think (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: (Unclear), yeah. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: So you can't discuss that? Speaker 2: Right. I've had, let's see, I've had all kinds of cases. I've had an envoy who was convicted of selling passports. You name it, it's (laughter), it, it happens around here. Speaker 1: Okay. And there was, there's a period of time in the '80s [1980s] when I think it was like Dan Webb (ph.) with the Federal prosecutor, and they prosecuted a lot of judges-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And did you know any of the judges that-- Speaker 2: I know them all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I testified in one of them. I testified for the government in one case. Speaker 1: They called that Operation Greylord, I think (unclear). Speaker 2: Right, right. In fact, that was, that, that was something that I suppose was instrumental in my ascension in, in the judiciary because when I was an associate judge, at some point, the then-presiding judge took a fall under the Operation Greylord scandal. And they had a new presiding judge to come in, Judge Donald P. O'Connell. And Judge O'Connell tapped me out of like approximately 300 judges to be his supervising judge of the First Municipal District, which was a district that had most of the Operation Greylord scandal. And so, you know, that was a promotion and I was that, that was the first time that a black had, a black woman had ever held a position in a supervisory post in the Circuit Court of Cook County, in Circuit Court of the entire state actually. So, but yeah, I knew all, I knew all the judges, all the judges involved. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And, and to tell you the truth, it all came as a total shock to me. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter). I had no idea. I was just like kind of like in, some, some other world. I, I had no idea a lot of the stuff was coming on that was going on. But then, I, I, think people tend not to let women know (laughter) sometimes what their, you know, what, what's going on and-- Speaker 1: So you say at that time, it's maybe more of a good old boy network and (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, now how are things nowadays, are, are women like, you think that in the mix in terms of knowing what's going, going on, or is it still more of a male-dominated (unclear)? Speaker 2: I can't say that we're kept in the dark. I, I have no evidence to, to that effect. I, I think, you know, the people that I know in the judiciary now seem to be very forthcoming. And, and I think we, here in this building, we are apprised of, you know, everything that's going on. I'm, I'm on the executive committee here, so I know basically, you know, a lot of things that are going on that--I don't know of anything illegal that's going on. But, and I, I doubt if, I doubt if it is. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But if it is, nobody's telling me about it. Story_ID: 86245 Speaker 1: Now have, have black women who are judges made an attempt to organize themselves, I guess, in some association where they, they can, I guess, commiserate and share information and, and support one another? Speaker 2: Well, we have a lot of groups that are not necessarily just judges. We have--we have the Black Women Lawyers' Association, which is comprised of lawyers and judges in, in this area. In fact, we just recently had a Midwest Summit of Black Women Lawyers and we had lawyers from all over. We invited lawyers from other jurisdictions to come in and, you know, there's a support group there. We have the Cook County Bar which, of course, is a Black Bar Association. We have the Illinois Judicial Council, of which I was one of the founding members, founded in 1982, and, basically, it was to enhance the image of the judiciary and to support the community. And we've done a lot in the community. In fact, we adopted a building down in the Robert Taylor Homes and we have given programs there and career programs. We've given Christmas parties and food baskets and Christmas toys to the kids. Unfortunately, they're tearing the building down, so we, this past Christmas, we didn't get to, to involve ourselves in that activity. But, and but there's no, no, group of black women judges. We, we have an informal network, but in terms of an organized group, no, we don't have anything like that, other than the groups that I just mentioned in which we are all mostly part, part of. Story_ID: 86246 Speaker 1: What, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community, you know, from the position that you're at, or just as Blanche Manning, you know, what, what are some of your hopes and concerns? Speaker 2: Well, you know what, what, one of my major concerns relates to the youth in our community. I try to do as much as I possibly can in the community with the youth. I, I concentrate on the youth. I, I realize that other folks may need help, too, but I think our young people coming up need to have some feeling of hope. They have to understand what exists out here. They have to understand what they can do, if they just will do it, if they know how to do it, if they know that's out there. And so I spend a lot of my time mentoring young people in various organized functions. I'm, I'm--for about twelve, thirteen, fourteen years, and I've been a member of the "We Care" Role Model Program which is sponsored by the Chicago Police Department and the Chicago Public Schools. And, periodically, they send us out to various schools to talk to the kids and to explain to them, you know, what we do in our careers, to talk to them about the, the detriment of getting involved in, in illegal activity, about, you know. And I think lawyers and judges can really go out and talk about and, and, you know, really bring home to them what exactly happens when they, just to allow themselves to get involved in one little thing, you know, it can, it can, you know, snowball. So, basically, that is my biggest concern for, for the community, the youth in our community, and whatever I can possibly do to help them to achieve a meaningful life. Speaker 1: And are, are you surprised to be able to talk to a judge or in person, or do they, do they find it hard to believe that you're really a judge? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they, you know, they're, they're thrilled about it, but I think they--you're, you're a judge, you know. Yeah, I think that's surprising to them 'cause I know when I was a young person, I knew one judge and I didn't know him well, and he lived in my community. And, I know now, you know, a lot of kids really do. And, and there are so many judges out there who, who go out and do this, you know, the outreach into the community. And that's not just the minority judges, you know. And, and as a matter of fact, the Illinois Judicial Council which is, which was started by minority judges, has non-minority members as well. Story_ID: 86247 Speaker 1: Okay, what do you think of--I know in popular culture, they're on television, you know, you have a proliferation of judge television, I mean, court television shows where you have a judge and the, the judges are the stars of these shows, you know. Judge Ratchet, judge, you know, all these judges who sit in, you know, and deal these crook, some of these crazy cases, you know. I don't know if they're any crazier than the ones that come, come to court actually, but they, you know, both of these small claims things, and they, they have to, they--what do you think about that? Do you think that's good or-- Speaker 2: Well, to, to be perfectly honest, I haven't really sat down and looked at them in detail. I have, you know, in passing, perhaps seen a few things take place. And, number one, I guess my first comment is that most of them are totally unrealistic. You don't want to, for instance, one, that I have looked at a few times--well, I haven't sat down and looked at it, but I, in passing, I've seen a couple of-- Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause it's hard to ignore popular culture. Sometime you know, though, you're not-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --trying to find it. You want them to find you. Speaker 2: You know, you know, two or three of them, I, I've just, just in observing the demeanor of the judges on some of these programs, you really don't want kids to think the judges act that way because most judges do not have the kind of demeanors that we see on television. And-- Speaker 1: Specifically, what, what kind of things are you talking about? Speaker 2: Oh, they'll shout at them. They'll hollow at them. They just don't have any dignity or, you know, they don't have the kind of demeanor that one wants in a judge. So I, I think, you know, to that extent, I think they're pretty unrealistic. They, they don't reflect what really happens. What would be better for young people to do is instead of watching that on television is for their schools to bring them into an actual courtroom, and let them sit and observe what goes on. And I, I have that. I have students come and, you know, schools who will bring their kids in, and I welcome that any time. But I, I guess the bottom line is I don't really think a whole lot of these programs on television but, like I said, I won't indict them all because I haven't really sat down and watched them, but the few that I've looked at, I, I would turn thumbs down on them. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 85455 Speaker 1: Ma'am, do, do you--what traits do you think you, you share with your parents or what traits did your parents have that you-- Speaker 2: Probably the one that comes to mind most is our work ethic. My parents' mother and father were both very much involved in, in the work world. They were not highly educated. They were, you know, they were high school graduates. They had a little college, but they were always working and to provide for their family. And I, I think that's basically the one that I would suggest most, the work ethic. And I think I have the same thing. I, you know, I, I can't, I can't conceive of not being a career person. And I, I think that's probably the one that we have the most in common. Speaker 1: Did you, did you surprise your parents of your achievements? Speaker 2: I, I don't think so. Unfortunately, my, my dad [Julius Porter] didn't live long enough to see me become a judge. My mother [Marguerite Porter] lived almost long enough to see me become a Federal judge. She died--I think a few weeks before I got the word that I had been selected. But, no, I don't think they were surprised. Speaker 1: Okay. So they had an expectation of--there was a certain (unclear) type of work and (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: They, they had a very, they had very high expectations of me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's why my dad wouldn't let me be a professional jazz musician (laughter). Story_ID: 85456 Speaker 1: Now that's an interesting way to say, to say when this, that you, you've picked up your horn again and even as a judge and you, you've-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, I play as much as I can (laughter). I-- Speaker 1: When did you start playing again? Speaker 2: Actually, I started back in '87 [1987]. That's when our Chicago Bar Association symphony orchestra was started by a couple of judges. And we would meet down at the Daley Center in somebody else's courtroom. And it grew and I continued to play--I was playing my clarinet then. And as time went on, in some kind of way, I got hold of a bass clarinet and I started playing that. And I decided that I liked playing the bass clarinet more than I do the regular clarinet. And so, I picked that up. And then about 1991--I guess you'd--so I, I'm guessing now and approximating, I picked up a saxophone. I didn't pick up my saxophone. I had to rent a saxophone 'cause I didn't have a saxophone any longer. And I just start, you know, feeling around, and then I started attending the Bloom School of Jazz [Chicago, Illinois] which is located here in Chicago. (Coughing). Excuse me. And I belong to a lot of committees, and I participate in a lot of things, in and out of town. And it seems that every time I go somewhere, somehow it becomes common knowledge that I play music. And so, I just started playing everywhere I go. I remember I was, I got my last degree I got, I was in Virginia, Charlottesville, went to the University of Virginia. I got a Master of Laws. And when I go down there, that's where I stayed on campus. And we, we'd have dinners and what have you. They'd always asked me to play. So I just started playing for different things. And then ultimately, I joined the Chicago State University concert band in the, in their jazz band, and I just picked up my horn, and started playing again. And, then I decided--well, like I said, I started taking jazz classes over at the Bloom School of Jazz. And I, for the first time in my life, started taking saxophone lessons. I had never taken lessons before, other than my clarinet lessons when I was a clarinet major. And I studied with a member of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra. So then I, you know, one group led to another (laughter). I would join the, you know, one group, and then I'd meet people in that group, and they'd invite me to join some other group, and sort, it sort of built up. And then about two, three years ago, some of us who are members of the symphony orchestra, the Bar Association symphony orchestra, decided, you know, we should start a Chicago Bar jazz band. So we came up with the idea of the Barristers' Big Band. And that's when we started meeting here in this, in my, my courtroom. And the outgrowth of the Barristers Big Band was that there were a few of us who enjoyed playing in combos. And so we established a little combo out of the Barristers Big Band, and that group is called the Scales of Justice. One of my law clerks gave it the name. And, then, from time to time, I get invited to play at private affairs or receptions, and what have you. I got an invitation about, maybe five years ago, to play at the Palmer House for a group for which I had previously been on the board, the Lawyers Assistance Program, which deals with lawyers and judges who have had substance abuse problems. And it's a fundraiser, an annual fundraiser, and so I put together a band. I play for that and I called it Diversity. And the reason I called it Diversity is because we were all different ages, different races, different occupations, you know, and, of course, different instruments. So it was either a sextet or a quintet, I forget now which. And from time to time that, we, I reestablished that group when we were invited to play for special events. And I play in my church band. And I play with the ladies' jazz band consisting of nine of us, and we play a lot of places. We play for private parties. We played on radio about two or three times, WHPK. We've played on Channel 19 twice, I think. We are, we played in clubs. Speaker 1: And what's the name of the group? Speaker 2: The KCR Ensemble. Story_ID: 85457 Speaker 1: So we, you know, and I, I played in clubs with, in conjunction with the Bloom School of Jazz [Chicago, Illinois], I played at Andy's Jazz Show Club. I played at the Jazz Showcase. I played at the Hot House and so. Speaker 2: That's pretty big. Those are nice venues. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Those, and Hot House, Andy's. Speaker 1: Right, uh-hum. Speaker 2: [Isaac] Redd Holt [HM] was at Andy's not too long ago. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, they have a lot of good people at, at Andy's but-- Speaker 2: And Jazz Showcase is one of the biggest venues for jazz and (unclear). Speaker 1: It is. I played there once. Speaker 2: Okay. That's something, you know, more people, people always sit there and watch (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That sounds great. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Sounds great. Speaker 1: Well, that's, you know. When you go to the Jazz Showcase, that's the only thing Joe Segal will let you go is sit there and watch. You can't talk. You can't smoke (laughter). You can drink but that's it. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, that's been and that's been a rewarding thing to do, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Since, since just since the late '80's [1980s], I think it was-- Speaker 1: Right. That's when I picked it back up, but I, I was obsessed with it when I was a teenager. Speaker 2: Uh-hum. Speaker 1: When I was in, you know, and my--may, maybe my senior year in high school and, and in college, especially the first or three years of college, I, I played a lot. And I played with a lot of good people who have gone on to become professional musicians, like I, I mentioned to you before. Story_ID: 85458 Speaker 1: Now, ma'am, I know you're still in the, you know, a practicing judge and everything, but what would you see right now is your legacy? We ask this of everybody so-- Speaker 2: I never really thought about it--myself having a legacy, but I suppose what, what I'd really would hope my legacy would be, would be that I was perceived as somebody who cared, who cares. I care for the people in the community, especially the youth in our community because they are, are our future. But I also care, even in terms of the litigation that I officiate at, I, you know, I, I am concerned about all the parties, the litigants. And I have a concern for the lawyers, and I, I trust and hope that they will be civil because I think this is so important. It makes for the best possible way to litigate. So I guess I would hope that my legacy would be that people understand that I do care and I have a concern, you know, for problems. I guess-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is slightly different but-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a very skilled jazz musician (laughter), and as a fair judge. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well thank you very much, thank you. Speaker 2: Thanks a lot. Story_ID: 85459 Speaker 1: Well this is a photo of the KC-, KCR Ensemble. It's an all ladies' jazz band, and we've been together for approximately two and a half years. And we play for many occasions, private parties, receptions. We play in some clubs. We've appeared on television together a couple of times on Channel 19, and we've also done some shows on a radio station. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And The HistoryMakers event? Speaker 2: And The HistoryMakers, we played for the reception at the Art Institute. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Why don't you tell us a little bit--that one and-- Speaker 2: That's a photo of myself talking with Wynton Marsalis. He appeared at the Symphony Center in conjunction with the program for young people in jazz. And I was there in my capacity as a representative of Roosevelt University. I'm a board member, a Board of Trustees member, of Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]. And I was invited to, to attend this evening and we were just talking. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I believe it's the same event. Speaker 2: That's also with Marsalis talking to some of the other attendees at the same event that was held at the Symphony Center where he was participating in the program for young people and discussing jazz and his music. And I was present there, too. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's a photo of myself with the state representative, [Constance] Connie Howard [HM], and the then-acting President of Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois], and another of the members of that faculty. That was in approximately 1998 when I received--that particular day, I received a Doctor of Humane Letters honorary degree from Chicago State University, and we were talking after the program. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Ready. Speaker 1: Yeah. Here I'm receiving an award from State's Attorney, Richard Devine. It's, it's an award that's given on an annual basis in recognition of African American Heritage Month, and it's named after CF Stratford. And that's a photo of myself with State's Attorney Devine after, immediately after I had received the award. It was approximately two months ago. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: That, that was an invitation to the event which was held at the Cultural Center. And I, that, that's the one where I received the award from State's Attorney Devine in-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: The award is the CF Stratford award, and members of the Stratford family were present, including John Rogers, Jr. [HM]. And also honored at that same event was James D. Montgomery [HM], prominent trial attorney. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) ready. Speaker 1: That photo was taken in my courtroom. It's a picture of myself in my robe, and with my tenor saxophone, and my gavel. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) ready. Speaker 1: Now, in that photo is depicted Rev. Dr. Hycel Taylor, who at that time was the pastor of Second Baptist Church in Evanston, Illinois. Currently, he's pastor of Pilgrim Baptist Church here in Chicago. And included in that photo are members of the Illinois Judicial Council, as well as Thomas Todd who was our guest speaker. And the event was at a Salvation Black History Month at Dr. Hycel Taylor's church in Evanston. That was taken about a couple of years ago. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And then you name something from what the right, maybe starting at the top, and see how far we can go. And, and if you can't remember who they are, that's all right. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I see Tim Evans there who is now Chief Judge of the Circuit Court of Cook County. And that's in the back row-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): This is Tim Evans, right, right here? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): This is the help site person in the office, you know, they try to transcribe-- Speaker 1: And the person standing to Judge Evans' left-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): This one, do you know who's that? Speaker 1: That's me. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That's you, okay. I can't tell myself without my glasses on. Speaker 1: And I can't see that one from here. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): It looks like a (unclear), Montgomery, right? Speaker 1: No, here, and that's Judge Everette Braden. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He was, yeah. And standing directly next to Judge Braden is Judge Marjorie Laws. And next to her, to the left of her, is Judge Stuart Nudelman. Next to Judge Nudelman is Judge Jackie Cox who was, at that time, the presiding judge of the First Municipal District of the Circuit Court. She's now been elevated to the bankruptcy, as a bankruptcy court judge. And standing to her left is Judge Sophia Hall of the Circuit Court; Judge James Stuart of the Circuit Court; Thomas Todd [HM]; and The Honorable R. Eugene Pincham [HM]; and immediately in front of Judge Pincham is Judge Vanessa Hopkins; and to her right is Judge, Justice Leslie Saul (ph.); and to her right is Mrs. Taylor, wife of Pastor Taylor; and Pastor Taylor; and to Pastor Taylor's right is Judge Mary Maxwell Thomas of the Circuit Court of Cook County; and to her right is Judge-- Speaker 2: That's Shelvin Hall [HM]? Speaker 1: Shelvin Hall. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and ready. Speaker 1: The young man depicted here is my nephew, my great-nephew actually, James Porter. He's the son of my niece, Monique (ph.). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And that young man is also the son of Monique. His name is Antoine (ph.), Antoine Brooks. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready-- Speaker 1: Okay. In this photo, standing in the rear are my niece and nephew when they were teenagers, Jack Porter and Monique Porter, Williamson now. They are the children of my deceased brother. And sitting, starting from the left is my husband, Bill Manning, myself, and my mother, Marguerite Porter. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, okay. Speaker 1: And that is Monique Porter, Williamson now, my niece. And on each side of her is, are, are her sons. The tall young man is James Porter and the little guy is Antonio. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): He looks extremely tall. All right, ready. Speaker 1: That photo depicts my mother and father, my father, Julius Porter, and my mother, Marguerite Porter, both of whom are now deceased. (Laughter). It looks we're about to have our heads chopped off there (laughter). That's myself on the right, and on the left is a friend of mine with whom I had traveled to, to Florida. And we were (laughter), in the guillotine--I guess you might say. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) so who judged you, sentenced? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: In that photo, to the right is my aunt, my, my father's sister, Erma Vonedoll (ph.), Ronaldo (ph.), I'm sorry; and my father's mother, Blanche McNeil (ph.), after whom I'm named, by the way. And both of them are now deceased and they lived in Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 2: Is, is that Ronaldo related to Eugene (unclear)? Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: (Unclear) the accountant, yeah. Speaker 1: Uh-hum. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: And that young man that you see there is Antonio Brooks, also known as Doodle. He is my great-nephew also. He's Monique's son. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Ready. Speaker 2: The three young men that you see there is my nephew, also my--considered to be a son. I raised him from two years of age. He's my brother's son, Jack Porter. Could we do another one instead of this one for right now? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Ready. Speaker 2: The young lady you see there is my great-niece. She is Jack's youngest daughter. And we, her name is Lanaer (ph.)--we call her Na-Na (ph.). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 2: That's a photo of my mother having a good laugh there, Marguerite Porter, now deceased. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Do you remember the occasion? Speaker 2: I believe she was laughing at something that either I said or that Jack, my nephew, said. It was in her home. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Now that photo goes back aways. It was taken in 1969. It's a photo of myself and my husband. We were in attendance at a Cook County Bar Association Auxiliary dance. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Uh-hum. And the night of my seventh birthday? Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Uh-hum. Speaker 2: Really? That's your-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, ready. Speaker 2: That is a photo of myself and the late Mayor Harold Washington, a person whom I considered to have been very instrumental in my career development. On that occasion, I believe I was on the campaign trial. I was running for judge, and he was in, in attendance at the event, too. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And ready. Speaker 2: That young man is my great-nephew. He's the son of my nephew, Jack. This is Joseph. Speaker 1: I guess she's here, too, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) close. Speaker 1: There's gotta be a way to--let's see (unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of myself taken with Senator Paul Simon when we were in Washington. Senator Simon was instrumental in my being appointed to the Federal bench. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Ready. Speaker 1: This photograph of myself playing with a combo, the Scales of Justice, at the Hilton Hotel. It was taken about a year ago. It's a jazz group that I play with. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, all right, we're ready. Speaker 1: The Black Women Lawyers Association had a Midwest Summit of Black Women Lawyers about, oh, seven months ago, maybe almost a year ago. In attendance and included in this photograph are myself with former Senator Carol Moseley Braun [HM]. And in the middle is a good friend of both of ours, Katherine Poindexter, former trustee of Thornton Township. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I can't get up--ready. Speaker 1: That photograph was taken after my election to the Illinois Appellate Court. Justice Charles Freeman is doing the task of swearing me in, and present also is my husband, Bill. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my niece, my great-niece actually, Jack's oldest daughter. Her name is Monica and she resides in Madison, Wisconsin. She's a, she's a model and an actress. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Is she going to school up there? Speaker 1: Yes, uh-hum. Speaker 2: What's her name again? Speaker 1: Monica. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That'll do it. Speaker 2: Could we-- Speaker 1: My favorite saxophone player is Pharoah Sanders. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And you probably didn't know it. Speaker 2: This young man is Monica's brother. He's, his name is London. He is a saxophonist and he's also a rapper. He has a CD [compact disc]. Speaker 1: Hmm, okay. Speaker 2: Commercial. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And he lives in Madison, Wisconsin as well. Speaker 1: Okay...