 Story_ID: 23262 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm an interviewer today with [The] HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My full name is, Stephen Craig McGuire. That's spelled, S-T-E-P-H-E-N, C-R-A-I-G, M-C-G-U-I-R-E. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born September the 17th, 1948, in New Orleans, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: My title is professor of physics. So I teach physics at Southern University and A&M [Agricultural and Mechanical] College [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in the department of physics, and I do research with the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you say that one more time slowly so that-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August the 18th, 2012. Speaker 1: And are we at the present time? Speaker 2: At the moment, we're in the Southern University system president's conference room. Story_ID: 23263 Speaker 1: All right. Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is: Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yeah. My favorite food at this point in my life would be grilled tilapia with brown rice and steamed and mixed vegetables. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Oh, gray. That's my favorite color. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Oh, that would be the summertime, when it's nice and warm and the fish are running and biting. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh, that would be the Florida Keys [Florida]. Speaker 1: All right. And the last one is: Do you have a favorite phrase or a saying? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if so much a phrase or saying, but there's a scripture in the Bible that says, "It is better to put your trust in God than to put confidence in men." I think it's Psalms 118 verse 8. And that--I think about that all the time as I go through life. Story_ID: 23264 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately so we don't get them mixed up. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Then we'll put them together. So can you give us your mother's full and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is, Ruth Audrey Barsock McGuire. That's, R-U-T-H, A-U-D-R-E-Y, B-A-R-S-O-C-K, M-C-G-U-I-R-E. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't recall exactly her date of birth, but she was born in Waveland, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Waveland, Mississippi. Now, you are--do you think she was in her twenties when she had you or younger or you have any sense of that? Speaker 2: I think she was thirty-four years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, that'll put her, what, 1914, I guess? Speaker 2: In that range. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: My dad for sure was born in 1914, so I think she was born a few years later. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them, and what occupations were they involved in or what stories you know? Speaker 2: I understand. What I know is, I have--I've heard stories and I have a picture, it turns out, of my grandmother on my mother's side. Her name was Maude Clark Barsock. She married Daniel Barsock. And there were eight children from that union, one whom, of course, was my mother, and she had seven siblings; and so, I have seven aunts and uncles from that side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: I don't know much about my grandfather on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Do you know what he did for a living? Speaker 2: Yes. Based upon the birth records of my aunt, the youngest child in that sequence of eight, and my grandmother's documents, at one time he was what was called a driver. And perhaps he drove a hearse or some other type of vehicle. That was at the birth of the oldest of the eighth, Daniel Junior. It was specified that he was a driver. By the time my aunt, the youngest person, came along from that line, Isabella Lillian Barsock, he was specified then as a clerk. Speaker 1: Okay. But you don't know what kind of a clerk? Store clerk or what? Speaker 2: No. It doesn't state. No. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, are there any stories from that side of the family about, you know, what life was like in Waveland, Mississippi? Speaker 2: I understand. No. Only that there were frequent trips between Waveland and New Orleans [Louisiana]. And the stories mainly occur in terms of what happened in New Orleans. For example, my mother migrated to New Orleans and settled into the portion of town called uptown, and it turns out that the whole family moved to uptown at one time or another at some point. And my oldest uncle on that side was born, actually, in a portion of town near the Treme, you know, on Conti Street. I know that from his birth record that I have. Story_ID: 23265 Speaker 1: Now, my mom [Ruth Barsock McGuire] met my dad [Harry McGuire, Jr.], I'm told, at a dance that was being held in the community in uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana]. And as the story goes in our family, my dad looked up and saw my mother across the floor and he immediately was smitten. He fell in love with her on the spot. And so much so that he approached her, and they became a couple from that point forward. They settled uptown and, of course, began to raise a family. And there was an interesting story about my mother. She would go back and forth in the community, and there was one lady who had--who did not have any children. And she approached my mother one day, she said, "Gee, would you let me be the godmother of your first child? I don't have any children, and would you let that child spend some time with me?" So my mom said, "Sure." And sure enough, when the first child was born in a sequence of children in my family--I'm the third of eight children born to Harry and Ruth McGuire--the first child that was born, that was my sister Patricia. Patricia became Ms. Olivia Jackson's godchild. And she spent quite a bit of time with her growing up uptown. Although, we as a family, dad got a job downtown, I'll call it. And you have to know that when you say Uptown, New Orleans, you're talking about really geographically south of Canal Street. And when you talk about up--I'm sorry. Uptown is south of, and downtown is north of Canal Street, turns out. So, but Dad got a job, okay, downtown working as a head custodian at the Andrew J. Bell Junior High School. And so, he moved the whole family from uptown to downtown, and that's basically where I grew up. That transition occurred just at about the time I was to go to school. Story_ID: 23266 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ruth Barsock McGuire] have a chance to finish school in Waveland [Mississippi] or did she finish at someplace else? Speaker 2: Thank you for asking. It turns out that I'm part of a generation of--first generation college attendees and graduates in my family. So, neither my dad [Harry McGuire, Jr.] nor my mother graduated from high school or certainly not college. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your mother go to any kind of school at all in Waveland? Speaker 2: I'm not really sure, but probably in elementary school, is what I'm thinking. Speaker 1: Now, she can read and write? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Thank you very much for asking. Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Actually, she--she was a very literate lady as it turns out. If I--okay. I don't want to get too far away from it. Speaker 1: No, no (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: But if I had to identify one thing about her that she emphasized to us from day one, that was education. She was the person who emphasized that education was the way to a better life in this society. She did not waver from that. Speaker 1: So, now Waveland-- Speaker 2: Mississippi gulf coast town. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So it's on the gulf coast [Gulf of Mexico]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So they--she used to go right down the gulf to New Orleans [Louisiana] (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Get on Route 95 right on into New Orleans. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: It was a major thoroughfare there, connecting the two communities. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: You're absolutely right about that. Speaker 1: Yeah. So it's between Biloxi [Mississippi] and New Orleans or what? Speaker 2: You got it. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: You go a little further east, you get to Biloxi. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So your mother--you don't know the name of the school she went to or what type of-- Speaker 2: No. No, I do not. Speaker 1: Was Waveland actually a little town? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, it was. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So it did have-- Speaker 2: There're some remnants of it since Katrina [Hurricane Katrina in 2005]. But it was basically wiped off the map. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So-- Speaker 2: I've actually been back to Waveland to try to find out something about the town, but I haven't had very much luck. And that's one of the projects that I have to pursue. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, did--was there any other tradition in your mother's family about where they were from other than Waveland? Did they come to Waveland from someplace else or? Speaker 2: I don't know that. No. Speaker 1: Okay. And now, there're all kind of, you know, stories about rural Mississippi. Did she have any stories about growing up that--? Speaker 2: Mom in rural Mississippi? Speaker 1: Yeah, and in Waveland. Speaker 2: Well, most of the stories she talked about was uptown, New Orleans. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Where she- Speaker 1: So, how old was your mother when she moved to New Orleans? Speaker 2: I don't know that. I should mention to you that she passed away at an early age, relatively early age. She was forty-nine years old. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. That is young. Speaker 2: I was--turns out I was in college at the time. I had come to Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and to major in physics, which I did. And then while I was here, I was given a opportunity to study physics for a year at the University of California, Los Angeles [UCLA, California]. And it was during that year in the--that's a good point. It was during that year in the spring of 1969 that I received that she had passed away. So, if she was forty-nine years old, she was born in 1920. Speaker 1: Okay. 1920. Speaker 2: That's a good number. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nobody could find that in the true records, okay. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: We said 1914, I said somewhere in that range, and so, yeah. Good. Speaker 1: Okay. So she's a little bit younger than we thought, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So. Let me see here. Well, what kind of work did your mother do in New Orleans when she got there? Speaker 2: When she got to New Orleans, what I remember people referring to is, that the girls would, they would cook. And they would cook pies of one sort or another, and they would sell them. But that's the only work I can--I can recall being discussed by any of my family members insofar as what the girls in New Orleans did when they were uptown. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 23267 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to go now to your--to your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Full name is, Harry McGuire Junior. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 9/1914. He was born in Napoleonville, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Napoleonville. Speaker 2: Now, if you look on the (clearing throat)--the--my birth certificate, for example, it says he's from a place called Bayou Lafourche. Now, Bayou Lafourche is an area. Bayou Lafourche--and it's also a--it's a bayou which passes right--it borders on Napoleonville and all these other communities in that area. Right? So when they say Bayou Lafourche, she's from the general area where Napoleonville--but, as a child growing up, my dad, when he took us back to the country, back home, he would take us back to Napoleonville, from New Orleans [Louisiana], up Highway 1, along the bayou, up to Napoleonville, and grandpa's house. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, how far back can you trace your father's side, and what do you know about that side in terms of what they were doing? Speaker 2: (Clears throat). So far, I've been able to trace my dad's roots, I will call it, back to a fellow by the name of Andrew McGuire. I don't know Andrew McGuire's occupation, but he married a lady by the name of Elsie Carter. And, Elsie Carter is listed as having been just a housewife--not just a housewife, but a housewife. And she had seven kids. Andrew McGuire and Elsie Carter had seven kids, one of whom, of course, was my grandfather, Harry McGuire, Senior. But beyond that, I can't tell you anymore about the extent of my father's ancestry. Andrew McGuire is where it stops right now. Speaker 1: Okay. That's as far back as he gets-- Speaker 2: That's as far back as I can go right now. Speaker 1: Now, you had mentioned something--you were talking when we came in about a lineage that reaches back to a plantation, a certain plantation-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in Louisiana? Is this the side of the family where that happened? Speaker 2: Correct. That's exactly right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The plantation is called the 'Little Texas Sugarcane Plantation'. And it's located in Assumption Parish, which is in this area of Napoleonville, near Bayou Lafourche. It's what's called one of the bayou plantations. In Louisiana we have river plantations, and we also have bayou plantations. So, 'Little Texas' was one of the bayou plantations. Speaker 1: And a bayou is a river or a creek, right? Speaker 2: It's a--yeah, a creek. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. So, now, what's the history of 'Little Texas' [plantation]? Do you have any history on the place? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I do not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's a subject though for investigation as we speak. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Little Texas and Napoleonville; [unclear], Louisiana. All of these places are, in fact, mentioned in the history of our family. And so I'm in the process of trying to connect all those dots, mainly by working through the Louisiana (clears throat) State Archives, and the Clerk of Court in Napoleonville, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Is there a story about Emancipation that you know that's passed down at all? Speaker 2: No, I have not--I'm not aware of any story about--that's related to the Emancipation during that time period, although, I sure there must be some. Speaker 1: Yeah. You would think that everybody would have a story about that at some point, but people don't. They don't have--we don't seem to have that kind--. Speaker 2: They--no. Nothing like that has ever come up in the discussion, either written or oral. It--the discussion mainly has focused on who's whose cousin and how, okay; who married whom, okay; and how many children were born from that particular union; and, sometimes where they lived. And then to a good extent what they did, right. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were the relatives on your father's side--were farmers for the most part or did they do something else? Speaker 2: No. Mainly--they were mainly farmers--farmers. They were farm hands. They worked--they worked the fields. I should mention that this part of Louisiana is strong sugarcane country. So that's the major cash crop in that area. You'll--you'll have sugarcane fields as far as the eye can see. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So many persons in--for example, my grandfather, he worked at the sugar mill. I know that because my father told me that. He would tell me stories how my grandfather would take my father to the sugar mill with him. My grandfather, apparently, operated the--there was a press that was, it was mechanized but it was horse powered. And so he would make sure that the horses kept moving around such that the press could turn and squeeze all of the juice out of the sugarcane in that operation. My dad--my grandfather did that for awhile, and my dad had related that story to me on more than one occasion. Speaker 1: Okay. He kept the horses moving around so that they can grind the--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: In a circle. In a circle. In a circle as part of that press. Speaker 1: On the press they would, like, put the raw sugarcane and it would be mashed, I guess, until-- Speaker 2: Exactly. That's exactly right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Until the juices are extracted. Speaker 2: Right. The juice be extracted and fall down into a trough and then it would be carried off for subsequent processing. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, that's a--I do know that during slavery that--it was described as tough slavery, working on a sugarcane plantation. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. I understand. Story_ID: 23268 Speaker 1: Within that context [of McGuire's paternal ancestors working on sugarcane plantations in Louisiana], I can tell you, growing up, my dad [Harry McGuire, Jr.] worked sometimes two and three jobs before he became the head custodian [at Andrew J. Bell Junior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and then he, in fact, he worked--he still worked another job, but he still had those two jobs. I have never seen anyone who worked as hard as this man. And if I had to identify one thing that he instilled certainly in the boys in the family--there were four boys and four girls in my family--and that was a very strong work ethic. Mom [Ruth Barsock McGuire] emphasized education, Dad emphasized the work ethic. You know, if you want something you got to work for it. So. Okay. And he would come home and there was always work to be done. He would take us on some of his jobs, okay, to work side by side with him, in addition to him working for the Orleans Parish School Board for thirty-five years before he retired working as a head custodian. Now, before any of the other jobs, but how did he get that job as a head custodian? Well, it turns out, a New Orleans entrepreneur I will call him, noticed my dad when he was working back on the river front, and asked my dad to come work for him to do some work around his house, etcetera. He was a person of social status, and he had political aspirations also. His name was Theodore Hortard (ph.). Well, eventually, Mr. Hortard-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Theodore Hortard--and eventually, Mr. Hortard, as we knew him, became the superintendent of the Orleans Parish School System. And it was at that point that my dad got a job as a--was called a roving custodian, where if the custodian didn't appear on the job, then they would have someone to come and substitute for him. Then eventually he got his own school as the head custodian. All right. But it was that kind of connection by which he gained that economic stability for the family. Now, all that happened, that transition occurred about the time when we had four kids in the family. Okay. And then, that's when we moved--that's when we moved from uptown to downtown [New Orleans], when he got his head custodian position. And, from that point forward we had four more children, as it turns out. And I--I graduated from high school, left high school, left New Orleans to go to school, and I've only been back and forth to New Orleans since that time. But, a very hard-working man instilled within us the value for work, hard work, to get what you want. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, did your dad have a chance to go to school any at all (unclear)? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Grade school even, did he? Speaker 1: As the story goes, when he was in somewhere between the sixth and the eighth grade, he dropped out of school to work in the fields as many people did to support the family. And as my sister tells the story, there were two things that discouraged him that he related to her about school. One, there was this business of being called on to do things in class, which he didn't feel like he was prepared to do, such as go to the map and bound such and such state or bound the United States of America on the world map; this kind of thing, to show your knowledge of geography. And then there was this business of him adding fractions, where you had to be able to separate your numerator from the common denominator. He would refer to those kinds of stories that basically were experiences that discouraged him. Now, remember now, his father, if you'll look at his father's Army records, record of--not army discharge but entry into the army or eligibility to serve, his father would sign his name with an "X." So he didn't--he didn't know how to write. Right. I have that record--I found that did show up from the [Louisiana] state archives. Speaker 2: Okay. So he was--he was better educated than his father by a lot, I guess, in terms of-- Speaker 1: Oh, you make an excellent point there. If I look at the difference between my grandfather and my father, then I look at the difference between my father and me, yes; there are significant differences in education between those two generations. No question about it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And with us, also, in our family, Mom stayed on top of Dad, and Dad didn't, he didn't argue in terms of "make sure those kids go to school," you know, "and get their education." That was just natural in the community. You have to get your education. It was uniform from the home, to the church, to the school. My goodness. Now, obviously from my age you know that I grew up in a time of strict segregation. So on the one hand, yes, we did get the used furniture from the other school. We did (unclear) get the used books from the other school, but what we had was the human capital. We had some of the best teachers that there were, because at that--all those resources were concentrated in the African American community. Story_ID: 23269 Speaker 1: But you were telling us earlier how your parents [Ruth Barsock McGuire and Harry McGuire, Jr.] met, and you said they met at a dance? Speaker 2: At a dance. That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay. In New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Uptown. Speaker 1: In pptown. This would have been about 19 what? About 1940? Now, you're--I don't know where you rank in the--? Speaker 2: Third. Speaker 1: Okay. So about what time--when did your parents get married, do you know? Speaker 2: I don't have a--I don't have that marriage document, although I can find that date for you. I don't have that. That's a good point. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't have that document. Speaker 1: All right. But they get married and, well, when you think about your parents' personalities and their dispositions and their looks-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: --and how they walk and what they were interested in, and paying to, and I mean, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: It's a combination. Mom is definitely there, no question about it, in my personality. Dad is definitely there too. We were just talking about (clears throat), in terms of my own physical attributes, I think I have a very strong genetic composition for, you know, just for physical activity, as it turns out. You may have seen my record where I was a pretty successful high school basketball player. And-- Speaker 1: What, you're about 6'4" [six feet, four inches in height]? Speaker 2: I'm 6'5" now. Speaker 1: 6'5" (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: I was 6--I played at 6'4" when I was in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's exactly right. Speaker 1: Then grew afterwards (laughs). Speaker 2: No. You know, you come home--you go to college right after high school, and when you come home people will say, "You've gotten taller." "Oh, did I?" (laughs) It didn't seem that way to me, but they noticed it, okay. So it was an inch growth after high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No question about it. Certainly, my father was a very strong-willed man. If he put his mind to something, you know, he's going to do it. That--that's the way I am as it turns out. Right. And, of course (unclear) things in terms of a work ethic was something that was very important as well. The value for education, I'm sure that came from my mother. So there's a combination there. And I see the same thing in my own children as it relates to me and my, you know, not--I don't think I'm more like one than the other. Now, there're some aspects of my dad that are very different from me. He used to like to dress real flashy all the time when, you know, when he would--he was a dresser as it turns out. He liked jewelry, and I have no inclination for any of those things excepting as, as necessary (laughs). So. So, you know, it just depends. Now, okay. Eight children. If you looks among--if you look amongst the eight children in that sequence, you will see different aspects of the parents come out in different ones, okay. That's absolutely the case. Story_ID: 23270 Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings from the beginning and, you know, insert yourself where you come along? Speaker 2: Sure. The oldest in the sequence--first in the sequence I should say, is Patricia Ann McGuire, and her married name is McGalvin (ph.), okay. Then there's Harry Horace McGuire, III, he's my older brother. And then there's me, Stephen Craig McGuire. Then there's Honore McGuire, that's my younger sister right underneath me, okay. Then there is Michael Wayne McGuire. Then there is Deborah McGuire. And next comes then Mary Ruth McGuire. And then there's Tracy Joseph McGuire, he's the last one. Tracy Joseph McGuire. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's what? Speaker 2: That's eight. Speaker 1: About eight? Speaker 2: That's eight. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That is eight. That's eight people. Speaker 1: Eight all together. Okay. And your household growing up consisted of eight children then and your two parents? Speaker 2: Correct, yes. Speaker 1: Was there anybody else staying with you, like grandparents or anything like that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Cousins or? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. And what kind of house did you live in? So that's ten people in the house. Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Two-story shotgun house, 2121 Domain Street, New Orleans, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Two-story shotgun house? Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. Speaker 1: (unclear) seen a two-story one, but that's--that would mean that there would be like six large rooms, I guess, with a-- Speaker 2: I call it--oh definitely. Speaker 1: --six large rooms and a bathroom? Speaker 2: The upstairs was basically--I call it two stories. Upstairs we call it the attic, but there was two rooms up there in the attic, okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, and basically we used them as bedrooms as necessary, right. And growing up, when I got tired sleeping in the bed with my older brother as it turns out, I just moved upstairs by the time I got to high school. Why? My personality was always such that I enjoyed being by myself and studying. That's just the way it's been ever since I can remember. As a youngster, and I don't want to get off the subject, but I'm just saying that. What was one of the most enjoyable things in growing up? That was being able to go to the library and read books, check books out the library, come home and you read them, because the library, as it turns out, it opened up a whole new world to you in terms of things that were out there, and what you could do, and so it was very mind-expanding as I found out over the years. So, and all throughout elementary and high school, I had an interest in academics and I excelled in it, and I had a special interest in science. You know, I was always wondering why are things little, why are they big; you know, how do things work, why do they work the way they do; this business. Okay. So it's a case where, yes, it a two-story house. I called it a shotgun house, and it was right in the middle of the Treme of New Orleans. That's the home that we grew up in. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 23271 Speaker 1: Yes. Okay. So, now, we always ask this question, and we always ask it in this way: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Sights, sounds, smells. Speaker 2: Growing up in New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 1: New Orleans, right? Speaker 2: (laughs). Okay. All right. When we moved uptown--when we moved downtown, rather, so where I grew up in the Treme, there was a bus line that went down Domain Street (unclear). And the bus, at that time, derives its power from an overhead electricity line. So one of the sounds that I can remember is the bus coming down the street on a regular basis, stopping at the corner, and I remember the crackling of the contacts between the bus and the overhead electrical lines. And that was one of them. Okay. Another thing I remember growing up, when I was upstairs in the home at night, I remember if you listen very carefully, it's almost if you could always the rumble of the city off into the distance. Right. It would pick up in the morning. Early morning, the world would wake up and you would hear the noises of the children coming to school. At night you would hear them playing outside when it was--the sun finally went down and it was cool out there. But then that would eventually die down when all of the kids had to go in and go to sleep. But the rumble of the city came from all the way downtown, it was always there. I remember that. It kind of has a constant background. What else do I remember this time period? We lived next door to a school, and one of the things that impressed me was, just I was a youngster, but this at the time was a high school. Okay. First it was a high school, then they made it a junior high school. But it was a high school. And to watch the adolescents come to school and the way they interacted with each other was very interesting to me. The way they dressed, their interactions with the teachers, the strong discipline that was there, the interest one sex had for the other in terms of, you know, courting on the school yard during recesses and this kind of thing. Oh, my goodness. The athletic competition during the practice sessions, or when they would go off to play the games and come back. You saw a full range of emotions with these students, okay. Jubilation when they won. You know, depression when they came back. They took all of these things very seriously, I mean, as a part of their life then. And those--I'm very young now, and I'm watching what goes on, of course, at the next door school. Also, I remember my dad [Harry McGuire, Jr.] would take me out to Lake Pontchartrain [brackish estuary located in southeastern Louisiana]. And out there, now that was another world entirely, okay. And he went out there to work on a place called the New Orleans Power Squadron. Why, it goes back to Mr. Theodore Hortard [who first employed McGuire's father in the Orleans Parish School District], who was the president of the Power Squadron. And so, he liked the way my dad worked. My dad would take me out there, and it was out there in that environment that I developed this love for fishing. I mentioned to you, in the summertime I like that because the fish are (unclear). That started way back when I was--way back when I was a kid (clears throat). Let me give you another slice of sights and sounds. My dad would take us back to the country to Napoleonville [Louisiana]. I remember riding in the car with him along Highway 1 right next to Bayou Lafourche. I remember that really distinctly. And I remember on one occasion as we drove along, he said something to me which I didn't understand until many, many years later. He said, "Son, you see all of these people up and down this bayou, Bayou Lafourche?" I said, "Sure, yes, I see them," looking out the car. He would say, "They're your cousins." "I don't know these people. What do you mean they're my cousins?" But he told me that and that stuck with me for some reason, because I never made a connection with it until 2004 when we had that family reunion. And I began to explore just how broad that tree was in terms of the different connections amongst family members in that community as it turns out. Right. So that was one thing. The other thing was recently I went back to Napoleonville and it's really, almost eerie in that you drive back there, and you drive down the street to the--small town--and you get to a point where there's no more street and there's sugarcane fields, sugarcane, tall. And you remember that feeling when you were a kid and he had took you back there. It's as if it all comes back, very easily. Even to the point where you go down to this little Texas Lane, and you got back to the [Little Texas] plantation [where McGuire's paternal ancestry traced back], and the two oak trees that were there right on the road as you entered into the plantation area, you can remember all that. It comes back to you. The details are incredibly imbedded in your mind. So there are aspects of that community which were, just made an--obviously, a tremendous impact on me, which I didn't realize until some years later. There's no question about it. Sights and sounds. There's Napoleonville, that's for sure. Oh, my goodness. I'm going to (unclear) sights and sounds. In New Orleans [Louisiana], again, strict segregation. So there was Pontchartrain Beach, which was some of the beach that was set aside, the amusement area--the amusement park that was set aside for the whites, and then there was Lincoln Beach, which was set aside for the kids. Now, those were some wonderful outings in the summertime when he would take us, the whole family in the car, out to Lincoln Beach. Find a place to park. Mom [Ruth Barsock McGuire] would set up the blanket, you know, with the table and began to put out the food and everything. Then we'd very carefully go across the highway to the beach at Pontchar--Lake Pontchartrain, and we would play, you know, out there under the watchful eyes of lifeguards and what not. There would be birds flying over and whatnot(unclear) birds and (unclear) birds that were there. And it was just a spirit of community and family on that outing that stuck with me, just how important it was to do that, how much I enjoyed being around the kids, my family members. Sometimes we'd have a kid from the neighborhood to come with us and whatnot. Yeah, I thought to myself, if I ever have a family, one of the things we will do is at least once a year pack everybody up in the car and go somewhere where nobody knows us and we can just relax. And that basically was the origin of our cross-country trips that I did when my kids were young as it turns out. So, those sights and sounds really made a, I guess, a big impression on me growing up. And they fit into what was my sense of family and community that remains to this particular day. Story_ID: 23272 Speaker 1: Now, was church special growing up or? Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Oh, yes. Now, I, growing as a kid, I grew up Baptist and I still am Baptist. And so, I was--so I attended the community church there. It was the Mount Zion Baptist Church in New Orleans, Louisiana, located at Domain and Galvest (ph.), right down the street from my house on the corner. The Reverend Morris Burrell (ph). We attended church there. Well, part of the family did. Other parts of the family grew up it turns out United Methodist. Right. Most of the family grew up Baptist and I was one of them. And, of course, there was the case where, you know, my friends in the neighborhood--well, actually, we just grew up in the neighborhood, you know, playing on the playground together, we're going to school with, you know, hanging out with; this kind of business--we would all get together and go to church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: So did both of your parents [Ruth Barsock McGuire and Harry McGuire, Jr.] go to church? Speaker 2: They were not strong churchgoers, no. They were not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They encouraged us to go, okay. But they themselves did not. No. And so, you know, there was Sunday school, vacation Bible school; you name it. All of the pageants, all of the programs. It was partly social, but it really provided a foundation. You heard things and you learned things. How much you learned you didn't really fully appreciate at the time. But it went back to the basic principles that we were taught. Now, I'm talking about both of my parents right now, okay. We've been talking about them separately, but it's hard for me to talk about one without the other. You seen that in the way that I--. Because at that time they were one. (unclear), but they worked together. Let me give you a few basic principles. One, they taught keep God first in your life whatever you do, okay. Now, one learns what that means over time better and better. You understand it better by and by, so to speak. Got to keep God first in your life. Second, the way to a better life in this society is through education, period. Okay. You know, get your education, do as much as you can to do that. What was another underpinning of the whole thing. Another underpinning was the idea--now, and I'm back to my father again, strictly him. "Whatever you take on as a task, whatever you do in life, do a good job," to use his words. Okay. Now, that translated later on into, you leave the place better than you found it wherever you go. Right. And then the fourth principle I would mention to you is that, and I saw this with them; you always take care of your family, whatever it takes to make sure you can ensure the integrity of your family throughout life. Those four basic principles was what they--their lifestyle embodied and that's what got conveyed to me over time. And I've tried to maintain those concepts in my whole life, you know since that time. Right. Even with my own family as it turns out, and extended family as well. So, the church was part of that, that fabric definitely. Now, growing up New Orleans, New Orleans is strong in Catholic, as you probably know. And so, I had a lot of friends who on Wednesdays they would leave school early and they would go to take catechism. I didn't actually know what that was at the time until I learned a little bit more history about New Orleans and its evolution. But for us it was with my friends there in the Baptist church within the community. Now to this day I'm a member of the Baptist church, and I'm member of the Mount Pilgrim Baptist Church here in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. So, you're probably right. Church did play a major role. Story_ID: 23273 Speaker 1: Okay. What about school now? What was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: First school-- Speaker 1: First (unclear) as you went to school? Speaker 2: --that I went to for one day? You want that one? Yeah. Speaker 1: Well? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Let's discuss some of that. Right. Okay. Uptown, went to school, kindergarten for one day. F.P. Rickard (ph). That was the elementary school. Speaker 1: Now what's the story about you being there one day? Speaker 2: (laughs) Dad[Harry McGuire, Jr.] got the job downtown. So that family had to move. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. So we moved, and we got to the new location and the new house, he had a talk with Mom [Ruth Barsock McGuire] and Mom said, "Okay, Steve. Look, we're going to just--wait until next year because it's too late for us to get you back into a school here, and so we're going until next year and see if we can enroll you in the first grade." And that's what she did. Speaker 1: So you had to wait a whole year, another year to enroll? Speaker 2: Yep. But I didn't go to kindergarten. I skipped kindergarten and I went to first grade. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, where did you start first grade? Speaker 2: At the Joseph A. Craig Elementary School. Speaker 1: A. Craig. Speaker 2: Joseph A. Craig Elementary School, and that's--it's still there and it's in the Treme. Speaker 1: In the Treme. That's what they call the neighborhood? Speaker 2: The neighborhood's called the Treme. Speaker 1: The Treme. Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's T-R-E-M-E? Speaker 2: It's one of the oldest communities from-- Speaker 1: Yeah. T-R-E-M-- Speaker 2: M-E. Speaker 1: --A-I-M-E? Speaker 2: T-R-E-M-E. Speaker 1: M-E. Speaker 2: It's a French word. It's pronounced "truh-May". Treme. Speaker 1: Okay. That's it. Treme. Okay. Speaker 2: It's named for the person who purchased the land and who set it up. Okay. Right. Treme. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So--so you started in the first grade? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Oka. Speaker 2: And I went there through third grade because, you see, we had to walk--must have been about at least a mile--from my home to get to Joseph A. Craig [Elementary School]. The school recognizes--the school system recognized this, and so, what they did was decide to build an elementary school located, it turns out, two blocks from my home. So they construct it, the Phillis Wheatley Elementary School. And so I went there in third grade, and I stayed there through sixth grade. Speaker 1: Now, I don't know about the other school, but I do know Phillis Wheatley was a black poet [Phillis Wheatley was the first published African American woman poet]. And so, it was--whoever named it had the black community in mind, I guess, when they named the school. Speaker 2: Yeah, because it's right in the middle of the black community. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. That's right. The Treme--the Treme has a tremendous heritage in terms of African American culture. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: The brass bands. Congo Square, Louis Armstrong [jazz trumpeter and singer]--. Speaker 1: Plus all that is there in Treme. Speaker 2: Treme. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's right. You're absolutely right. Speaker 1: Congo Square, and you said--what else did you say? You said-- Speaker 2: Right now there's the Louis Armstrong Park. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's a Mahalia Jackson [gospel singer] Center for Performing Arts. Speaker 1: When you were growing, Congo Square, now was that--were they drumming at Congo Square when you were growing up? Did they do that? That's something to think about. Speaker 2: There were events over. Congo Square is right before what we call the Municipal Auditorium, okay. It's right there at Rampart Street and I think St. Philip Street. Anyways, but the point of that is it's there. And, yes, there were programs in Congo Square. I did not participate as much in them as a child, but I learned about them historically. But before I came along, Congo Square was the place where the African Americans were allowed to congregate on Sundays and express themselves culturally. Okay. There were marriages. There were performances as it turns out. That was one place where the manifestation of the African American culture would take place in New Orleans. Out of that came, of course, out of New Orleans came jazz, and out of New Orleans came things like the second line in the jazz bands that would march after the funerals, as it turns out. So, yeah. It's a hotbed of African American culture in that area. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23274 Speaker 1: Phillis Wheatley [Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana; named after the first published African American woman poet]. So, were your teachers black for the most part? Speaker 2: Okay. Yes, to answer your question. Not for the most part. All of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm growing up in a strictly segregated society. From elementary school to high school, all of my teachers were African American. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you were explaining something earlier about the dynamics of the school in terms of the quality of instruction. Speaker 2: Well, all I was saying is that, during that time period, because it was strictly because of segregation that, even though we got secondhand books, even though we got the used furniture from the other schools, which is the way they did things within Orleans Parish during that time period. That was not true in the case of Phillis Wheatley because it was a new school. But in general, that was the practice. But what's most important it was the teachers. And the teachers we got were the best teachers because, I mean, they--it was strictly segregated. So all of that talent stayed right there in the African American community. Speaker 1: Now, we've had other people describe the quality of instruction they got in a black schools and the level of education of the teachers. Now, what were--just--so, what do you mean by the best instruction? What kind of teachers did you have? Speaker 2: Okay. Let me take an example of high school, if you would allow me, okay. When I look back at my high school yearbook, and I will be happy to show it to you because I have a copy of it here, and I look at the faculty in my high school. I would put that faculty up against any high school faculty right now in terms of their sheer credentials. About a third of teachers came out of Southern University College of Education [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. About another third came out from Dillard University. Another third came out from Xavier University [New Orleans, Louisiana] as it turns out. Speaker 1: All three of those black schools are in--represented in New Orleans. Speaker 2: In Louisiana. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah? Okay. Speaker 2: Dillard [University] and Xavier are in New Orleans. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Southern University is in Baton Rouge. Speaker 1: Now, there was a branch in--wasn't there a branch in New Orleans back in the-- Speaker 2: You're absolutely right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The New Orleans branch of Southern University came into being in the mid-'50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay? Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Around mid to late '50s [1950s] it came into being, okay? Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's another campus in Shreveport [Louisiana]. There's two campuses, one of an agriculture; another one in law in Baton Rouge. So you actually have five campuses nowadays, each with its own campus. It is the only HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] system in the country. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, I'm just confirming what you're--what you just said. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. All right. Speaker 2: So if you put---it isn't about the credentials, but--and there's an interesting thing about the credentials from those teachers. Many of them had master degrees. If you look at where the master degrees came from, they came from schools outside of Louisiana; University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Kansas State [University, Manhattan, Kansas], Columbia University [New York], University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and so forth and so on. Because LS--schools like LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and Tulane [University, New Orleans, Louisiana], they were not allowing the entry of African Americans at that time into their graduate ranks. And so, so that didn't happen. So the education that they got, the news was it was pretty strong. Speaker 1: Now, is Louisiana--I believe it was, but I'm not sure--but, was Louisiana like Mississippi and Alabama and South Carolina in terms of them paying the tuition of black graduate students to leave the state and go to other schools? Speaker 2: You are absolutely right. They would pay you to go somewhere else. You're absolutely right about that. I didn't see it expressly, okay (unclear) (simultaneous)--. Speaker 1: I'm just saying, well, hey, because every time I hear about that, it seems like the craziest thing-- Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: --(unclear) that they would send, you know, so want to go graduate school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So rather than accepting you at LSU for graduate school, they I guess to meet a federal mandate that they had to--if you qualified, they'd have to admit you, they would rather pay your tuition to go to University of Michigan-- Speaker 2: University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa]. Speaker 1: --or Columbia . Speaker 2: Or somewhere, right. Speaker 1: Or someplace where you actually get a better master's degree or you could get-- Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: So. Speaker 2: You're quite right. We had that. One example of this. Say we would go to suppress human potential, okay? I mean that's--that happened. That's a part of the--in the record that I went to and discovered. There's much opportunity here, but at the same time, we have gone through some--we have taken some pain to deny opportunity. And that was one of the principles that, in fact, the people who taught me said. "Steve, go where the opportunity is. Don't hang around here. You've got too much potential. Go where the opportunity is." That's--I believed them and it was true, and that's basically what I did most of my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, at Phillis Wheatley School, do you remember the name of the principal when you there? Speaker 2: Mamie J. Watson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Now, was she a Ph.D. or? Speaker 2: Oh, no. No, she was not a Ph.D. Speaker 1: Okay. Mamie J. Watson. Speaker 2: But, one of those traditional, strong-willed, unyielding educators; would make sure that the students behaved properly, okay, in school. Would make sure that the teachers were on their job, so to speak. And so, she was one of those administrators that we had that, in fact, ensured that the students got the best chance of it. She was the principal when I showed that article that I showed you at Phillis Wheatley Elementary School. Story_ID: 23275 Speaker 1: Now, who were--were there teachers, special teachers that were like mentors to you at Phillis Wheatley [Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Okay. There was Ethel R. Carmel (ph.) who was my homeroom teacher, who took a--who seemed to take a liking to me. She was very supportive of things that I did in the classroom for sure. Now, in junior high school there was Rita Hayes (ph.), who was, I think it was my seventh grade or eighth grade teacher--eighth grade teacher, and (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Now is that still at Phillis Wheatley? Speaker 2: No. I went to McDonogh 41. I shifted on you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Thank you for asking. Speaker 1: All right. So McDonna--wait. How do you spell it? Speaker 2: McDonogh 41--McDonogh Number 41. Speaker 1: That's--is that McDonald or McDonna? Speaker 2: McDonogh. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: D-O-N-O-G-H. McDonogh. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, junior high school or middle school? Which one? Speaker 2: Same thing. Speaker 1: Middle, okay. Speaker 2: Seventh and eighth grades. That's the way it was done at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. So. Speaker 2: So, now--so, Rita Hayes was the person. There were a number of--there were a number of people. Another one was Herbert Jackson, physical education teacher at McDonogh Number 41. Herbert Jackson I credit (laughs) with--and teachers do this, and I'll never forget this. I credit him with actually looking at me, this tall, skinny kid who was known to be a certified nerd, who loved to (unclear) class, and seeing athletic potential in me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Came to me one day and said, "Look, why don't you go out for the volleyball team?" "Me?" (laughs). "That was for athletes." (laughs). Excuse me. "That's for athletes." So. But he had seen me play in the intramural sports, you know, that we had at lunchtime and what not. He said, "It might be a good idea for you to go out." And after awhile he said (sighing), and this is the way he first said it, "Mr. McGuire, have you ever thought about going out for basketball?" "No, I hadn't." He said, "Well, why don't you come out and try out for basketball?" So that got me started in athletics. Right. He did it. So now, that's just a few of them, okay. Rita Hayes and Mr. Herbert Jackson in middle school. Then there was Ethel R. Carmel and, of course, Mamie J. Watson [principal] there in--at Phillis Wheatley Elementary School. Story_ID: 23276 Speaker 1: Now, when you get to high school, that's when it really, it really, really, really became significant, and I have to say that. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, what was the high school? Speaker 1: High school was Joseph S. Clark Senior High School in New Orleans, Louisiana. Speaker 2: Joseph S. Clark. Speaker 1: Right. You may be aware that Joseph S. Clark is the man for whom this building is named. He was the first--. Speaker 2: And his picture is right there on the wall. Speaker 1: There he is. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 2: Right there on the right, across the room from us. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: This is the father of Felton Clark who succeeded him. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: And all that. This is--so this is--we're talking about, these are deep educational waters now we're talking about. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: The Clarks, yeah. Speaker 1: I agree with you entirely. Speaker 2: Okay. So, Joseph S. Clark, he was--(unclear) (simultaneous). There were two Joseph S. Clark high schools in the state of Louisiana at the time. One was in New Orleans and one was in Opelousas. So I attended the one--I had the good fortune of attending the one that was in my neighborhood, could walk to school every day, get an education, and get on with my life. Speaker 1: Now, before we got you into high school talk, what-just grade school days, you were alluding to the fact that you loved to go to the library and read. Speaker 2: (Laughs). Speaker 1: And so, I can relate to that. And, did you have a--was there a Carnegie Library, a black library in New Orleans you could go to because of segregation? Speaker 2: That's a good point. Speaker 1: Or was the libraries open for everyone? Speaker 2: I know by the time--okay. We're still at the elementary school (unclear). But Nora Navra Library was located within walking distance of my home, and that's one I went to. All I can say is that it's right in the middle of the--it was in the Treme, and Treme was just strictly black people. So if it wasn't officially segregated, it was de facto, I would say. Speaker 1: Yeah. I know often in the black community there would be a Carnegie Library built (unclear), Carnegie education fund (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: No. No, no, no, no. No. No. No. Speaker 1: No? This wasn't one. Okay. Speaker 2: No. The closest thing to that within New Orleans that I know about is that there was Rosenwald Gym, which was Uptown and, of course, all throughout Louisiana they had Rosenwald schools. Right. Right. Speaker 1: Rosenwald Educational Fund, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I know a lot of those types. Speaker 2: So, yes. So, yeah, I only saw black people growing up in my community. If I--well, every--there were certain white families that lived in the Treme, okay? But very few, okay. Very few. If I would walk from my house toward the lake, when I crossed North Broad Street, which is one of the boundaries of the Treme, then I began to see other race people. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As I continued toward down the Bayou St. John, because that's the way I would go to fish, I would see the change more, and more, and more, and more, and more. And you could go into any of the shops there and buy things and whatnot. Now that was my recollection. There was no problem with that. But I know about the time I got to high school all the libraries, if they were segregated before, they certainly were not. Because I spent a good part of my life in the New Orleans Public Library during that time period. Speaker 1: Okay. So, New Orleans now is a different city from a lot of cities in the South. And I'm surprised at all the different kinds of scenarios. I mean, you could be in Montgomery, Alabama, and have a real strict segregation. Everything has got white-black fountains on it and all the signs. Or you could be in Memphis [Tennessee] where you have the signs but you can vote there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And in New Orleans, you didn't have that kind of rigid segregation because of it being a poor city, I guess. Speaker 2: As a kid growing up, I remember colored and white signs, definitely. Speaker 1: Oh, so they did have the signs. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. On the water fountains, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In the restrooms. You go into Sears or whatever those stores downtown, it's segregated. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: Remember, this is the time period of the lunch counter sit-ins. Right. So New Orleans was very segregated, no question about that. Speaker 1: Well, it's always been like a--sort of a confusing city too with the different racial groups (unclear). You got Creoles that are considered black, but then they're kind of on the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear) society of their own. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Now, you raise an excellent point there. I can tell you my wife is from Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. I'll tell you a story. Growing up, well, in talking--just in talking, we met in college. Just in talking with her I would just refer to some of the things that I did in New Orleans, and she would look at me and say, "Steve, you couldn't do that in Baton Rouge." "What do you mean you couldn't do that? I just thought this was something that people did." So the levels of segregation, its implementation are different. The fact of the matter is, you could not keep people separated from each in New Orleans. We're out on the Bayou St. John on the grassy area there playing football, touch football. The whites are over there playing touch football also, right? Now, you know, these are kids. So at some point the white guys come over and look at the black guys and say, "Hey, what about next weekend a little integration?" And we say, "Sure." So we start playing football games against each other, right? Well, after awhile, the police sees this--they see this. And they come up and they, in fact, say, "What are you guys doing? What are you guys doing? Let's break this up." See, they would separate us, okay? Story_ID: 23277 Speaker 1: High school [Joseph S. Clark Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Now, I don't want to get too far away from what your question is. In high school, I'll just give another example, I played basketball (clears throat). Now, you know, basketball is played out in the open on the playground courts in the city. So after while, you know, we go down to St. Aloysius [school] and we're playing basketball with just, you know, the white guys who were there. We're just playing just to have fun. Somebody saw this. We showed up one day and the basketball goal was taken away, cut off at the concrete and concreted over so we couldn't play basketball there anymore. Let me give you another example of just where we were in time. Today you take for granted interscholastic--interscholastic sports, okay, and Louisiana being integrated, no problem, okay. During that time, there were two schools in New Orleans. One was Jesuit and the other one was St. Augusta. St. Augusta was known for being a very strong school, even to this day, okay, academically and also athletically. Well the principals at these schools decided, "Look, we have to do something to break down this barrier of segregation in our schools. Let's do it by just simply playing a basketball game between our two schools, and making that a demonstration of what can happen without incident." St. Augusta at that time was the number one ranked school in the black league. Jesuit was the number one ranked school in the white league. They played that game behind closed doors successfully. St. Augusta won the game, okay. But they played it successfully--successfully. The parents of the players didn't come in and stage a protest. They had to play it behind closed doors because you couldn't just open it up it up--something like that to the public. But it demonstrated the basic principle, that two groups of kids, you know, with these similar interests, could get together, play a competitive basketball game appropriately refereed, and you not have an incident. Story_ID: 23278 Speaker 1: Okay. Now. Now, you liked to read growing up. What were your favorite books? Speaker 2: Oh, I enjoyed reading books about, for example, automobiles, about nature, and eventually books about things like sporting events, like fishing and hunting, and these kinds of things. The thing that attracted me most was the books about the future. There would be books in the library that would discuss things about the way the world would be; for example, now I'm in the twenty-first century. Right now, things don't look that way right now, but still they were a futuristic view, you know, of automobiles that sort of levitated. And-- Speaker 1: Right now we still haven't got that yet, have we? Speaker 2: I understand (laughs). Speaker 1: We've--of all the things, that's the one thing that-- Speaker 2: And you know I was a little disappointed at the time because I liked cars, and I was thinking to myself, "Gee whiz, how am I going to be able to build my own hotrod?" You know, because all that's going to be gone. Right. No, no, (shakes head). No, that wasn't--that's not the case. But looking at these futuristic views of the world that were being projected in these books, I found that extraordinarily fascinating, books that taught you how things worked, okay. And I learned how an internal combustion engine working--worked by just going to the library and reading that it's a four-stroke engine. And I said, "Oh, now I know what goes on inside my dad's [Harry McGuire] car. Ah-ha." Right. And so, that was always something that was--that interested me. Speaker 1: Now, did you have friends that were interested in the same things? Speaker 2: For the most part, no. No. My friends who were--most of--they weren't explicitly--they weren't as strongly interested in the sorts of things that I was interested in. You're right about that. I can tell you a story though if you ever pause, and go back to elementary--between elementary and junior high school. (Unlcear) where are people involved in or interested in things that I was interested in as much. Well, you could ask the question, "How did I get interested in anything? How did that happen?" Well, how did I find out I wanted to be a scientist? Well, it turns out during that time period, what the teachers would do was, they would take their classes out on field trips. And we did field trips--to show them how parts--other parts of the world operated. We took field trips to the Wholesome Bread Company, Wholesome Bakery, okay? And we took trips to the Brown's Velvet Ice Cream Company, all right. Took trips to, what was it now--City Hall. They would take us through and show us how City Hall worked. But then around 1961, something happened in New Orleans [Louisiana]. NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] decided to place a rocket construction plant in a little town called Michoud, Louisiana, which is a suburb of New Orleans. NASA promoted their work to the school system and allowed teachers to bring their classes in for field trips. On this one field trip we went to the site out there at Michoud. (pause). Speaker 1: That's Michoud, like, Micheaux? Speaker 2: Michoud. Speaker 1: --M-I-C-H-E-A-U-X. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It's not? Okay. Speaker 2: M-I-C-H-O-U-D. Speaker 1: O-U-D? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Michoud. Michoud. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: It's a French word. (clears throat) So we got off the bus, walked into the room there, and as we walked in, lined us up, a man came out of the back and he whispered something to my teacher. Now, while all this was going on, I was noticing lights blinking on this machine, this computer in the background, these large decks of cards being fit in there, you know, kind of like a Gatling gun (unclear) in there and creating all this noise. And I looked over and there were mock-ups of rockets over there to the side. And then the man turned to us and began to tell us about how they were going to build rockets that would put people in space and also eventually for the man on the moon. And I said to myself, "Wow. This is the place for me." Speaker 1: Now this is 1961. Speaker 2: Right there. That's right. I was around eleven or twelve years old. Speaker 1: About twelve, yeah. Speaker 2: Just a kid. Now, I didn't know what science was. I didn't know what physics was. I didn't know what, you know, engineering was. There were no such individuals in my family. Speaker 1: Now, had you been following the space program on television and John--when John Shepard went up and then [John] Glenn and-- Speaker 2: Well, eventually. That came later, of course. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, yeah, I followed those things. Right. That happened later on, but I was always fascinated by it. Speaker 1: John Shepard was in '60 [1960], I think. Yeah, because--no. Well, no. Well, well, no. '60 [1960], '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: At the time they were building the rockets that were going to put people into space. So that's why I'm saying if-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --if they ever have to date all by year or so, you know, I can understand that. Speaker 1: I know the Sputnik went up in '57 [1957]. That's unmanned, though. Speaker 2: That's unmanned and the Soviet Union. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sorry. Yeah. Speaker 2: And that's what created NASA. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Right. Speaker 2: That's right. Okay? And so, NASA went into full gear to, in fact, get into the space race. There was too much at stake (clear throat). Russia had demonstrated themselves to be, what, a technological giant of the world. Speaker 1: Now, did you, when the astronauts were named, I remember in a certain community of us, we all knew all seven of the names (laughs). You know, I mean, everybody wasn't concerned about that, but there were certain fellows mainly that knew all seven of these guys' names. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Can name them all. But (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: No, I can't name them all, okay (laughs). I can't do that. Of course, I remember several of them, one of whom especially was, of course, Ron McNair [Ronald McNair]. Everybody knows about him and the tragedy that befell him as it turns out. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's much later. I'm talking about that initial set, the first set. Speaker 2: The initial set, no. No, no, no, no. If you say their names, I'm sure I'll know them. But I followed that whole progression of events, you know, with a lot of interest and enthusiasm. But I have to tell you that what was most appealing to me was the basic science behind what they were doing, such that by the time I got to high school, of course, at that time, you had to take biology if you were on the college track, and you had to take chemistry if you were on the college track, and you had to take trigonometry and algebra, but then you had to take physics. And it's when I got to physics is when I found out what is it--what it was I wanted to do. Why? Because on one of those trips to the library I learned that physics was, amongst the sciences, the only that tried to explain everything in a fundamental way. That is, from a few basic ideas, as expressed in certain equations, you should be able to predict phenomena. It was the universally predictive science. Now that, of course, we know is not strictly speaking that, but it's something that we strive for. But that appealed to me so much until I said, "This is the subject that I want to study when I go to college." Story_ID: 23279 Speaker 1: Now that's a nice idea [wanting to study physics in college] but again, there's a lot of pressures on you in high school and during that time period. You recall I mentioned to you I had actually progressed as an athlete. And if you are a successful athlete during that time period, say an all-city forward out of this major high school in New Orleans [Louisiana]--remember, this is the mid-sixties, 1966, and we were just at the beginning of that recruitment by the larger universities, a recruitment period. So they were coming and people wanted to see you play basketball. But I really had no interest in playing basketball in college. And I had told myself the only way I would do that is if I needed the money to go to college. Well, along came Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and offered me a full expense paid, you know, four-year academic scholarship to study physics there. And so, that basically eliminated my need to play basketball in college. So that was some--that was a turning point in a sense. Speaker 2: Now were people angry with you for not playing basketball? I know they were. Speaker 1: Why would you ask that (laughs)? Larry understands (deals?), you understand the culture (laughs). Let me just use the word "upset." "Upset," right? Upset with me. That's true. Speaker 2: And I know they didn't leave you alone at Southern [University] about it, you know. Probably--there was probably some coach or somebody saying, "If you would just come over here and shoot a few (unclear) (simultaneous)." Speaker 1: Yeah. There were--oh, yeah. Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. Definitely, definitely. Speaker 2: "Come on man." Speaker 1: (laughs) But what I knew is the following: If I did not maintain at least a 3.0 average in my studies, and I'm studying physics, I would lose my scholarship. That terrified me, okay? Speaker 2: But you might get another one though because-- Speaker 1: Because of what? Speaker 2: --basketball (laughs). Speaker 1: No. For the basketball, right. Larry, I'll tell you one other story, okay, that convinced me. You're right. Senior in high school, the recruiters are coming, you go to the State Basketball Tournament, the recruiters are there. You sit around a table and the recruiter discusses programs with you, the teams that they play, the facilities that they have, okay, the schedule that they maintain, the coverage. It's got all that. All that--they discuss all of that--all that. Then at the end of the discussion, I'll never forget this, they'll say, "Now, tell us what you want to study in college." They say--everybody goes around the table, some know, some don't know, and they get to me and I say--they say, "What do you want to study in college?" I say, "I want to study physics." The faces drop, okay. And they say, "Well, one of the things that we require is that if you come to our school, you have to remain eligible to play basketball." Now, what that means is that you have to have at least a 2.0 average. And I thought to myself, "Yeah, but, you know, I want to study physics. Why can't I just study"--I'm thinking to myself, "Why is that?" That was a consistent response that I got from the coaches. Speaker 2: Now, did these recruiters and coaches know that you were valedictorian of your--even knew you were going to be valedictorian of your class [at Joseph S. Clark Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: Because you were one of the top students in-- Speaker 1: I don't--I don't think it ever crossed--I don't think it ever crossed their mind. Speaker 2: --(Joseph S. Clark?)? Speaker 1: I don't. I really don't. Speaker 2: So they took it for granted because you're a basketball player you weren't in the academics. Speaker 1: If you go to that school, you're going to be a basketball player, you're going to play for them. You're going to keep their secure. Now this other stuff that you want to do, that's up to you. And that convinced me that there was no real--we talked about mentorship or the caring about the person (unclear) with that. Besides, you know, I knew what I liked, and I knew what I wanted to do. And I had the money to do it. Even when I was in college I was offered a fellowship to study at the University of California, Los Angeles [UCLA, California] for one year, you know, with a fellow by the name of Professor Charles Whittum (ph.), okay. Speaker 2: (unclear). Speaker 1: He doing particle physics experiments at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center [SLAC, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California], so that was great. I spent another summer studying with Professor Lucy Hainer (ph.) at Columbia University [New York]. So I did--it's worked really well for me from the standpoint of just pursuing what really was my passion. And I'm very thankful to this day that I was able to find that, okay. Because even as I engage students nowadays, because so many students--so many people don't know what they want to do. I had to learn that that was--that my situation was somewhat unusual. I had to begin--I had to develop an appreciation for that. But it just--it was really a blessing to be able to know at that age what it is and what it was you wanted to do. And I've been fortunate enough to be able to do it to this very day. So, yes. So I found the response of the recruiters discouraging. And they went on even when I was in college and not playing basketball, but would do things like, play, you know, pickup games and then different kind of leagues, you know, just intramural leagues and whatnot. There would still be a request to come and try out for different--different teams and whatnot. So. But the good news is that, you know, I was able to play it not under the pressure of having to play basketball. I was able to play it as a form of balance, and when I couldn't play it anymore, then it formed the foundation about for which I could just now play something else, like tennis and swimming, which is what I do today. Right. So. So I--never one regret. Although, yes, they was angst (laughs), and (unclear) "Why aren't you playing basketball?" You know. Because that's just the way people view it. But I don't think--. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: I don't think people really--are too much concerned about it now given the way things have turned out. Story_ID: 23280 Speaker 1: In high school [at Joseph S. Clark Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --now, how did your [basketball] team do just to--since we're talking about it? Speaker 2: We--I understand. I would say, well, we were in the same league in the same district with St. Augustine [school]. And so, that was the principle competition on the basketball court. And I never--we never--I never could beat them. And we never could--I mean, they just had too much talent. As a matter of fact, when I came out of junior high school, a recruiter from Augustine came to my house to try to get me to go to St. Augustine, and they recruited all the kids in that way to begin to build that program, with an eye toward that one basketball game that was played back in 1965. There was a movie made about it, by the way. It's called 'Passing Glory'. And the director was the all-American center on that team by the name of Harold Sylvester (ph.). Tremendous basketball player. Speaker 1: So he directed the film? Speaker 2: He became a Hollywood actor and director. Speaker 1: Harold-- Speaker 2: Sylvester. Speaker 1: Sylvester. Okay. Speaker 2: You remember a movie called 'An Officer and a Gentleman?' Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. There was Lou Gossett, right? Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: There's one other African American in there, a recruit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's Harold Sylvester. Speaker 1: Okay. That's Harold Sylvester. Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. So 'Passing Glory' is a-- Speaker 2: That's a film. Speaker 1: --film actually made about the team? St. Augustine's team? Speaker 2: About that event. Speaker 1: Oh, in '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: About that game and the events leading up to it. Yes. Speaker 1: Now, what is that historic game? Tell us about that. What is that game? Yeah, that's '65, yeah. Speaker 2: The game was a basketball game--'65 [1965]. It was played in 1965 between St. Augustine and Jesuit [African American and white school teams]. Speaker 1: Oh, that's the one behind closed doors you were telling us about? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Oh. All right. All right. Speaker 2: Exactly. That's exactly right. Story_ID: 23281 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school [at Joseph S. Clark Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] were there any--what about high school teachers? Any special teachers in high school? Speaker 2: I'm going to name two of them for you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of them is a lady by the name of--her name was Mrs. Olympia Boucree. Boucree is spelled B-O-U-C-R-E-E. Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: Ms. Boucree taught advanced mathematics and physics at my high school. She was just a beautiful lady who simply supported my interest in physics. We went to--at that time, there was an organization called 'The Louisiana Interscholastic Athletic Literary Organization', words to that effect, and it sponsored competition between different schools. Again, in the black system they were segregated. She mentored me to win first place in the physics competition in physics, and I went on to--I took second place in the state. But I can remember staying at school after hours and trying to do homework, because she would give these hard physics problems for homework, I remember. They seemed hard to me. And we would be down there in the cafeteria working on these problems, and Ms. Boucree would come--well, she would whiz through from some meeting after school and what not, and I could grab her, "Ms. Boucree, Ms. Boucree, I have a question over here." She never hesitated to come over and stop what she was doing to talk with us about it. And one interesting thing I learned about teaching from her, I would ask her a question, she would never answer it. I would ask her a question, she said, "Well, Steve, did you think about it this way? Did you think about--did you look at this particular part of it? What about this over there?" And I was--so you would think about it and then you say, "Oh, yeah. Right. We have it now." Then she would go away. She would guide you to the answer having confidence that you could figure it out in the end. So she, I credit her with that. She lives to this day in New Orleans. She went on to do a Ph.D. from Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee] in education administration. Of course she's retired. I did make contact with her. We stay in touch and I keep her informed of what I'm doing. She's--. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She's one of the top teachers in my case for me, in addition to the others that I talked about, (unclear) (blocking mouth with hand), Boucree is right up there at the top. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Item number one. Item number two: There was another teacher of--I think it was social studies he actually taught, maybe it was geography or maybe some combination of the two. We'll look at it in the yearbook. Andrew J. Douglas. Head basketball coach, J. S. Clark Senior High School. Now, he took me from junior high school and turned me into an all-city forward. We called him Coach Doug, okay (laughs). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To this day now we stay in touch. He is a retired educator, and he recently retired as a pastor of the Asbury United Methodist Church on the West Bank. Coach Doug has to be mid-eighties right now. But he is another teacher. There's one other one I would mention. A lady by the name of Barbara Bechet. Barbara B-E-C-H-E-T, who directed the library at the school, but who also had responsibility for the debate team. And she was another one who took a keen interest in me. She saw me as someone who could fit in nicely with her debate team (laughs). And we went on to win competitions actually (laughs). And she always showed a great appreciation for when her students, in fact, were successful. So I'd say it was all fun and games and "Did you see how we get this one?" But she really encouraged us. So those three come right off the top, you know, in terms of people who I owe a lot to insofar as my own personal development in high school. Story_ID: 23282 Speaker 1: So, how you chose Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was at--I know they offered you a scholarship, but had you applied at a number of different schools? Speaker 2: I looked at other schools. You're right. But there was one other thing. Southern University, it turns out, is contrasted with Dillard [University] and Xavier [University] in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Southern University had a reputation for excellence in undergraduate science education, physics education in particular. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Why does he say this? Well, during that time period, and I have checked some records since that time, the National Science Foundation [NSF] was sponsoring these institutes, whereby they would hold some workshops for teachers of science, biology, chemistry, physics. And Southern University had a very strong reputation for participating in those. I figured they must have known what they were doing. Item one. Item two: they had, also, some graduates in physics who had gone on, okay, to do well. So, I thought, "This is probably a good bet. You have the money, so, give it a shot." It wasn't like it was something totally new to them. They had been involved for awhile, and so I took that to be a good indication. And I didn't know it at the time, but also, they had a president with the name of Felton G. Clark, who strongly emphasized academics and intellectual pursuits on the part of his students at the university. I didn't mention this, but when I was a junior in high school, at that time, Southern University had one award which was named after Felton G. Clark. That was the Felton G. Clark award which was given to the student who was a junior in high school, who had the highest academic average of all the athletes in that particular city or location. And I actually won that award when I was at Joseph S. Clark High School. Story_ID: 23283 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this may be a time to pause and then we talk somewhat about, like, Felton Clark is Joseph Clark's son. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Right. And he went, I think, to the East Coast to get his Ph.D. [degree], and then comes back to-- Speaker 2: Columbia University [New York], then he came back to Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], right. Speaker 1: Yeah. He comes back to Southern and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So he's a son of-Southern, returned, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and there's a lot of--. So it was--and being here on the campus, you get that sense of family, you know, and all that. So this was, you know, this was like a storybook story. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, your son goes away, comes back, and he's the president. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In a (unclear), you know. Speaker 2: But it was a tremendous benefit to the university, I would say, in his particular case. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because he was--he was president up to 'til 1968. And this campus underwent tremendous expansion during that time period. Of course, times were changing. We're in the middle of the '60s [1960s], and it was a lot in the way of political people. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. And he--now, you were here. Now had he--were you here when he got in trouble? Speaker 2: Let me explain-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --how it--what my interaction with Felton Clark was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Direct interaction, not just the award that I received. I came in 1966. By 1968, after making the adjustment from high school to college, I was on track making straight As. And I was also, because Southern University was a land grant school, enrolled in ROTC [reserve Officers' Training program]. So one of the things he did was to encourage leadership and scholarship, where that he would acknowledge that at every Founder's Day. And so, indeed, he did recognize me while I was here. In the spring of 1968, that was a very turbulent time also, in terms of student protests, as it turns out. And I think that ultimately eroded his ability to maintain his position at the university. But, yes, I did get a chance to meet him. Yes, he did honor me directly in that regard, and I remain appreciative to this day for that. But remember, I mentioned that I went to the University of California, Los Angeles [UCLA, California] for a year? It was that following year I went to UCLA, and that was the year that the transition occurred between Felton Clark and G. Leon Netterville. Right. So by the time I graduated, Felton Clark had retired. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. (Unclear). What I remember, and I not--I don't have the year pegged right now in my head, and I can't--I think it was earlier. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: Before you came here-- Speaker 2: That? Speaker 1: --that he suspended the students for demonstrations? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That was part of it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: That was part of the difficulty. You're exactly right. Now, you may be aware that those students subsequently were awarded their degrees. Speaker 1: Right. They were. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Yeah. Speaker 1: And I know we've interviewed D'Army Bailey, who was the leader. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Yes, yes, yes, yes. Right. Speaker 1: (unclear) (simultaneous)--upheaval in those days, and that--the more people we talk--it almost seems like a Shakespearian tragedy 'cause you had the great hero of an educator-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: --and was being pinched by the state to do something, you know, to curb what the students are doing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Though, he, you know, he was for it in a lot of ways, but then he suspends these students and then you got like a-- Speaker 2: My own sense is that he did what he had to do in order to protect the larger--. I don't think he--I don't he had his heart in it. I don't think he went out and (unclear) (simultaneous). Not at all. No. Speaker 1: That's what I (unclear) (simultaneous). That's why it's a tragedy, you know. Speaker 2: Right. That's right. That's it. Speaker 1: It's a story of power and, you know, of the power of the state to--and this being such a familial place, you know, the jobs and lives of all these people at stake. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And it's been--you know, I say, I know people have cut it different ways-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --but it's a tough thing to think about, you know. Speaker 2: It is. It is. It is. No question about it. Well, it's those tough situations that really where your--the character and your leadership come out. It's not during the easy times and the good times. Okay. Speaker 1: But you had a chance to interact with him, though. You talked to him. Speaker 2: Yeah. And my interaction was very positive. I was particularly impressed at that time at the level of intellectuals there he would bring to this campus to speak to the students, to inspire us, to encourage us, to motivate us. I mean, I--if I take the Founder's Day Program, where he honored me along with some other ROTC cadets. Who was the Founder's Day speaker? It was none other than John Hope Franklin, who at that time was the chair of the history department at the University of Chicago [Illionois]. This is before he went down to Duke University [Durham, North Carolina], where he finished out his career. So he brought, you know, a tremendous message to us in terms of how we should approach the future, you know. And insofar as our commitment to the struggle and the communities that we came from, okay. Don't dwell on the past, but, in fact, focus on, you know, the positive things that you can do in the future with your various careers, as it turns out. So he was--it was very encouraging to have him here. Speaker 1: Now, did he ever bring Samuel Massie [also a HistoryMaker; organic chemist] to the campus? Speaker 2: At some point he did, and I'm trying to remember when he did. I don't remember. Okay. I can't tell-- Speaker 1: Dr. Samuel Massie. He was the head of the National Science Foundation [NSF] up to a certain point. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Yeah. Speaker 1: But he was on the Manhattan project. Speaker 2: Okay, now. Let me do the following, okay. You said Samuel Massie, who was a--he's a giant himself. Now I do know that Walter Massey [also a HistoryMaker; physicist] was the director of the National Science Foundation at one time. I don't know if you're speaking about the same person there, but-- Speaker 1: No. Samuel, the older man-- Speaker 2: Maybe he was also? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah. Speaker 1: He was the first black director of the National Science Foundation. Speaker 2: Got it. Okay. Sure. That makes perfect sense. Right. He was--he has a chair [chairship] named for him. You might be aware of that, which--it's at different HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] around the country. One of which is at Southern University. Samuel Massie Chair in Engineering. Right. Right. As well. So, yeah, so he's--he's a giant of a man. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Guys like Rutherford Adkins. Speaker 1: Basically raised in a log cabin. That's a soul. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: I mean, it's really, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. I mean, yes. Speaker 1: --Pine Bluff, Arkansas. Speaker 2: You know, I think Walter Massey came out of Hattiesburg, Mississippi. You know, that's his home. Right. Right. All of those are tremendous stories. Right. Story_ID: 23284 Speaker 1: All right. So, at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], now you--I know science is intense and physics is more intense probably than any of the rest of them. But did you have the time to do anything else in college? Speaker 2: As an undergraduate? Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: Well, I didn't participate in very many extracurricular activities, if that's what you're asking me. I focused mainly on my studies. I played intramural basketball, of course. And I would participate in the activities associated with the physics club at Southern University. That's for sure there. Other than those things, of course, I met my wife [Saundra Yancy] while I was here so. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about meeting your wife. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: What year were you in and what happened? Speaker 2: I was a freshman. In coming to the university, I was selected to participate in something called the Honors Program. And so, that was great, because you're collected together with some of the best professors and so. And one of the professors said, "Let's go. We're going to have a party at a gathering at my house." And so, it was at that gathering that I met this wonderful young woman (laughs). And, you know, we got to know each other a little bit better as time went on. Now, in the beginning it was a little--I remember that my focus was on school, as it turns out. Right? Hers was too. Don't get me wrong. And so, but we met out in front of the student union because her dad was one of the persons who was ferrying people back and forth--she's from Baton Rouge--ferrying people back and forth to the party, as it turns out. So, I just met her at that party, and we got to know each other, and from that time forward, and dated, of course, as undergraduates. And then we graduated from college, went off to graduate school, and life was good. And so, we decided, say, "Hey, why don't we get married?" (laughs) Speaker 1: So did you go to the same graduate school? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Did you go to graduate school together? Speaker 2: No. I went to the University of Rochester [Rochester, New York] initially in physics. She went to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] in chemistry. Speaker 1: Okay. So were you close by, I guess? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. There was a certain closeness there. And we worked it out. Eventually, I--she did a master's degree in chemistry education at Cornell, and I came to Cornell and completed my Ph.D. in nuclear science and engineering. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So as they say, the rest is history. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23285 Speaker 1: Well, you graduated from Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in 1970, right? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Now, when you were--you were at Southern with Dr. [Martin Luther] King was assassinated, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And do you remember anything about that in terms of how the students reacted or the school? Speaker 2: Well, the students certainly reacted (unclear). Well, as you might imagine, many of the students just reacted with tremendous grief, a sense of loss. Some reacted violently. They set the lumberyard on fire out there, and there was a lot of--some violent response. But what I remember was this overwhelming feeling of just having lost a great person, a great leader, a great inspiration. You know, that was that--that void had been created. I mean, he was such an important figure for so many young people, particularly us, those of us in college as it turns out (unclear). So that took some getting over. No question about that. But the campus pulled together in the end. Right. It was something. It was a difficult time, we'll just it that way, okay. It was a very, very difficult time for all of us having to have lost such a good man. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I mean good for the time--the country, as we saw it at that time. Now, there was turmoil. We were in the middle of the Vietnam War at that time. And so, there was a lot that was going on there in that regard as well. Speaker 1: There was also the assassination of Bobby [Robert] Kennedy that June. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: And a lot of people were distraught over that as well. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And before we leave college, too we have to talk about, 1969, July the 20th, Neil Armstrong walked on the moon. Speaker 2: Wow. That's right, as a guess. Speaker 1: Did you watch that on television? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: With interest. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: (laughs) Speaker 2: Say that again? 1969? Speaker 1: July the 20th, 1969. Speaker 2: Right. That's right. Speaker 1: Neil Armstrong walked on the moon. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember that. Because--I can tell you where I was. You know all these things happen, and you know where you were when it happened and occurred. That summer, I came back to New Orleans [Louisiana] and I took a job with an oil company to make some additional money to go back to school in the fall. We were at work and the television was on. And I remember that scene where he stepped off the craft onto the surface of the moon. And that stuck vividly in my mind, no question about it. That was--that was a clear milestone in the history of mankind. No doubt. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: No doubt about it. Speaker 1: Okay. This is something that was predicted when you were at the rocket plant [McGuire's school trip to NASA's rocket construction plant in 1961, in Michoud, Louisiana], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: That someone would do this. Speaker 2: It came--you're right. It provided a certain perspective on what I had seen earlier. Speaker 1: Yeah. I don't know how you felt, but it was almost like a faster gratification than anybody expected, I think, in those days for that prediction. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was on the fast track for that. You're right. They had been given a directive to do that. And when I say perspective, what I mean is that it really gives you a sense of vision, as people call it nowadays. You have to be able to see where something is going and where it's going to happen before it actually does. There's a certain element of faith there for sure, but there's also an element of determination, that no matter what you encounter along the way, you going to, in fact, still make it happen. And you're also driven by the idea that this is something that must be done, okay, in order to advance the state of affairs, and so forth, as the knowledge of mankind is concerned and so forth, okay. So--so, that was a tremendous example in that for me at that particular point in my career. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23286 Speaker 1: So, 1970 you graduated from Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and with a B.S. [Bachelor of Science degree] in physics, and you graduated magna cum laude [honors]. Okay. So did you--did they have a robe for you at the--at graduation or was it--? Speaker 2: Oh, there were, yeah. They were saying, it's a chord that you put over your--right, that you wear I should say. Speaker 1: And who were some--I didn't ask you this, but who were some of your fellow students that you think of now in terms of--that you know they went on--they maybe went on to science or some other field? Speaker 2: I understand. Well, there were guys like, Wilson Gordon, who went on to become an engineer, okay. There was Willie Wilson, who became a physicist, a laser physicist and who directed the program at Lincoln University [Chester County, Pennsylvania] for a number of years as well, okay. There was--and I can't think of Clinton's last name right now, but he was also an optical physicist, who also worked in the military as well. There was a guy from my high school, Ramos Rondino (ph.), who went to Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] and did astronomy. As it turns out, he was another one that I stuck close to during that time period. Let's see. Others from Southern University who came along with me. Okay, those are the main names that come to mind right now, as it turns out. But it certainly--there certainly were others. Speaker 1: Now, do you remember future congressman William Jefferson? Speaker 2: William Jefferson was, in fact, a student leader at Southern University at the time. I think he was the student leader's president of the SGA, and I think his future wife was Andrea Green, and she may have been at Southern at the time. Jeff, as we called him, because I was in the ROTC [reserve Officer's Training Corps] , I think he was a Brigade Commander at one time. Jeff may have been my Brigade Commander when I was in the ROTC at Southern University. Yes. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm going to ask about him. And, I don't know, you weren't involved in sports that much, but was Mel Blount of the Pittsburgh Steelers--Steelers [NFL team] I think it was? Speaker 2: Yes, Mel Blount. Okay. Who were the athletes? Now, remember now, I was an athlete and I went to the gym and I played basketball, okay. So, what does that mean? Yes, I played basketball against Mel Blount. Everybody knew him. Isaiah Robinson, everybody knew him. Butch Robinson, everybody knew him as well. Let's see who else was there during that time period. Of course, there was Al Beauchamp. At that time, Southern University had a reputation for defense. Really defenses, middle linebackers, cornerbacks; this kind of thing. Now, that's where the emphasis was during that time period. So, did I know these people, really personally, and closely? Not really, but I knew them and they knew me, okay, because you show up there, and you play basketball with them, and then the graduation list comes out, and there's a guy's name on there named Stephen Craig McGuire, and he's listed as magna cum laude, and somebody say, "You know, that's Steve." And they say, "Steve?" (laughs) So, you're right. There's a--and it still exists to this day in our society, there's a gulf, there are several gulfs, but the gulf between the intellectuals and the athletes or the jocks; it's a wide gulf, okay. (laughs) But I never saw it as a barrier, okay. And I have a few stories about that as well. But go on please. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23287 Speaker 1: All right. So. So, you got married in 19--? Speaker 2: '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: It was around '71 [1971] or '72 [1972]. Anyway, I graduated [from Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in '70 [1970] and I married in '71 [1971]. That's correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: All right. So you were at Rochester [New York] then when you got married, right? Speaker 2: That's right. That's exactly right. Nuclear Structure Research Laboratory. Speaker 1: Okay. Nuclear Structure Research Laboratory, University of Rochester [Rochester, New York]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, well, tell us about University of Rochester and what it was like, and who were your--some of your mentors there? Speaker 2: Oh, okay. The University of Rochester was--for me, it was a tremendous cultural change, (unclear), but the beautiful--the beauty of the school is that it had a very strong physics program. Well, of course, that's why I went there initially, was to learn more about physics. There the culture was very different in terms of--very competitive, put it that way. Okay. And as the story goes, they would admit a certain number of students into the graduate physics program, with the knowledge that they weren't going to keep all of them. Okay. Half of them will have to go, keep half of us; that kind of thing, so. Speaker 1: So this is a different philosophy than Southern University, right, in terms of--? Speaker 2: Very different. Very different. It's a different philosophy than what they have in graduate schools today. That's right (laughs). Speaker 1: In most places you'd think. Speaker 2: I understand. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: But that's the way the story went. But it made for a very competitive environment in that case. That's what I found out. They had facilities like I had never seen before. It was at Rochester that I learned--well, I guess I knew of it but it became manifest, this interest in doing experimental work. I loved how things work, I loved to put things together and make them function in a certain way, build apparatus such that you can do experiments and test theories. Now, that interest was developed under the direction, the supervision of a professor by the name of Harry W. Fulbright. Fulbright was a physicist at the Nuclear Structure Research Laboratory, who I went over to work with. And I credit Fulbright with basically teaching me how to be effective in the laboratory, definitely; how to build apparatus, mechanically, electronically, successfully. Speaker 1: Now, would you say that was probably the biggest weakness coming out of Southern [University], the unfamiliarity with certain apparatus in the lab that you didn't have? Speaker 2: It was the--no. It's not unfamiliarity. It's the different--it's the difference in the culture, the level of competition that's involved there. Speaker 1: But Southern had the--had equipped facilities (unclear). Speaker 2: We had good facilities. Okay. We did a good job. We did a great job with what we had. There's no question about it. But when you--you can't compare Southern University to the University of Rochester. They're different--different places. Nor can I compare Southern to Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]. And I've worked at both of them, been students at both of them, etcetera. So, it's just a difference. It just was the difference. And, oh, oh, you know what? The level of expectation is different. And so, and that--but to me that was all good because a competitive person will respond in to that positively. Which is basically--that's what happened to me. Working in Fulbright's lab was a good thing. We published some papers showing physical phenomena that nobody else had ever done before, and studying the structure of what's called f-p shell nuclides. And based upon that work, Harry Fulbright took a sabbatical and he went to Paris [France] to work for a year. We published the papers--. Story_ID: 23288 Speaker 1: And at the time [while McGuire was a graduate student at the University of Rochester], about that time, I became interested in the experiment that was going on down at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] by my future adviser, but I didn't it at the time. And I paid a visit to him one day. Called for him, okay. Speaker 2: Now, this is John McMullen, right? Speaker 1: John McMullen was the name of a benefactor for the College of Engineering and Nuclear Science. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. I'm (unclear). Speaker 1: And I did--and I did--I did win that award. I awarded that grant when I went to Cornell, right. Speaker 2: Okay. You got the John McMullen Fellowship in Cornell. Speaker 1: Correct. Yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 2: But the person you're talking about is-- Speaker 1: David Delano Clark. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he was the director of the Ward Laboratory for Nuclear Science and Engineering. He was the one who was working on this experiment that appeared in 'Physics Today'. So I went down to talk to him about it. I read about it. I became somewhat fascinated by it. I went there to talk with him about it and really got interested in what he was doing. And I asked him while I was there in the library; I remember I said, "Do you think I could began working with you on this program, this particular experiment?" And I can recall him saying, "Well, it depends. You would have to be a graduate student here. Meaning you would have to apply." I said, "So what's my chances of--for getting in?" He shrugged his shoulders and said, "I don't know. We'd have to see. You have to apply." So I went back to Rochester and I applied, and eventually was accepted into the program. So I went to Cornell to work on that particular experiment. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. So this is 1974? Speaker 1: Correct. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So. Speaker 1: I was at Cornell from '74 [1974] to '79 [1979]. Story_ID: 23289 Speaker 1: '75 [1975], it says here you published your first academic paper. Speaker 2: Yes. That's the paper with [Harry] Fulbright [McGuire's M.S. degree advisor at the University of Rochester, Rochester, New York], probably. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Mm-hm. The work that we did at Rochester. Speaker 1: Yeah. 'Spectroscopy and the f-p Shell.' [(6Li, d) spectroscopy in the f-p shell.] That's what-- Speaker 2: That's the one (laughs). Interesting enough, see, they had tried that experiment before. But the spectroscopy was lacking mainly because of the instrumentation that they were using. So I was given the task to build the detector that was going to enhance the resolution, and I was given the task of constructing the targets that could be used. In particular, they wanted nobody who had ever self-supporting targets before. Now to get that for this particular nuclei, to do that, you had to learn how to make thin films in the right way. And, basically, Fulbright gave me carte blanche to go in the laboratory and gave me a few techniques to use. Told me how to go do it. So. That's what I did. Speaker 1: Oka. Speaker 2: Did it. We tried it out and low and behold: the resolution, the definition and the spectra. Oh, it just--it was just amazing, it was just great. So. And what that meant was that you could learn more about what was going on in the nucleus from that information. Okay. And so--so you had a good--a good handle in terms of the physics that was active (unclear) manifested itself there. So, yeah. So that's what that paper is all about. You're right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23290 Speaker 1: Now, where was your dissertation now? Speaker 2: Say where is it? Speaker 1: What was your dissertation? What was your title on?? Speaker 2: Oh. You know--I--the Ph.D. dissertation was a study of what's called spin-forbidden isomers in Uranium-236. Speaker 1: Can you explain that for us? Speaker 2: Sure. All right. U-236 is the nucleus of an atom. And the nucleus is made up of neutrons and protons, and they interact with each other in such a way that they--because it's a--it's a microscopic system, not a macroscopic, it obeys the laws of quantum mechanics. So the energy levels exist in certain discrete quantities; energy level that they can obtain. Now, when I say, "spin-forbidden," it's possible to, in fact, create the nucleus in one of these states that has a high rotation value, angular momentum, we call it, spin, as it is, okay. Now, in order for it to get out of that state, it has to release or give that angular momentum up to go back to the ground state. Okay. Now, you can learn a lot about the way the nucleus is put together by studying these states. Now, understand me. They don't--it's not done--it doesn't occur easily. Takes a relatively long period of time to do it. That's the word "isomer". It's the long-lived state of the nucleus because it has this high spin. And so, I was able to create those things through a certain reaction. It's called, "neutron catcher." Okay. Nucleus goes up into this high-spin state, and I was able to see the decay of the state through the emission of a combination of electromagnetic radiation and electrons. Okay. So, that's what that's all about. It's a study of the structure of a heavy nuclei, using this reaction mechanism. All right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I don't know if I've given enough there, but--yeah, and--and so your high-spin states are forbidden, spin-forbidden states. Spin-forbidden. A very high-spin, the transition is forbidden to a certain extent, not absolutely, so it occurs more slowly; and so, we studied those using this particular apparatus while I was in graduate school. That was the experimental nature of my dissertation. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you received your Ph.D. in 1979 from Cornell [University, Thaca, New York]. Story_ID: 23291 Speaker 1: Now, did you like Ithaca, New York? Speaker 2: Ithaca is a great place, I mean, for doing certain kinds of professional activities, for sure. Right. Speaker 1: And were there any other black professors on campus [at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] when you were there? Speaker 2: In physics? They had black professors, but did you mean in physics or engineering? Speaker 1: Physics, yeah. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Not at all. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: No. None at Cornell either. Speaker 1: We interviewed one last week, but he wasn't there when you were there, I guess. Speaker 2: What--now who? Speaker 1: We interviewed someone here last week, but I guess he wasn't there when you were. Speaker 2: From where? Speaker 1: Cornell. He's-- Speaker 2: A physicist? Speaker 1: Yeah. He was a student there, then he went away. He taught at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] and came back to Cornell. Speaker 2: Oh, you mean Mike. Yeah. Yeah, Mike Spencer. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Mike is back there. Yeah. Mike is--he's in engineering college. Right. Which is where my field was in also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But if you know Cornell, it's rather diffused. Oh, yeah, Mike Spencer. No doubt about it. Right. Speaker 1: Not exactly-- Speaker 2: I haven't seen Mike in awhile. Mike was an undergraduate there when I was a graduate student, and he worked out of Les Eastman's group. And they did a lot of collaboration with Howard University while they were students. And then he eventually went down there and took all that (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Yes, I think he's an engineer because he's one of the "Bs." They had that group called the "Bs." Remember that black engineering or something, they called themselves the "Bs." Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Yeah, I know them. No, no, no. Yeah. Know them well. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So what did you do after you got your Ph.D.? Did you-- Speaker 2: First job I took was at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory [Oak Ridge, Tennessee]. And there, I worked in the chemical technology division at the high-flux isotope reactor. There, I worked on the problem of the production of elements heavier than uranium for a variety of purposes and where some--uranium is the heaviest naturally occurring element. But you can make additional elements by a process called successive neutron capture. That is, if you create an environment of relatively slow thermal; that is thermal neutrons, and you place this material in it, then the material will absorb the neutrons, become radioactive, and decay in such a way that they will generate higher-Z elements in the process. And if you leave it in there for a long time, it can produce elements all the way up to Einsteinium [synthetic element; chemical symbol, Es]. So, there is a technological need for such elements out there in the community. And I was assigned, basically, to this group by accepting the job from Oak Ridge to provide a certain level of expertise in terms of the basic physics for the whole operation process, in order to be able to, you know, continue this resource at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. It was a national resource, there's no question about it. So I took on that job. Later on, I was given a job of analyzing the disposal of high-level nuclear waste within the United States. That was the high-level nuclear waste transportation problem'. You have a, you know, these reactors around the United States; about sixty-six of them, and so, the idea is that you--they produce high-level nuclear waste in the form of spin--fuel rods. And those fuel rods can't stay at that site and the reactor continue to operate, because the storage capacity fills up. And so, they have to be moved to some remote site. And so, we analyze the transportation requirements based upon certain speculations in terms of where we could place these waste repositories around the United States. That was an item that was of considerable interest to [U.S.] Congress during that time period. So I worked on that for a while also. And, also, I worked on a problem over at the Hollofield Heavy Ion Facility, associated with the occurrence of errors, I would say; upsets and computer memories that were placed in space. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, Oak Ridge was a great place from the standpoint of, you know, you were able to do a lot of things and do a lot of science and learn a lot, use of applying a lot of physics in that environment. It's great. Right. Story_ID: 23292 Speaker 1: All right. So in '82 [1982] you moved on to be become assistant professor of physics in Alabama A&M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Huntsville, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In Normal, Alabama. Speaker 2: How you like that? It's up there in Huntsville. Now, Normal, Alabama, is the specification of the post office on that campus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Right (laughs). Speaker 1: So it's in Huntsville, basically? Speaker 2: That's right. Normal doesn't have a mayor. You're right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: The basic idea of the motivation was that, at that time, A&M was in the process of--they wanted to build a Ph.D. program, in a HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], in applied physics. So I came down and joined the team to do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So did--now, how was your teaching to research ratio with the University of Alabama A&M? I mean, did they expect you to teach a lot of classes-- Speaker 2: True. Speaker 1: --or did you have time to do--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, no. It's an HBCU, so you have to teach a lot, at least three classes a semester. It's a good thing I was young and, you know, new (laughs). Ready to take on the world. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Are you--you are--now, by this time, are you a member of the National Society of Black Physicists? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Now, during that time period, I was actually elected the president of the society. Now, that was back around 1987 as I recall. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I think between '86 [1986] and '88 [1988], I was the president of the organization. So sure. I've been with that organization ever since 1978, as it turns out. So that was actually before NSP was designated as a--as the National Society of Black Physicists. We were just meeting at that time in a day of scientific lectures, as it turns out, at various places around the country. Right. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, you were promoted to associated professor of physics at Alabama A&M, and what year was that? They got it down here as (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: I remember. I think it's 1984, was it? Speaker 1: '84 [1984]? Okay. Because you started in '82 [1982]. Okay. Speaker 2: So maybe it was later. So maybe it was later, because I know it takes at least three or four years longer before you can apply for it. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And it says it that you began working with the High Energy Particle Astrophysics Laboratory of the Marshall Space Flight Center [Huntsville, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now--now, that's in Alabama, in Huntsville? Speaker 2: That is one of the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] centers, the Marshall Space Flight Center. The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center is in Huntsville, Alabama. And when I landed at A&M [Alabama A&M University] with the idea of building this Ph.D. program, you have to do research, of course, and having a background in nuclear physics, I talked to the people out at the High Energy Particle Astrophysics Laboratory at Marshall Space Flight Center. Local, right? They were interested, of course, in building relationships with local universities. So I was at a local university, and so, I went there and spoke with the people. And what I eventually did was to apply for and receive a summer fellowship to work in the laboratory there. So I did. And that's where I began this work using these hybrid emulsion detectors to see the highest energy of cosmic ray interactions. So these emulsion detectors were flown to high altitude to get away from the absorbing affects of the atmosphere, and they would allow cosmic rays to slam into them and record the events. And we analyzed the events in terms of their particle production, I will call. One particle comes in, slams into another one (makes screeching sound), many particles come out. Okay. So by looking at what came out, you can then calculate what may have happened inside the collision. All right. The phenomena in question we were looking for was evidence of something called the "quark-gluon plasma", which could be produced only in the highest energy collisions, because you wouldn't have enough energy to reduce the rays to quarks. And so we were looking for indirect evidences of that in the particle distributions. Story_ID: 23293 Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Okay. My work at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], it had many a facets to it. Let me see if I can just summarize for you the nature of what I did while I was there. And, of course, being a faculty member you're very much involved in teaching, but being a research university also, there's a very strong emphasis on your research program. In a nutshell, my work at Cornell expanded upon what I had done earlier, to use both neutrons and x-rays in novel ways to understand physics of materials and how they behaved. One example of this was the occurrence of something called a "single event upset" inside the circuit of a computer, a microcircuit; and nowadays, a nanocircuit you might call it. The idea is that, when we placed these hybrid detectors in high altitude, we noticed that the electronics part would undergo electronic glitches I will call them, from time to time, that we traced back to the occurrence of high-energy cosmic rays interacting with the computer circuits that were--that comprised the detector. Now, it turns out this is a larger problem as it relates to space travel, particularly as it relates to placing items in satellites in orbit around the earth. And that's because the earth resides in an environment of charged particles. One is the Van Allen [radiation] belts, but there's also the solar wind that sends a steady stream of protons, and mainly helium particles and protons, to the earth, and occasionally, there's a heavy ion, a higher-Z particle that comes as well. But all these particles are ionizing; that is, they produce ionization, they produce electrons and positive charges when they pass through materials through their interaction with the material. If the material is a computer circuit, then it's possible to deposit that ionization in such a way that it can cause bits to flip from zeros to ones, and ones to zeros inside the circuit. So, therefore, what you're doing is you're actually changing the contents of the instructions inside of the computer circuit. And you would not like for that to happen; for example, in a circuit that you're placing inside of a satellite orbit for, you know, a long period of time. So, the question that you might ask is, "Well, how do you correct for that?" And, there's two aspects of the solution. One is to--you can choose to build the circuit out of materials that are less susceptible to producing ionization in a region, a sensitive region of the components that produce the zeros and the ones; that is the transistor stamp. So that's one thing that we do in order to reduce that. The other thing is that, on the one hand, you can't reduce--you can't eliminate entirely this effect inside the circuits. So, therefore, you can produce what's called "watchdog circuits" on your computer that will, in fact, check what you put inside the memory on a routine basis to make sure that what you put in there is what you thought you put in there and that the upsets, if they did occur, are corrected and not cause you any problems in terms of the operations that you have on board your craft, transmission of information and data, whatever that be, control. So it's a very important problem. But those are two aspects. You can keep a watch on the circuit itself, correct problems if you find them, but intrinsically, you would like to use materials and build devices that are inherently resistant to this effect all together. And that's basically it's more a matter of the engineering these things, these kinds of features inside of the device that you're building. So it becomes more of an engineering problem. And it still exists to this day as long as we undergo space travel, particularly in different parts of the solar system and the universe where there are different kinds of radiation environments these problems are going to persist. They're going to be there. And so, there'll be people working on these for quite some time out into the future. When you launch a NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] mission, it lasts for how long? Maybe fifteen, twenty years? And so, once someone, some group of people after the fact watch that during that time period, and this is one of the phenomena that they have to be cognizant of and take care of in order to get the best data and the best performance out of that particular mission. Right. Speaker 1: And so, we have teams today of like the, I guess, the Mars team. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They're there now, where this team is going to work together, I guess, for years to come on the same project, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: This one--this one project (simultaneous). Speaker 2: You're absolutely--. I have a good friend who started out his career on Cassini, that mission [Cassini-Huygens; robotic spacecraft sent to the Saturn system]. And he's still on it. That's right. That's exactly right. It's a tremendous investment of one's time, and one's energy, and one's human resources; no doubt about it. In the billions of dollars. No question. Speaker 1: Okay. So. Okay. So, '89 [1989], we're talking about you being at Cornell as an associate professor of nuclear science and engineering. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And you were there for ten years. Story_ID: 23294 Speaker 1: There's one other thing I didn't mention about Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York; McGuire was on the faculty there for ten years]. So, yes, I did expand my research to study the properties of materials and their performance in different environments; some details of which I've given you already. There's one other thing that happened while I was at Cornell, and that involved--now, the use of my research to enhance learning of science, physics in particular, of course, in the introductory course. And that was a bit of a challenge for me because I had never thought about doing that, but I could see the value in it. If you can, in fact, capture a student's imagination and also make this seemingly complicated problem accessible to them in a way that they can become involved in it, then you can stimulate learning in that particular way. And so, I worked very closely with another professor there named Professor Donald Holcolm. Donald F. Holcolm. He was a two-time department of physics chair at Cornell, and he also was a president of the American Association of Physics Teachers, amongst other honors, but certainly an expert in education as it relates to physics. So I had the opportunity to work with him in the introductory physics course for the engineering students at Cornell, and it was there that I began to learn how to effectively take what I do in science and then begin to communicate it to students at that particular level in a way that made the subject much more interesting, and much more accessible to them. And in the process, stimulate their interest and maintain their interest in some cases in science. And so, that was the other main thing. We published a paper in the 'American Journal of Physics' while I was there, that contains a good example of how we did this using a neutron activation experiment at the Ward Laboratory for Nuclear Engineering, where some years earlier that I had done my Ph.D. work as well under David Delano Clark [McGuire's doctoral thesis advisor]. He was one of the co-authors on that paper as well. So, those two aspects of my time at Cornell stand out. And there's one other thing I would mention about my time at Cornell. I was a part of the Materials Research Center at Cornell, and this is a multidisciplinary National Science Foundation [NSF] research center, and we were able to, while I was there, effectively involve minority students from schools mainly in the New York City area, but also stemming down to my home state of Louisiana and other places, into some of their summer internship programs. That was--that was very rewarding for me also, and it was done through the leadership of the person who was the director of that center. They really wanted to make it happen. This is Professor John Silcox of Applied and Engineering Physics, and I had a chance to work with him during this time period as well. So I would say those three things sort of mark my time at Cornell. Story_ID: 23295 Speaker 1: Also in which I'm involved (unclear), some rather professional expanding of my own capabilities that were very nice. Should mention also during that time period [while McGuire was an associate professor at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], I was elected a charter member of the--a charter fellow, rather--of the National Society of Black Physicists, and I also served as the visiting scientist in physics and astronomy at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan]. In particular, I was the Martin Luther King visiting professor in physics and astronomy at Wayne State University. Speaker 2: Now, that would be in which--somewhere between '89 [1989] and I guess--no, '80 [1980]. Yeah, '89 [1989] and 2000. I mean '99 [1999]. Speaker 1: No, no, no. That would be--let me say the following. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That would have had to have--. Oh, actually--I think it was sometime between--I thought it was '95 [1995] somewhere to '99 [1999], somewhere in there. Speaker 2: Oh, '95 [1995] to '99 [1999]. Speaker 1: That's right. Yeah. Right. I don't remember the exact date, but it should be somewhere in my records. Speaker 2: But it's like for one year, though, right? Speaker 1: Actually, it was just one visit for a few days. Speaker 2: Just for a few days. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: That's correct. That's right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's right. You come in--that's a good point that you raised that. You come in and you give a lecture, okay. You meet with students and faculty, and they ask you to do something that I had never done before. They wanted me to go out into the Detroit [Michigan] school system, middle schools, elementary schools, and talk to the students. Well, this is where my interest in effectively communicating my science to non-scientists came in very handy. And it was absolutely a wonderful experience for me to go out there. What I found was that, first of all, the administrators of the schools were staunchly interested in the welfare of their students. I mean, sitting around and talking with the principals, they would outline to me what the interest was, their programs were, they were interested in what I was doing, very receptive of my being there. And then the teachers would take me to the classrooms, and I had my own set of demonstrations and discussions ready and available. And it was just marvelous. The youngsters were extremely bright, eager to learn; actually, quite knowledgeable about certain aspects of technology that I was trying to stimulate their interest with, as it turns out. So, and I did that for (laughs) one day, then, they asked me this, "Hey, want to do to it for another day?" It was really--it was really a good experience for me in terms of seeing just how interested in learning students were, and what a great potential we had in these young people. And I must say that, I don't have any instance where I've ever stood in front of a group of young people, trying to explain to them what I do in terms of that they can--well, they didn't respond in that way, but this particular instance was very rewarding for me. I enjoyed that experience very, very much. So, yeah. That happened also while I was at Cornell University. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: And there'll probably be some other things, too, but I just can't remember all of them right now. Story_ID: 23296 Speaker 1: Why did you leave Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York]? Because here you are at Cornell. You're engaged in research, you got time to do a lot of research. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And traditionally at the black colleges and universities [historically black colleges and universities, HBCUs]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you have to do a lot of teaching-- Speaker 2: You do all right. Speaker 1: --and you don't get a chance to do as much research. And I don't know what your contract was going to be, but that's, you know, well, what happened and why did you make the transition? Speaker 2: Well, three things happened around 1998, I will just say in my life. I received word from my--one of my old professors at Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], with whom I had maintained contact over the years I was away supporting students in various--bringing them to my laboratories, you know, and giving them the kind of educational and professional enhancement that they would need in going out into the world into the future; scholarships as well--when he turned to me he said, "Steve, what do you think about coming back and serving as chair of the department? I'm going to step down." I said, "Well, that would be quite an honor," but what immediately occurred is that if I came back as chair of the department, what will I do in terms of bringing what I have been doing all of these years to bear on the educational preparation of the students from Southern University. That was an open question, yeah, for me. So (clears throat), I told him I'd think about it. And in the meantime, as part of my research work with Don Holcolm and Dave Clark [David Delano Clark; McGuire's former doctoral thesis advisor] at Cornell, I submitted a paper to a conference in New Orleans [Louisiana] sponsored by the American Association of Physics Teachers. Well, I went to the conference, but on the way down to the conference, I reading the abstract book, and I found a talk in there having to do with an experiment that was being planned to be built in Louisiana that was going to place the most stringent test on Einstein's theory--general theory of relativity today. It's called LIGO [Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory]. Now, what caught my attention was that this is a major physics experiment being planned from my home state of Louisiana. Now, understand me. Back in 1970, if they had this kind of thing going on and it was accessible to me, I never would have left Louisiana. But now it's there. So I said I'd better go to the talk. So I went to the talk and listened intently as the person described in great detail the experiment and its challenges, and its potential payoff in terms of our understanding of the universe. And that was it. I was really just captured by this possibility. So now you have two things on the table in my life. One, the possibility I might go back and serve as the chair of the department. Nothing is official now, okay. The possibility we might be able to get involved with this project in Louisiana. Close examination of the situation yielded the fact that there was no conversation between my university and this major physics experiment, which was located essentially forty-five minutes away from the main campus. Well, if I am to make this transition occur, what better position to do it from? You have to be the chair of the department. So, that was a possibility. And then thirdly, I'm from Louisiana. Again, if there was a possibility of doing this kind of physics which I was encouraged to do when I was in school, back when I was here, I never would have left. So it's a possibility to come home, be closer to family. My older daughter had just moved to Houston, Texas, doing her residency at Baylor College of Medicine. It would have been closer to family. These were three compelling arguments, to be quite honest with you, that I simply couldn't get out of my head. And so, I had a talk with my wife [Saundra Yancy], and said, "I got to give this a try." Okay, so, I took the position, and I'm jumping over a number of steps, but I took the position at Southern University, and then set out on the task of building a collaboration, a meaningful collaboration in science and science education between LIGO and Southern University. So that--that was part of the motivation. So I go as part of the motivation in coming to Louisiana. Understand me. I had no relationship with LIGO before I left Cornell. I knew about it. I had heard about it. But all my life, I should mention to you that, in order to become involved in anything, I've had to take the initiative to go and seek it out myself. So that wasn't anything. If you want something, then you have to go and try to do it. Nobody's going to give you anything. I just went back to my father [Harry McGuire, Jr.], okay (laughs), just now. And so, you should be aggressive enough to go in and seek out what you want--what you want to find. And this was something that was, as it turns out, I was just strongly motivated for. Story_ID: 23297 Speaker 1: And it seems like a fortuitous timing too on the level that, here's someone from Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], is now at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] involved intense with research, has a chance to go back with that momentum and get involved in LIGO [Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory]. And, you know, it was something that someone who is--who had been here, probably for a period of time, would not have the same kind of research verve to be able to deal with that project, you know, (unclear). Speaker 2: I understand your comment. The word I use is there was a compelling argument. Another way to look at it is that, I have to ask myself, "If you don't do this now, when are you going to do it? And if you don't do it now, some years later." I mean, when I say, "do it," "if you don't try this out now, then, you know, you don't want to have any regrets." So. Because the argument was compelling to me personally. Now, that's not necessarily the case for others, but, you know. We have to do what we know we have to do. It's a part of finding your purpose in life. And it all goes back to (unclear) that visit to Michoud [Louisiana; McGuire went to NASA's rocket construction plant on a school trip in 1961], okay, back around 1961. So, I decided to give it a try, and I do mean that because there was no guarantees that any of this was going to work at the time. So I did. I came down and I took over the department of physics, and I served in that capacity for ten years, during which time we were able to establish this meaningful, I believe, long-term relationship with LIGO, this experiment. The experiment, since I've been back, that is during that time period, it was made operational. But you see, back when I first learned about this, the experiment hadn't been built. Now, you were saying fortuitous and this was a good time to do it. You know, once it's built it's going to be more difficult to become a part of it. But there was a chance for us to make a contribution in the earlier stages of the experiment. And so, that was an opportunity there, which I am--I just couldn't--I couldn't pass up. For me it was an opportunity. If you discuss it with others, they may not see it that way at that time. But in that ten years, we've been able to build that relationship with this experiment in such a way that it's working to the benefit of our students, and our faculty, and the university's--university's image, I think, during this--during this period. And I should say that I think that best is yet to come. The machine, that is the instrument, has been made operational, we have achieved the original design specifications, and we've received the upgrade from the National Science Foundation [NSF] to, in fact, increase the sensitivity by a factor of ten; that is, the reach, factor of ten; where-at which time when we recommission the machine in 2015, because it's down right now for upgrade; in 2015 we should be able to now place the most stringent test on that theory. And we believe we will be entering into a period of routine gravitational radiation observation. Story_ID: 23298 Speaker 1: All right. Now, this LIGO stands for 'Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory' [Livingston, Louisiana]. And this is the project that was funded--founded in '92 [1992] by Kip Thorne and Ronald Drever of California Institute of Technology [Caltech, Pasadena, California], and Rainer Weiss of MIT [massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: So. Okay. So, now, what exactly--so they're measuring gravitational waves through LIGO, the instrument? Speaker 2: That's the purpose of the experiment. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: The directed routine observation of gravitational waves--of gravity waves. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, well, can you explain that, in a way that even I might understand (laughs), how gravitational waves are measured? (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (clearing throat). Let me do the following, if you would allow me. I would first like to say what they are, what types of events produce them, and then that will set the stage for my trying to describe how we're going to measure them, okay? Let's do that. All right. Gravity waves are ripples on space time. We talk about space and we talk about time as if they're separate, but we know they're together, okay. And so, the idea is that, gravity doesn't work quite the way that [Isaac] Newton explained it. You could say, "Well, they already had numerous laws of the universe--universal law of gravitation, so I believe it." Doesn't quite work that way, is what the theory says. Gravity, instead, is the effect of matter on this medium we live in called space time. Matter distorts space time, such that if you have large amounts of matter which is moving in an asymmetric way as a result of accelerations, then you should produce time-dependent warppages or ripples on space time which, according to the theory, propagate out into space with the speed of light. Okay. So. So gravity is ripples of the space time moving around. As I gesture and what not, that's producing tiny, tiny gravity waves (clears throat). What kind of events produce these waves? Well, let me give you a few examples. When you have two black holes which are--as they're rotating around each other, and eventually they merge to each other and form one object, that rotation is producing gravity waves. And the gravity waves then go out and they have the chirp. So it goes (making whirling sound). And so, you can look for that kind of signal in your detector. When stars suddenly explode at the end of their life, then you have a supernova, for example. The ejection of matter from that explosion typically occurs in an asymmetric way. And so, we're expecting that there will also be distortions on space-time associated with that event that propagate out into space, and we should be able to see it. Now (clearing throat), there are objects in our universe known as pulsars. They are rapidly rotating neutron stars that wobble, but they rotate and they wobble in an extremely precise way. You can use them as time standards, as a matter of fact, so much so. Now, they we expect would be a source of periodic gravitational radiation because they should be producing these ripples on space time in a periodic, consistent wave on frequency, and then goes out into space. So, as opposed to the transients that occurred in the mergers and the explosions, the wave goes out and dies away, right, where you have the periodic waves. Now, given that the physical universe; i.e., creation, started with a sudden release of matter of energy, well, that's got to be the biggest event in the history of the universe, right? So and there may be some remnants of that release on space time. So you look for what's called stochastic evidences of gravitational-wave, random remnants out there on space time. Of course, now if you can see those, then you ought to be able to look further back in time than anyone has ever done in the history of mankind. Right? So, those are the kinds of events. Now (clears throat), if you were close to these kinds of events and you underwent the kind of space-time variations that are produced, of course, it would rip us apart. But we are so far away from them until when they get to us, they're extremely tiny. So on the one hand, [Albert] Einstein predicted this back in 1916. Why haven't we seen it up until this particular point in time? The affect is a very, very small one. Surely, we have seen evidences of warppages of space time, physically measurable instances of that. But we haven't seen direct evidence of gravitational radiation. So this detector is designed to see these warppages, okay. It's detectors, it's an antenna, and it would better if I had a picture to show you, but maybe we'll get that later. But the idea is the following: The way you measure the gravity-wave when it comes by, and this has a very tiny affect on space time. The displacements involved in terms of the motion of space time is on the order of one thousandths the size of a proton. Extremely tiny. That's correct. It's very tiny. So you have to have a special instrument in order to be able to see this. And it's only recently that we've been able to get to the point where we have the technology with which to, indeed, make a measurement. So the idea is that, you want to see this variation on space time, so how do you do it? How do you measure this small distance? Well, you use a technique called laser interferometry. Okay. And, the idea, and I wish I had a blackboard that I could show you, is that you can split two laser beams and have them go down different paths between two mirrors that are suspended, each one moving between the mirrors. They are oriented at 90 degrees with respect to each other. And then you can bring the beam back together with itself, and the interference pattern that you see will reflect the differences and separation between the mirrors in either arm. Okay? And so, certain gravity-wave patterns will produce certain kinds of interference patterns in your detector, and that's what you're looking for. Okay. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So, I haven't given you the details in terms of how the detector is put together, but the basic idea is, you use laser interferometry to measure a physical phenomena called gravitational waves, okay. And you do it inside of a facility called an observatory, and you're quite right as you mentioned earlier, there are two such sites for seeing--designed to see this phenomena. And they operate in coincidence with each other. If one sees it, then the other one needs to see it also. And they're separated by a long distance, and then so, but then given the speed of light transit time of the wave, it should occur within plus or minus ten milliseconds of each other, right, in each detector as well. And again, I wish I had some time to show you this by way of a diagram or blackboard, but I don't. But that, essentially, is the way the detector works. There's two of them, and so it's like two eyes. You're able to maybe focus out in to the--out in to space to see where the source is. And you increase your detection confidence by doing that. And there is a network, finally, I will say, of these kinds of detectors around the world, the details of which I can talk about later. Story_ID: 23299 Speaker 1: What's the significance of the research with LIGO [Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory, in Livingston, Louisiana]? I mean, what are hoping we will find out about the, you know--I mean, there's a lot--lots of things we don't know or need to find out about, but what's the significance? Speaker 2: But the idea behind LIGO is that, if we can in fact see this, when we see this gravitational radiation, you will see a new type of radiation. It's not electromagnetic, and it doesn't require its source to be hot and luminous. It can be cold and dark. So given the idea that the vast majority of the matter in the universe, 95 percent of it is cold and dark, then you have a chance of opening up a whole new window on this universe that we live in, if you can--when you make these detections. So you're bound to see, I believe, phenomena that we just don't know about right now. The other aspect of it that's extremely important is that, if you see the stochastic remnants of the big bang in your data, then you will have looked back further towards creation, that's never been done before in the history of mankind, and we anticipate that that in itself will yield valuable information in terms of our understanding of the evolution of the universe, as it turns out. So those two ideas that we're opening up a whole new window on the universe, I think--I think make for a strong or either a very compelling argument for this particular experiment. There's direct evidence that gravitational radiation exists and [Albert] Einstein was right. But we want make routine and direct measurements of this so as to just generate a body of data and knowledge that will help us move toward a deeper understanding of this universe that we live in. Right. Story_ID: 23300 Speaker 1: So at what stage do the students here at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] get a chance to be involved in LIGO? Speaker 2: That's an excellent question throughout. They can begin really as early as the freshman year and become in LIGO-related research as undergraduates, and also as graduate students. Those are avenues that are available to them. Also, students from--not just from physics, but a variety of disciplines, are involved in a program of science education, wherein we train students to be able to articulate the science of LIGO as manifested in hands-on exhibits that we have on campus, and also at the LIGO Livingston Observatory as well. The LIGO Science Education Center is a major science education facility which was created in part through a grant where Southern University is a founding member (pause)--a founding member, and we train our students to be able to, in fact, articulate their science to the public as part of our (unclear) training program, which is funded by the National Science Foundation. The research participation on the part of undergraduates takes place by way of their participation in my research on campus throughout the year, in the summer; and also, through their participation in the research experience for undergraduate program that is sponsored by LIGO itself, with National Science Foundation [NSF] funding. So, we have a number of avenues which we've used in the past, and we fully anticipate continuing that in the future. At least six faculty members from different disciplines have been involved in LIGO-related research. And at Southern University, we currently have an effort in experimental research, computational modeling, as well as science education in effect, which couples us, I think, very closely to this major science facility out there in Livingston, Louisiana, in a way that's bringing forth meaningful benefits to our students. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Faculty too. Right. Story_ID: 23301 Speaker 1: Okay. So, how is--now, how is your--you're chair of the department [of physics at Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which takes, you know, a lot of time. Are you still the chair of the--? Speaker 2: No, I'm not. Speaker 1: Okay. You came in a chair [in 1999]. Speaker 2: And I served for ten years. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And then I stepped down to spend most of my time teaching, and also serving as a principle investigator for the LIGO [Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory] scientific collaboration, which is a role that I had on campus, wherein I have responsibility for LIGO-related research and educational outreach activities. The collaboration itself is organized in groups, institution. There's about 800 collaborators worldwide, and there's about thirteen countries, and about seventy-six institutions, and so, we're one of those institutions, right, involved in that. So, I spend most of my time doing that these days (pause). Speaker 1: Okay. Now. Okay. Okay. Let's see. So, LIGO. So what portion of your time you have to spend--I mean, do you spend--not have to spend, but do you spend teaching now as opposed to before? Speaker 2: Oh, now that I've stepped down from chair? Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm full-time teaching, which means I teach at least three courses in a semester. And I advise students as well, right, and I do things like hold office hours, and I do various commitments to the department and the university. So that aspect of the load is heavier. I spend my summers, strictly speaking, doing research and working with my students. But during the year, I work with my students as well. The trade-off is that I have less in the way of administrative responsibilities to handle. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. I don't think I mentioned that you were--now, when--you were president of the National Society of Black Physicists for awhile, right? Speaker 2: Correct. That's right. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) back '86 [1986] through '88 [1988], I think. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I didn't mention that. That's--can you kind of speak to the importance of that organization then? Speaker 2: Oh, it's extremely important, because it's just one of the organizations that seeks to, in fact, develop the potential of our young people in the area of, you know, for physics. That's right. So, we're very supportive in that particular regard. Our major event during that time period was our annual conference, and that attracted students, and faculty, and researchers, you know, from across the United States. And we serve as a consulting body for certain entities who want to get our opinion on problematic issues that would affect the minority community, and so we provided that service as well. And we encourage our members through the awarding of fellowships, the awarding of scholarships, to supporting them to go to other kinds of conferences. It's a--it's an essential organization which came into being out of a recognized need on the part of the participants to serve this particular part of our community. And so, yes. So it is a very significant organization. It certainly was the case when I was there as president. And it continues to this particular day, no doubt about it. Now, of course, I'm not the president anymore, so I just go to meetings and present my research work, and serve as a consultant in some sense. And so I'm not in the thick of things so much. But still, I'm still a participant, no question. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're a fellow also of the American Physical Society. Speaker 2: Yes. That's right. That was in 2008, I was elected a fellow of the American Physical Society. Through the forum on education, which I feel extremely proud of because to do the research is great, but now do you think the research and what you do, and you impact generations out there into the future. We're all a community, you could say we all are family, correct? And so, why do we have families anyway. We know how to, in fact, reproduce ourselves, professionally and otherwise. We have families so that we can transfer those values that helped the community to be--to enable to be self sustained, to grow, to thrive, transfer further enough from one generation to the next, because we have very short memories. It's just the way we are. So--and so, in that sense, yes. We're a part of the community, and that's--that's basically our primary over-arching purpose. And we do this in a variety of different ways within the context of what's called outreach today. Right. So, you have to bring the next generation along; otherwise, you may lose them, no doubt. Right. So we do much of that. Speaker 1: Now in terms of the LIGO research, you mentioned before that LIGO is being retooled and-- Speaker 2: Mm-hm, mm-hm. Speaker 1: --a next generation-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --instrument is being prepared-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --even as we speak. So-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --you're having--you're able to contribute to the development of this new instrument. Speaker 2: The question, how do we do it. The research that I'm involved in, specifically, deals with the materials physics of the optics that goes into the interferometer. In particular, we are looking at the coatings. We're looking into the composition, okay, and the fabrication of the coatings of the mirrors. Test masks mirrors that are used in interferometer. And the basic idea is the following: When you're trying to see such a small signal inside of an instrument such as this, you have to dig that signal out of a background of noise and interferences. But noise is basically the demon in this case. And so, you want to be able to reduce the noise; that is, minimize it, get it as low as possible in all components of the interferometer to include the coatings on the mirrors. None of--on the test masks, it's been calculated that the vast majority and 85 percent of the noise inside the test mask curves inside the coating. So. And so, my work involves characterizing materials that we plan to use in producing the coatings that go to the mirrors, and there's a number of avenues we have to research then. Using that basic information about the structure of the molecules that make up the dielectric coating and develop models by which we can predict some of the microscopic properties of the coatings themselves. That's primarily what I do. Again, I use x-rays and neutrons. We do work at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory to study the structure, okay, of the coatings, their composition in terms of elements, okay. And at Southern University, we look at the morphology of the coatings as a function of the exposure to laser radiation, to see how that progresses over time, and we also look at then the details of the phases of the materials that go into the production of the coatings. And we look at the coatings themselves for elements of crystallinities. Right. Yeah, right. So it's really a material science-kind of investigation, both experimental and computational. And that's funded by the National Science Foundation [NSF], all with the intent of finding the best combination of materials to put into the coating to reduce the noise in the system as much as possible. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's--that's what I work on. Keeping the noise down and enhancing the signal to noise ratio, and improving the quality of the result. Right. Story_ID: 23302 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is your--this is like the last quarter of your career, I guess, and, in a sense. Speaker 2: You could say that (laughs). Speaker 1: Yeah. I mean, are you--you plan to stay here at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and--? Speaker 2: So, what are my plans? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: At some point, I'm going to have to retire, okay. And I will continue to do the things, of course, that I think are important, things that I mentioned to you earlier. And the hope is that I will be continue--I will continue to be able to contribute in some meaningful way, okay, with the students and with the research. Now, will that be specifically at Southern, I would hope so, right. Depends largely on the direction that the university goes in. But I certainly would--I would welcome that. No doubt about it. We have a collaboration [with Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), Livingston, Louisiana]. Livingston is right there nearby, and so, they provide us a wonderful opportunity to continue to doing what we have started to do over the last ten years or so, ultimately and to the benefit of our community. We've been able to be part of the construction and the creation of a wonderful science education center out there. That's integrated into our programs here at Southern University. And we've been very fortunate to be able to participate in a meaningful way with the research that's going to lead to the next generation interferometer with LIGO as well. So all of those are, I think, important things to have to make available to the students who are going to be coming into this university. And I look forward to continuing that work. No doubt. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23303 Speaker 1: Now, I--this is a--Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] has a master's program in--. Speaker 2: Physics. Speaker 1: In physics. Right. Speaker 2: And physics right now. It will be a master's program in physics and mathematics depending upon, as I understand it, the emphasis that the student wants to go into. That's a part of this recent reorganization that we've had. Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Sorry. I didn't mean to--. Speaker 1: No. I was asking--that was the question. Speaker 2: Yeah. We got some graduate--that's the graduate program that I've done, and it's so--and basically, the emphasis in our department is to prepare students to become leaders in their field. Meaning, they have to go on to--to Ph.D. in whatever field they choose, okay. And during the time period I was chair, we had students going into all kinds of fields. I mean, there was one kid, just he recently received his Ph.D. in theoretical astrophysics. He's working at J.P.L. [NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory]. Another one very close to me received her Ph.D. in medical physics from the University of Wisconsin. Another received his Ph.D., in Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia], working at CERN [European Organization for Nuclear Research, Switzerland] on the Atlas Project there. Another, University of Texas Medical Center, Ph.D. in medical physics as well. Just several others. And the idea is to prepare them so that they can go out and be leaders in their field. That's the understanding. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, these students are all part of the legacy of college instruct--teacher--I mean, a professor. Speaker 2: Exactly. Story_ID: 23304 Speaker 1: Tell us, when you look back at your career now, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, what would I consider to be my legacy? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well, that he took the basic values that he was given years ago by his parents [Ruth Barsock McGuire and Harry McGuire, Jr.] and held true to those, and he did it with integrity; meaning that, in fact, I gave back to my community in such a way that I helped prepare the next generation for the challenges that they would face. Yes. That means family, yes. That means my students, it's no question about that; and yes, that means the broader community. That, I hope, would be my legacy. And I did it with the appropriate courage, the appropriate integrity as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: True to the cause. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 23305 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today? Speaker 2: Hopes? (clears throat). Maybe I should start with concerns. My principal concern right now is the lack of cohesiveness within the community. It's as if the community has been in some way scattered, and that it has lost its--the values that got us to where we are right now. And the principal item there, I think, is education. I mean, we've lost the handle on education, and so, we have to get that back in some way. We have to get the basic values associated with our community, you know. Respect for each other, having God in our lives, you know, the church in its role; that's--those are extremely important components. So, it's the schoolhouse, the church, and the home. Right. That--we have to get back to that. Triangle. Okay. System. Now that's--that's the concern. And the hope is that we'll be able to do that. People will eventually wake up. You know, we go through cycles in our society, and we swing one way, and I'm hoping that the pendulum is beginning to swing back the other way in terms of our recognizing that there's a lot in the way of detriment activities that we're involved in. And we're going to have to do something about that. Not wait for someone else to do it, but we have to do it. We have to take on that responsibility. (Unclear) see that that goes on, and that's our responsibility to do that in this generation. And I will work toward that as long as--as long as I'm here. Yes. Story_ID: 23306 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would go back and change if you could? Speaker 2: You know, not really. Not really. It's interesting. Sometimes we think something is hurting us, but it's just preparing us for the next step. Be careful too, also, sometimes it feels real good, be careful that you apply it in the right way. But in the end it all fits together. Right. Keeping your eyes on the prize as you go forward. Nope. Not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wouldn't change, no. Story_ID: 23307 Speaker 1: All right. Well, tell us something about your family. Now, you have children, right, and--. Speaker 2: Yeah. I--well, my wife [Saundra Yancy] and I have--we have two kids. They're not kids anymore, but they're children. I have two girls. Carla and Stephanie, separated by four years. Carla is the older one. I'll tell you where they are right now. Carla is a professor of pediatrics specializing in children's allergies at the Baylor College of Medicine, okay, in Houston, Texas. And she lives there with her family, my son-in-law and their four children. My son-in-law is a lawyer, an attorney. And I don't know how they do it, but they seem to be coming along really well. Carla did an undergraduate degree in chemical engineering from Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia], then went to medical school. Okay. And so, I didn't know she was going to go to medical school, but she decided to do that, so that's what--that's what they want to do, that's what they do. So, she's doing quite well with her research and with her activities as a university professor. Stephanie, the younger one, is a mezzo-soprano. She lives in New York City. The most recent time that I saw her was, she was an artist and residence at Johns Hopkins University [Baltimore, Maryland] where she gave a set of master classes and vocal music and theatre. And she also performed her one-woman show that she developed under the auspices of the arts council of--the Queen's arts council--she lives in Queens [New York]--to the--at the Baltimore Museum of Art. Stephanie did her undergraduate degree at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in biology, and then she did a Ph.D. in auditory neuroscience from the University of Oxford, England. And then she came back to the United States and she did a couple of degrees and opera at the Longy School of Music [of Bard College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] it turns out, and then began to follow her passion, which is music--opera, you know. Then she moved to New York City, and she's been working there ever since. I mean, she's performed at Carnegie Hall. She recently performed with the Boston Pops at the MIT Tech Night, as it turns out. Faneuil Hall in Boston. She told me that she recently came back from a performance with the Nevada Opera there. And so, she's doing what people in her business do, as it turns out. So. Both of them, basically, followed their passion. My wife is a, she's a professor of chemistry specializing in education, chemistry education, chemical education, okay, at LSU [Louisiana State University, baton Rouge, Louisiana], and her emphasis is on helping teachers to know how to--learn how to teach their subject better, communicate with students, and learning students how to learn more effectively as well. And so, there's an enormous need for that in our country in our days, given the way our educational system is going. So she spends most of her time, these days, going around the country speaking on this subject in various venues. Right. So. As I mentioned, I met my wife in college at Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. And we were married shortly after my undergraduate [in 1971], and so, you know, we've been together ever since (laughs). And that's this month, forty-one years. Right. So. It's been a forty-one-year journey, the kids are out the house, and we've got grandkids now. Right. Ages are thirteen on down through five. That's six actually, thirteen through six. That's our grandchildren which is, Joshua, Ruth, Daniel and Joseph. Right. Right. Who we get to see from time to time. We get to see all of them from time to time, as it turns out. So, it's been an interesting journey, I'll tell you (laughs). Speaker 1: Okay. Well, congratulations. Speaker 2: But it's been--it's been wonderful (laughs). I have many stories about my family that I could tell you, you know, with the kids growing up and what not. And on the one hand, parents always--I know I always want my children to gain enough in the way of education and preparation so that they can fend for themselves out there in the world, but I'll tell you. There were really some curves at times (laughs) off of what they want to do. So I never would have picked Carla to be a physician, but she loves it, that's what she does, and it's in her heart, and so, that's great. And I always tell the story about, you know, Stephanie is very talented in terms of doing physics. She wants to, in fact, do--she wants to sing. So she's following her passion, and so, she's going ahead and doing it and enjoying it every step of the way there. So. In the end, I am, I'm fortunate and I'm thankful that things have turned out this way. You asked me earlier, is there anything I would change in my--no. Not a thing. Not a thing. Not at all. I am--I'm just glad for it all, and I count it all joy. Absolutely, yeah, because it's--and what does the future hold? Oh, I don't know. But I--we all have our own directions and we're moving in that way, in such a way that we try to compliment and support each other as we go forward, as it turns out. So, I just look forward to whatever it is, continuing to do what we have found as our purpose. Right. So the family is doing fine. Thank you so very much. You did meet my immediate family, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Right. Right. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Well, that's them. That's them. Now, my wife, she's--the one that I mentioned to you that I was a part of a group of first generation college in my family? Well, she's third generation college. Third generation college, I would say, at least third generation college. Second generation, Southern University. So she has education in her family. Speaker 1: And that history from this area, like I said. Speaker 2: Absolutely. That's right. I think her grandmother went to Leland College [Baker, Louisiana], and her mom-- Speaker 1: That's were Gardner Taylor [preacher] went to school. Speaker 2: Absolutely right. That's exactly right. She has a whole family--her grandmother and grandfather had nine siblings. And all of them, they have master's degrees. It was a big emphasis on--her grandmother bought property near Southern University, a house. So that when the kids would come to Southern, they would have a place to stay. So it was a great, strong emphasis on education historically in her family, going back at least to her grandmother, maybe before then. I don't know. We'd have to do the records and the homework to find out. So. So, she in that since, she's carrying on her family legacy. Right. Right. Right. Right, in education. Speaker 1: Now, did your parents get a chance to see you get your Ph.D. in physics? Speaker 2: (clears throat) Mom [Ruth Barsock McGuire] had passed away by that time, and by the time I graduated with a Ph.D., with my Ph.D. back in 1979, Dad [Harry McGuire, Jr.]had fallen ill, as it turns out. And so, he had to be--we had to be very careful about that. But, of course, they knew about it. That's right. That's exactly right. No, Mom didn't know about it, but Dad did. So he does know about it. And my whole family does. There's no question about that. But so. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23308 Speaker 1: All right. Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to bring up before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: (laughs) Boy, I don't know. Nothing that I can think of right now (laughs). You covered this (unclear) from A through Z. You know, there was one question I saw there. It's interesting. There's one question I saw on that list that caught my attention. It said, "What's your earliest remembrance?" And I always found that fascinating because I do have an earlier--an earliest remembrance. And it's contained in a picture of me. It's the earliest picture of me when I was three years old. I had on a shirt, and I remember that shirt as a kid. And there were lines that was on--not dotted lines, but there were separated lines, parallel on the shirt, and I can remember thinking to myself, "Each one of those lines was a car and a train that I saw going--that I see going across a railroad track near my house all the time." I remember just thinking plain that back in my mind, using that particular shirt. I know--I don't why it stuck with me, but that's the earliest remembrance, three years old. Story_ID: 23309 Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different: Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Again, as a husband, a father, and a dedicated educator and member of the community. Absolutely. Member of the community who was, in fact, dedicated to its welfare. But mainly a husband, father, absolutely, and, you know, my profession in terms of my dedication to my students, dedicated teacher, no doubt, and a committed member of the community. That's basically it. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: If we do that, then that's great. That'll cover it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you very much, indeed. Story_ID: 23310 Speaker 1: Okay tell us about this photo. Speaker 2: Oh, that's a photo of me, a studio photo that was taken when I was three years old. That's the earliest photo that I have of me. Speaker 1: Okay. That's the striped shirt. Speaker 2: That's a--that is a photo of me as the Big Chief in the annual production at my elementary school, which is Phillis Wheatley Elementary School, in New Orleans, Louisiana [named after the first published African American woman poet]. That's me playing Big Chief. Speaker 1: Is that part of Mardi Gras or what? Speaker 2: It was not per se, but it was part of the Mardi Gras spirit that was being embodied at that particular part of the play. That's me at 11 years, and that was a professional photograph as part of a newspaper article that appeared in the 'Louisiana Weekly' back in November of 1959. Speaker 1: That's great. Speaker 2: That's me with my grandsons, indicated, they're Daniel, Joseph, Joshua, and me back in June of 2008, upon a visit to our house in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. That's a picture of the delegation of individuals from the collaboration--the LIGO [Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory] collaboration that were planning the construction of the Science Education Center. That's a picture of our visit to the Exploratorium in San Francisco [California]. That is a picture of me and our older daughter Carla with three of her children at that time. That's Joshua, Ruth and Carla is holding Daniel, on a visit to the LIGO Livingston Observatory. This is a picture of my high school physics teacher Mrs. Olympia Beaucree. This is an earlier picture of my mother [Ruth Barsock McGuire], me--that's me to the left in the picture--and my older brother Harry, and my younger sister Honore. This is a picture of me and my younger sister Honore in the backyard of our home on the main street in New Orleans. This is a picture of a foursome called the Four Musketeers. That's me in the circle there, of course, with my younger sister Honore down there; older sister Pat [Patricia] and older brother Harry on top, near above. And this is a relatively recent picture of my wife and I, Saundra and I on a night out on the town. Oh, here's a picture taken back in, I think it was 2004, with me and Professor Jim Gates of the University of Maryland on his visit to LIGO Livingston Observatory. And this is a picture of me, our younger daughter Stephanie is to my right, and wife, Saundra, along with Rita Walters at the Johns Hopkins University on April 5th, 2012. And his is a picture of Saundra and me at the occasion of my delivering the Percy L. Juneau (ph.) luncheon address at the National Organization of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers [NOBCChe]. And this is a picture of me and my student from Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] at her graduation from the University of Wisconsin, a Ph.D. in medical physics. That's me, Michael Archenaffi (ph.), Rachel McKenzie (ph.), and Divine Kumar (ph.) upon a visit to the Marshal Space Flight Center [Huntsville, Alabama] during their undergraduate years at Southern [University]. I was the undergraduate advisor. Ah, here's a picture of me and our younger daughter Stephanie upon her graduation from Oxford University [England], Ph.D. in auditory neuroscience. Ah, same occasion. This is me, Stephanie in the middle, and Carla to the left. Carla is the older, and she is a professor of pediatrics at the Baylor College of Medicine [Houston, Texas]. Here's Carla again with her family. My son-in-law, Eric Davis, who's a local attorney, along with a new addition, Joseph, she's holding. This is Carla with her three kids again. This is Eric, Daniel being held by Eric, Carla and Ruth and Joshua. And now we go back in time with the picture of me, my older brother and younger sister with my godmother, Mrs. Isabella Pingston (ph.), who, after my mom passed, serves as my mother for all of these years. And this is a picture of the Southern University delegation to the LIGO inauguration held on November 12th, 1999. That is the dean, Earl Dunes (ph.), there's-- Speaker 1: Are you going left to right? Speaker 2: Let me go left to right. Earl Dunes is actually the associate vice chancellor for academic affairs that's in the middle; there's Dean Robert Miller, and there's vice chancellor for academic affairs Brenda Burkett, and then myself, yours truly. And that is a youth group from my church, the Mount Pilgrim Baptist Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana; Reverend Jessie B. Bilbury Junior (ph.) is our pastor. We're visiting the LIGO Science Center on that--on that day. Speaker 1: Bilbury from Chicago? Speaker 2: No. He's from Farmerville [Louisiana], as I understand it. This is a picture, a group picture, from the first Edward Bouchet Abdus Salam Conference on Physics and Technology [named after prominent physicists, Edward Bouchet and Abdus Salam]. Oh, and this is a picture of the first newspaper article that I appeared in in the 'Louisiana Weekly' honoring me as the--as one of the top students from my elementary school. And this is a picture of the family about a year before I received my Ph.D., 1979, underneath my biographical sketch from my Ph.D. thesis from Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]. Oh, and this is a picture of--taken in 1987 of the summer fellows, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] fellows at the Marshall Space Flight Center. And this is the cover of a recent addition of the Southern University system magazine, 'Ovations', which highlighted me as one of the shining star faculty members from the [Southern University] system, Baton Rouge campus in particular. Speaker 1: Hold on. Speaker 2: And this is a picture taken from the [Edward] Bouchet Conference on International Physics and Technology that was held in Benin, West Africa. Now, this is a picture of Waveland Johnson and Ms. Sara McGuire Johnson. Sara McGuire Johnson was the sister of my dad [Harry McGuire, Jr.]. She's my aunt. Speaker 1: Which one shall we do now? Speaker 2: Which one do I want? I'll give them to you. Just a moment. Just a second. I can find them. It's up in the front here. Get him. Oh, they can just use that, yeah. That's my granduncle, March McGuire, in his Army uniform. Okay, let me get another one for you. This is my grandfather to the right. This is Harry McGuire and his sister, my grandaunt, Aldena (ph.). My grandfather on the right and my grandaunt, his sister, Aldena McGuire. Okay, McGuire. Get Dad in here somewhere. This is my dad. And this is my father in 2004, Mr. Harry McGuire Senior. Thank you. Now, I think you need to do the tree. You didn't do the tree, did you? Speaker 1: Oh, no. We didn't. Speaker 2: But, will that work for you? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. This is the family three we (unclear) together. This is--you can see my grandfather on the left, my grandmother, Mary Jones McGuire, my dad, Harry McGuire, Junior, and my mom, Ruth Audrey Barsock McGuire, and also my grandmother on my mother's side, Maude Clark Barsock, and me...