 Story_ID: 11053 Speaker 1: My name is Reginnia Williams and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer today is Matthew Hickey and we don't have any observers for this particular discussion. I'd just like to get started this morning by slating and to begin by asking if you would please state your name and spell your name first, middle and last for us? Speaker 2: Otis Moss, Jr., that is O-T-I-S M-O-S-S-, J-R. Speaker 1: And would you also please state the date of your birth and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: Thank you, February 26th, 1935. Speaker 1: And what is today's date please? Speaker 2: Today's date of course is March 18th, 2005. Speaker 1: And finally would you state for us the location of this interview and the address? Speaker 2: The location of this interview is Cleveland, Ohio, Olivet Institutional Baptist Church, 8712 Quincy Avenue. Speaker 1: And your occupation please? Speaker 2: Minister and pastor. Story_ID: 11054 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, if you look at my true county heritage would fall in the category of greens and cornbread, vegetables of all kind, fruits. There is one aspect of the true county heritage that I have dropped for the past twenty years. I literally gave up pork, beef, chicken, all meats except for fish and I have wrestled seriously with relinquishing that from my diet. Speaker 1: Okay. Reverend Moss, do you have a favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I think spring and summer have special appeals and that I think is a part of my country heritage. However, I have learned to look for and witness the glory of god in all seasons. Speaker 1: And how about a favorite color, do you have one? Speaker 2: My favorite color would be found quite often in, in my theological symbolisms, scarlet and of course maroon and white which happen to be my school colors, Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]. Scarlet has a special appeal to me and special meaning of course in theological signs and symbols because it represents salvation. It represents the sacrificial dimension of the redeeming love of Jesus Christ. Speaker 1: And how about a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Several but my wife and I enjoy a portion of the West Coast and Arizona as vacation spots, Florida. And Georgia is always a pleasant place for us to visit. We were both born there come spring, summer, winter or fall. Speaker 1: And Reverend Moss do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A few and they come up from time and time when I am talking to young people, that phrase out of my rural background and heritage that was constantly repeated to me, "Keep on keeping on," another, "Keep looking up," and another, "Praise God from whom all blessings flow," and still another, "You are somebody." And that was etched into my mind and consciousness early in life and later it was given a special rhythm in that famous praise poem that Dr. William Holmes Borders created back in the early 1940s and broadcast it on 'Wings Over Jordan', 'I Am Somebody'. And it became the theme for the Rev. Jesse Jackson in the '60s [1960s]. And I constantly encourage people to check out Dr. Borders's book at the Library of Congress in the rare book session--section. I think it's under the title of 'Thunderbolts' [1942] and in that book is the original praise poem to the African American struggle, 'I Am Somebody'. Story_ID: 11055 Speaker 1: I'd like to begin this section by asking if you would please tell us about your mother. What was her name and where was she born? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Magnolia Ridley and she was born in Georgia, was orphaned at the age of two I am told. And an uncle whose name was Joe, I suppose at some point it was Joseph but everybody knew him as Joe, he became her parent, her surrogate parent and a very loving parent. And of course in her adult years she met my father, Otis Moss, Sr. and they were married and to that union five children were born. Speaker 1: Now again, was your mother born in the South? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was born, my mother was born in Georgia. Speaker 1: Can you remember the town? Speaker 2: I don't think it was a town but it was in the LaGrange vicinity. I am not sure of the neighborhood area but it was in Troup County. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you mentioned that your, your mother was orphaned at an early age but after the death of her parents did she stay in that same community or--? Speaker 2: Yes, she did. Speaker 1: Okay, so the uncle and the extended family were right there? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: All right. Did she share with you any other stories about growing up in Georgia? Speaker 2: Unfortunately my mother died when we were quite young. I was four years old and thereby missed many of those personal treasures. My older sisters were able to hear and retain many of those. My sister Joycevette (ph.) has done extensive research into our family history and is, is sort of the family historian, the, the genealogist in the family and has made it a very joyous hobby or pursuit to continue year after year collecting and compiling data regarding the family and sharing various things from time to time. And always I guess every year discover a new relative, some new kin folk here and there. Story_ID: 11056 Speaker 1: Would you tell me please about your father's side of the family. We know your father's name but where was he born? Speaker 2: My father was born in an adjoining county to Troup County, Meriwether County and the post office for Meriwether County was Stovall, Georgia. Stovall, Georgia is located maybe my guess is ten miles from LaGrange. He grew up there. I'm not sure just when he moved from Meriwether County to Troup County but it was somewhere close to the time of the marriage of my father and mother [Magnolia Ridley Moss]. Story_ID: 11057 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss in growing up in Georgia did you have any opportunities to interact with your grandparents either maternal or paternal grandparents? Speaker 2: Unfortunately no. My sisters have some memories of our paternal grandfather who, who died when we were all quite young. I was probably two years old at the time of his death so we did not have the benefit of that interaction. We know that he was a very active person in his community, very active in his church and was a deacon in the local Baptist church in the county and community where he lived. Story_ID: 11058 Speaker 1: We had an opportunity to learn about that church because my father [Otis Moss, Sr.] was also a member of that church and took us to that church frequently on the second Sunday of the month which was a tradition in our family. Speaker 2: Now, well what was so special about the second Sunday? Speaker 1: Very good question. The second Sunday was the Sunday that they had regular preaching service, Sunday School every Sunday but on the second Sunday the pastor came from the circuit he was taking care of. That was the preaching Sunday. In my home church the fourth Sunday was the preaching Sunday, and it was a tradition in the rural area to frequent churches where the preaching was taking place and there was a church of such for each Sunday in the month. Consequently there were, you--even though no church in the rural area had a full-time pastor, because of the first Sunday service and the second Sunday, third and fourth, one could make the circuit and hear a sermon every Sunday be it in a Baptist church or a Methodist church. And because of the interconnectedness of families, there were some families who were members of the first Sunday church and a portion of their families belonged to the second Sunday church so there was that beautiful interchange that extended family connection. Speaker 2: Reverend Moss what was the name of that church? Speaker 1: Branch Hebron. Some would call it Branch Hebron but they called it Branch Hebron Baptist Church [Greenville, Georgia]. Speaker 2: And that's the Second Sunday church? Speaker 1: That's the Second Sunday church. Speaker 2: You said that was attended by both your father and your grandfather? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, and what's your paternal grandfather's name? Speaker 1: Mitchell Moss was his name. Speaker 2: Now you mentioned that it would be possible also for families to attend Baptist and Methodist churches and was there any friction there, conflict between the denomination? Speaker 1: No, there was denominational pride, denominational you know affirmation but interestingly enough close interdenominational cooperation. During the summer each church had homecoming services and revival meetings. On those homecoming Sundays generally they ran from the fourth Sunday in July through the fourth Sunday in August. You would find members carrying in food, baskets, trunks of food to each one of those homecoming events and many of them were not members of that, of a part, particular church but they also shared in that homecoming big dinner spread. They talked about it as 'Dinner on the Ground'. It was a, almost like a summer festival of faith and you, you would have a four-week continue, continuum of revival meetings and some special outstanding charismatic powerful preacher would be in each one of those venues. And this was the highlight really of the entire summer in the African American religious community. Relatives who had moved away, some escaped to places like Cleveland, Chicago, Detroit, New York and other cities would come home during those months--during those weeks. And here you would see parents, grandparents, great-grandchildren together for a few fleeting days, and in retrospect as you, as, as you remember the songs they were singing like, 'This may be the last time, may be the last time, I don't know'. And to them it was literally truth and literal fact because often this was that moment when, when there was a family reunion other than a funeral and the remarkable memories and kinship and the retelling of stories and sometimes partying and various kinds of recollections took place in that setting. The focus being the proclamation of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the invitation to the, to the unchurched community to become a part of the family of Jesus Christ. And because there were no indoor facilities most people got religion in the summer time because that was also baptism time and it was pretty inconvenient to be baptized in an outdoor pool in the midst of a winter season. So even though the Holy Spirit worked in all, works in all seasons, the Holy Spirit seemed to have touched more people during the summer season than in any other time. Speaker 2: I'm glad that we're having this discussion today because there are so many things that you're mentioning as it relates to the experience you had in Georgia but that, it sounds so foreign to me now even though I'm a member of that same Baptist church that you're referring to. But this idea of one minister being responsible for several churches--. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --on a circuit, is that a thing in the past or is that still common place in the rural South? Speaker 1: In some rural areas not just peculiar to the South you still have situations where congregations have to depend on a visiting pastor so to speak. By no means as frequent as it was in years now gone but you still have instances of that. Story_ID: 11059 Speaker 1: The other thing I wanted to ask you to elaborate on is this idea of baptism in the outdoor pool in the summer. Why was that such a, a special occasion for members of that religious community? Speaker 2: This was one of the highlights, one of the great celebratory moments in the life of the community. It represented triumph, it represented salvation and liberation. It also represented the fact that there is present in the community the power of God at work through the teachings and presence of Jesus Christ a special way. And baptism was an outer expression of something that had taken place within the community, within the community of faith and it was a time to celebrate. One of my most vivid childhood memories is that Saturday morning of my baptism, having spent a considerable portion of Friday as a ten-year-old helping to haul water to fill up the pool and then coming back on Saturday morning for the baptism, marching out of the church in a special kind of processional. Story_ID: 11060 Speaker 1: Can you continue with the baptism? Speaker 2: Yes. On a Saturday morning at the end of a revival, excuse me, marching out of the church going to this outdoor pool with this tall, stately figure of a black pastor, African American pastor standing six feet three or four inches, leading the congregation with the candidates immediately following singing, take me to the water, to be baptized and then entering the pool making the statement and proceeding with the baptism with the pool surrounded by a large multitude of people from the community, from various churches in the community and of different denominations. But for a moment everybody was one in celebration, one in, in praise, one in affirmation of this special event. And I looked up from the pool that Saturday and looked into the faces of the elders and my peers around the pool and I still see that pastor raise his hand and say, "I baptized your mother [Magnolia Ridley Moss] in the same pool and now she is resting in eternity." And then he said something to the effect, the exact words I do not recall, that he was baptizing a minister and the shouts around the pool were transfixing, transforming in so many ways. And then I walked out of the pool and the deaconesses, the mothers of the church and the deacons gave me assistance in getting ready for the right hand of fellowship and it was just a great day. The, the telling of which has been a continuing testimony throughout my life. Story_ID: 11061 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss, so far in our discussion you really painted a detailed picture of this transforming moment almost in your life that you associate with your own baptism at the age of ten. But would it be fair to say that baptism for young people in the Baptist Church is really a rite of passage, that there's an expectation that you're moving into a different phase of your life after baptism? Speaker 2: Yes. There was this special sense of taking on a new kind of moral responsibility. Now everyone did not live up to that and probably no one lived up to it a hundred percent. But our elders communicated to us both directly and indirectly that there is now a new expectation. You are now supposed to model something different. You are now to be a representative to those who have not had this experience of a new and higher calling. Now some people heard that and you know went right on doing what they wanted to do and some heard it and felt a deeper sense of commitment. Speaker 1: At the age of ten were you aware of the serious nature of the commitment that you had made at that point? Speaker 2: I think as much as a ten-year-old could grasp, I really was because there were some unspoken movements in my own consciousness that had not been expressed that indicated a call to ministry. But that was not to be revealed publicly on my part until I was seventeen. Story_ID: 11062 Speaker 1: You also mentioned that there were other children in your family. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I'd just like for you to speak their names as part of the story today and to tell me if they were also a member of that church family that you've described? Speaker 2: My three sisters, Susie, Callie, Joycevette, we all called Josie, were all baptized in that same pool. Speaker 1: Do you have brothers? Speaker 2: Our younger brother [Mitchell Moss], excuse me, who was only seven months old when, when our mother [Magnolia Ridley Moss] passed went to live with an aunt, our Aunt Pearl and she became his caregiver while my father [Otis Moss, Sr.] worked. And, please excuse me, because of the fact that my aunt lived a few miles away where she and my father had grown up, we were not that far away but too far to walk. So the second Sunday took on an extraordinary meaning for us because that was the Sunday we went to my father's church, to my aunt's house who always prepared special dinners and we had the opportunity of being in fellowship with our younger brother. So the, the separation necessitated by death and a few distance down, miles down the road we somehow would seek to overcome every second Sunday and through letter writing, cards and all other forms of family affirmation. It did not completely overcome the pain of that separation but it kept alive the brotherhood, the sisterhood and the family unity. And, and, and made it possible for us to grow even closer in later years. Story_ID: 11063 Speaker 1: You've already described the sights surrounding your baptism and things associated with the church and the sounds of the singing of 'Take Me to the Water'. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: But can you describe for us the smells of some of those special dinners prepared on the second Sunday in that house where [brother] Mitchell [Moss] was growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, the cobbler. Speaker 1: Is that peach or apple? Speaker 2: Both. And especially Aunt Pearl's potato pie, it had a crust like none other. We thought she was a genius in food preparation so much so that silently I think we sort of compared everybody else's potato custard or potato pie with Aunt Pearl's potato pie. But there were also saints in the community who did similar things and it gave us, that gave us a notion, we can talk about extended family a little later on, the notion that as valuable as Aunt Pearl was in our lives and in the care of our younger brother we also had some great caregivers around us. And their teachings, their counsel became remarkable and lasted in our own development as children and as men and women. Story_ID: 11064 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss you've already suggested the importance of your family in laying a foundation for you early on in life and also perhaps an extension of that foundation through the church. But are there other institutions, especially the schools that will play an important role in your early life as well? Speaker 2: The school was incalculably important. In terms of its facilities, very crude, one room, one dictionary, hand me down, used books, discarded by white schools and often they took the time to write in those books that they knew were going to the 'colored' kids, or titles not quite as kind, they carried certain racist statements. But our teachers were able to take those unkind, inadequate, used, discarded books and baptize them in their own commitment to learning, to education and trans-, transcend all of the ugliness and bring forth a lesson plan of beauty. When I talked about my baptism earlier as the water was brought to the out, to this outdoor pool it was muddy water really. It was not clear. And I have often remarked on the fact that my baptism was a baptism in muddy water and that has been kind of our journey from time to time. So those, those teachers took what was inadequate and those tattered and torn pages and presented to us a picture of a greater future and painted for us dreams and stirred within us hopes and aspirations that would not die. The school was important as a place of fellowship, of learning, of recreation, a place where you had the opportunity to memorize a line here or a poem there. My first oratorical contest was in that setting as a second grader when I fell in love with my teacher, I mean literally it was a heavy situation. Speaker 1: Should we mention her name? Speaker 2: Miss Lottie Mabry. She was beautiful, kind and occasionally would offer me a piece of cookie or something out of her lunch bag. I was so moved by her 'til I just dreamed about her every night. Of course there were few nights that I didn't dream about her and those were the nights that I didn't dream at all. And I really went to school to see Miss Mabry. It was that kind of impact and when she glanced up from her desk or table and looked at me and smiled, it made education worthwhile. And she gave me an assignment to learn a poem and I was to--the class was to participate and the winner would get a prize. And I still remember the little poem: "I had a little nut tree, nothing would it bear but a silver nutmeg and a golden pear. The king of Spain's daughter came to visit me, all because of my little nut tree. I skipped over water, I danced over sea, and all the birds in the air could not catch me." I won the contest and several decades later through the assistance of my sister, I was able to locate Miss Mabry in Detroit, Michigan and she recognized me and I recognized her. By this time her body had become challenged from a paralytic stroke. The beautiful face was somewhat twisted but the spirit came through. And once more as we looked at each other, her arms were extended and we embraced and for just a few fleeting moments reminisced. It was the last time I would ever see her, but what an impact on the life of a second grader who was hungry for a special kind of, of affection and who in his world was still grieving over the loss of a mother [Magnolia Ridley Moss]. Her moment of kindness, her smile, her touch, her pulling me into a world of performance that said do this and the vote of the winner came not from her but from my classmates. They nominated the winner and of course she affirmed it and gave me a prize. How can we ever pay, repay for such a gift? And that is God's operation of grace in our own time and space. That is education made flesh. Story_ID: 11065 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss you talked about some of the challenges that the teachers and the students faced in the Jim Crow schools of Georgia. But I'm wondering also, because you mentioned Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], how you were able to look beyond, I know the teachers helped but to overcome those challenges and to know that there was something beyond this limited education made available to black students in the South and that you could go on to higher education? When did you begin to think along those lines? Speaker 2: It came through our school experience, it came in our family, it came in our community. For as marginalized as we might have been from the daily movement of what some people took for granted, we also knew that segregation Jim Crow apartheid was wrong, evil, inhumane, ungodly and sinful. And here school and church combined to, to bring that message to us and helped us to interpret it. One of my early recitations in church, my sister and I had a--did a performance together. When I say performance we did recitations together, simply said, "The Negro was hated without a cause and he's not to blame. He wipes the teardrops from his eyes and lives on just the same. When it comes to making laws the Negro has no voice. It matters not how gray his head, he's always just a boy." It was a poem of protest and I did not recognize at the time of it, of deliverance why the audience of adults stood and applauded. But in later years and participating in the Civil Rights Movement I, I discovered that here a child had a friend for them, an expression of protest and articulated in a way that could have put them in danger if they had said the same thing in some settings although some did. All of these things helped to lay the foundation for us, for my generation to look at the imperfections of our own government and our nation and the, and the lack of the fulfillment of constitutional guarantees and say, "Yes, we have the obligation to do something about this." So to read black newspapers, to read the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and 'Troup County', to open the 'Afro-American' and see a Thurgood Marshall winning a case against the law school in Oklahoma, Texas, Louisiana and then to come to a Civics class and have our teacher make that a part of the lesson plan, this was a remarkable education. So in, in the segregated Jim Crow circumstances we claimed something and, and, and grasp something that many students missed in so-called integrated school settings because they're not integrated, they're settings of desegregated racism. So out of that, out of that circumstance and hearing the leaders of the wider community discuss the situation, walking into a barber shop and, and, and hearing the elders give their own interpretation of the meaning of the election between [Harry S.] Truman and [Thomas E.] Dewey and, and what it, what it meant when Strom Thurman left the Democratic party because Hubert Humphrey had said that we need to get off the states rights path and get on the human rights path. Or to walk into a LaGrange [Georgia] barber shop and look on the wall and, and there was Jackie Robinson or there was Mary McLeod Bethune, there was Ralph Bunche, there was Ella Fitzgerald and, and Louie Armstrong. So the barber shop and the beauty shop also took on a, another form of community education. Now that was not the only conversation that took place there but these were things of value. Now depending on what barber shop you were in, this barber shop happened to have been run by a deacon of a local church. So his standards were pretty, pretty, pretty exact. There were certain things you didn't say because children were in the barber shop and it was not uncommon for him to invite some people out of the shop if they were not--their behavior and respect and dispositions were not at, at the level that they, they should be. So all of these things happened in a community where "the village" was a reality. Story_ID: 11066 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss I hear you saying then that in spite of the fact that the schools were separate and inferior, you were being socialized to believe that something greater awaited you. Now you also mentioned the age of seventeen as far as your public announcement about your call to the ministry. Things are now happening as you're preparing to go to high school and now to college so how does all of this come together and eventually lead to your going to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Very good question. Let me pick up something, pick up on something in reference to--I would not categorize those schools as inferior. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Disadvantaged in, in many respects but at the high school level anyway, not necessarily in my, the setting. But at the high school experience now those teachers were much better prepared than most of their white counterparts and there were reasons for that. They could not do graduate education in Georgia but the State of Georgia as did many southern states, in order to try to keep its system of apartheid in, in, in place would literally pay for black teachers to do their masters degree in education outside of the state to keep them out of the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. Consequently many of those teachers, those African American teachers came to places like Case Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio], Columbia University [New York, New York], New York University, got their Masters degree and beyond one may, one or more. And they were helping to shape minds and directions of black youth. Story_ID: 11067 Speaker 1: I want to thank you for correcting me on that issue of inferiority and linking that with black schools because now we have an opportunity to hear an account of a very fine historically black school in relation to your experiences at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. So can you just share for us at this time what it was like to be a student at Morehouse as a teenager? Speaker 2: Let me begin, let me begin with that by saying four or five years before entering Morehouse I had walked, which was not unusual, several miles to hear Dr. [Benjamin E.] Mays deliver a high school commencement address. And I left the auditorium as he was getting into his car and had an opportunity to shake his hand which to me was just a, a great moment, and said to him, "I will see you at Morehouse." Well you know I'm shaking the president of Morehouse College, what am I going to say? That was a hidden dream of mine anyway but I just decided to say it. And he smiled and greeted me graciously. As I moved through high school and made it known that Morehouse was my college of choice, I must say that every teacher in my high school encouraged me in that direction and there are some great experiences that I could talk about during my high school career. When I arrived on Morehouse College campus my freshman year, freshman week and Dr. Mays gave a reception for the freshman class with Mrs. [Sadie Gray] Mays as the hosting person, or the two of them, and here we are out on the lawn with the president and first lady of the school having personal interaction and I'm able to go and shake his hand again and remind him of the fact that I said I would meet him at Morehouse College (laughs). And really a relationship began to develop that turned into a friendship and one of the most remarkable memories of my adult life. Now that's difficult to duplicate in other college and university settings out--outside of or beyond the uniqueness of the historically black liberal arts college and I'm sure that my story can be repeated by many other African American men and women because I've heard so many similar stories. This journey at the college level took on indescribable proportions for it was at a--during a, the time when the Civil Rights Movement was getting ready to be born in a very special way. Two years into my college career comes Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, Kansas, 1954], and the people that--who interpreted Brown and, and, and the people with whom I had the opportunity of discussing the meaning of Brown before and after its issuance were persons like Dr. Mays, Dr. Robert Brisbane, Professor of Political Science at Morehouse, Dr. Samuel Williams, Professor of Philosophy--my major professor and was also a professor to Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. And beyond the campus, attorneys like the late A.T. [Austin Thomas] Walden of Atlanta and attorney [Donald L.] Hollowell of Atlanta who recently passed, Dr. William Holmes Borders who preached about the decision from the pulpit. So to be surrounded with that kind of atmosphere and then two years later, actually one year later the Montgomery [Alabama] movement. So to be in college at that moment in history and to be in seminary at that time, to be there when the city had movement and when the protests of the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] were being formulated was just a great moment in anyone's personal life but in the history of our nation and yea in the history of the world. Story_ID: 11068 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss there's so much going on in that period of history that you just alluded to especially the 1950s. It's the Cold War era and, and very often there are young radicals who are involved in the Civil Rights Movement are labeled Communists. So for some of the younger students of history who will look at this interview can you just help us to understand why it was so dangerous for a black person, especially in the South to be associated in any way with a Communist party and what that meant for America at that point in your development? Speaker 2: Probably one of the most disabling labels that a black leader could get at that period was to be called a Communist because it made him or her a target for all kind of reprisals and intimidation and investigations and it also set them up for isolation from their own community. So it was a form of living assassination through alienation, marginalization under spurious accusation. In some instances it was successful, unfortunately, until, until finally people began to rise to the level of, of saying we--"You call us anything you want to. We will not be intimidated. We will continue to march. We will continue to protest." And it, it reached a point that the Un-Americans Activities Committee [House Un-American Activities Committee, HUAC] which was a congressional committee that browbeat and intimidated so many people, black and white, with the Communist scare tactic, eventually the committee became an embarrassment to the whole nation and the government itself and it was disbanded. The one thing I think, well one of the things I think that moved the nation beyond the, the power of intimidating forces maybe not totally but the spiritual dynamic that was brought into our historic movement under the leadership of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. To be in college when an alumnus of the school moved to such a prominent spot in world history was again a call to every student I think in college and especially at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] to become a part of this movement in history. At the end of my college career Adam Clayton Powell was our commencement speaker and [Rev.] Dr. Gardner Taylor was our baccalaureate speaker. Now think about this, 1956, June, Sunday you are challenged and inspired by Gardner Taylor and Tuesday morning just before you receive your diploma or your degree you are challenged by Adam Clayton Powell. I never heard him better than on that day. And he closed his message by saying, "You must go from here with a sense of mission. Martin Luther King, Jr. is waiting for you to come march with him." Those kind of electrifying words and then he spent about fifteen minutes talking about racism in the United States Army and kept pulling stuff out of the file. "Here it is, straight from the Pentagon. Assignment to the Redstone Arsenal, Caucasians only. This one was written by--," you know he had the document. And he kept pulling stuff out. "Here it is again, assignment, overseas duty, unit whatever, Caucasians only. Racism is controlling the Pentagon." Now for a group of young graduates to hear this kind of message and, and witness this kind of audacity was certainly not just electrifying it was liberating. My Political Science teacher [Dr. Robert Brisbane] said to the class one day, "If there's anybody in this class who is not a registered voter, even if you get an A you're going to flunk." Well I don't know if he was going to really do that, but everybody thought he was, so it was sufficient (laughs). And those who were not registered, and you could register to vote in Georgia even in those days at the age of eighteen, those who were not registered to vote would have to become ashamed of themselves. That was a remarkable kind of education beyond the textbook. Story_ID: 11069 Speaker 1: I need to ask about something else that happens during your college years. Knowing that you're finishing up just as the Montgomery [Alabama] Boycott of the bus system there is, is being resolved in December of 1956, but in the summer of 1955 when you have the lynching of Emmett Till. So even for those non-violent protesters and the young seminarians and others who were being urged to join the movement I suppose there must have been at least in the back of your minds some thought of what happened to Emmett Till. Can you just tell me how you decide to move forward in spite of the fears that might have been caused by the, the reality of death and the movement? Speaker 2: Yes. I remember and this was five years after Emmett Till and the memory and the image and what 'Jet' magazine did for the conscience of humanity with those images along with the mother of Emmett Till cannot be exaggerated. Five years after Emmett Till here we are as seminary students, [Morehouse] college students in Atlanta [Georgia] getting ready for our first sit-in well aware of the fact that some of us could be killed or brutally injured. And we spent time spiritually preparing for that kind of experience. The first time I stayed up all night for one specific reason and that was to engage in prayer was the night before my first experience of a sit-in. Collectively we gave each other strength, support, encouragement and offered our friendship to each other in a, in a very special way. We were not exempt from fear. We were not, we were not as Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] often said, "Courage is not necessarily the absence of fear it's the, it's the ability to move in spite of fear," and this is just, this is exactly what we did. The whole nation responded and for a brief while both brutally and positively. And the brutal response did not defeat what we were doing, it heightened the need, the recognition of the need of what we were doing to the extent that a handful of students and the Atlanta University Center in less than a year caused seventy-five stores and all of the public facilities to sign a public document desegregating all of the lunch counters and the phrase that most people did not know about, other facilities (with emphasis), which was a paragraph not found generally in the sit-in agreements, and other facilities which meant beauty shops and barber shops and all of that. Students, the oldest of which was probably twenty-four or twenty-five at the graduate level, students sitting at the table with the mayor [William B. Hartsfield] of the city of Atlanta saying, "We demand that the following things be done within the next thirty days. We demand that all charges against students arrested in the city and movement be dropped because they were not wrong, the city was wrong." And guess what, the mayor agreed with us. Just a few of the aspects of what transpired there and the kind of college experience that made this kind of early leadership possible on the part of college students. Speaker 1: Reverend Moss can you help students of history understand why it was so important for those young leaders to achieve those victories in getting the lunch counters integrated or desegregated because I, I'm thinking of a statement that was made I believe by Ella Baker said something along the lines of, "Freedom is about more than attaining an integrated cup of coffee or a hamburger." Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was that about? Why were they willing to endure the beatings and the arrests and the other things? Speaker 2: The segregated lunch counter was a symbol of a system of apartheid that insulted the dignity of a race of people. And it was necessary to remove the insult in order to establish meaningful dialogue because we cannot truly communicate if we come to the table where one side is insulted. Story_ID: 11070 Speaker 1: You were starting to tell me about the meaning of the student effort to desegregate the Southern lunch counters and what that represented at least for them. Speaker 2: Yes, if you recall the 1896 [U.S.] Supreme Court Decision establishing separate but equal which was really the first time in American society that apartheid had been made legal since slavery or even before slavery became "the law of the land." It was then necessary to make apartheid illegal. A sit-in movement laid the foundation for that. Coming out of and learning from the Montgomery [Alabama] bus protest, it was not possible to move forward as a mass effort with all of these rules and regulations of race intact. That was absolutely necessary to change the legal structure of our society and one could argue that you only needed to win a law case or a suit and strike that down it was all over, but that was important. But it was necessary for the masses of people to get involved in changing what was affecting their lives on a daily basis. All of this happened with the Montgomery movement which was a mass movement then following that the student movement, another mass movement. But the student movement--not but--and the student movement represented a generation of leaders coming forth with a new paradigm of direct action learned from and inspired by the [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] movement. But there was still another river to cross because if you can't vote, eating at the lunch counter comes with a new kind of insult because you're still not a citizen. So the Voting Rights Bill [1965] was absolutely necessary because that is where citizenship was affirmed. Therefore the Selma to Montgomery march was an irreplaceable necessity in the struggle for human rights. The great threat that we face in the twenty-first century is the possibility of the voting rights enforcement, the enforcement of the voting rights act being diluted to the extent that the right to vote can again be so abridged that it will become acceptable once more to deny people their citizenship by way of the right to vote and that is a clear and present danger. Story_ID: 11071 Speaker 1: You were sharing with us information on the positive difference that young people especially were able to make in the civil rights movement through the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, sometimes referred to as SNCC. Perhaps some of their ministers associated with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council] that comes out of the Montgomery [Alabama] Bus Boycott. And then you took us to 1965 to talk about the difference that all of the marchers made as they moved from Selma to Montgomery and then later in '65 [1965] we get the passage of the Voting Rights Act. What was the impact of the signing of that bill into law trying to secure political empowerment for a group that had been politically disfranchised historically? Speaker 2: The '65 [1965] Voting Rights Act sought to complete in some respects what was brutally stopped at the end of Reconstruction. It truly changed the political landscape of the nation with a handful of black elected officials in 1965 to thousands of black elected officials today. Now we must also keep in mind that if you look at the say ten thousand more or less black elected officials today compared with a few hundred or less in '65 [1965], that's a remarkable difference. But if you look at the number of elected officials period, five-hundred-thousand and look at that figure you, you still see where we truly are in terms of real participatory democracy. That's, that's one thing. And the other thing is the whole [Civil Rights] Movement reached a watershed I think with the civil, with the Voting Rights Act because then a party shift began to take place and one party that had historically been looked upon as the party of segregation became the party of participation and civil rights. The Democratic Party shifted and became the civil rights party and a few years later, the Republican Party became the anti-civil rights party. A lot of people would disagree with this, but it's hard to look at the facts and, and, and deny it. And we are, we are grappling with that reality at this very hour. The backlash that [U.S. President] Lyndon Johnson talked about is at work right now and it has been brutally effective. Story_ID: 11072 Speaker 1: Maybe we'll come back to [U.S. President] Lyndon Johnson because I especially want to spend some time to talk about 1968, his decision not to run and the assassination of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] that year. But I want to stay with 1965 for a moment. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: If I'm not mistaken you turned thirty years old in 1965. So you're a very young man, college-educated professional putting yourself in harm's way, perhaps some people would say unnecessarily, by being openly associated with these activists in the Civil Rights Movement. So I'm wondering what do your family members have to say about your civil rights activism? Are they supporting you, are they on the firing line with you, are they marching with you and working with you? Speaker 2: A very good question. One, when I started an activist role in, in civil rights back in college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and seminary days, I, I was married for the first time, 1959 and my first wife and I walked picket lines together. We had an agreement that we would not become arrested. I don't know if this was a good agreement or not, that both of us would not become arrested at the same time. It was just a, a personal kind of agreement but we were involved. My sister Josie in Detroit [Michigan] was marching with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] so it was, it was a family involvement and participation. There was no one in my family calling me on any given day saying, "Don't do this." It was almost like we were expected to see you there (laughs), so it was that kind of mutual support system. But it was my responsibility to counsel with many individuals, students and (pauses) young men and young women who had been directed by their parents not to participate, and not to come back home if they did participate. And this was a great moral and ethical struggle on the part of, of students to make that kind of decision against the direct advice of their parents. Most of them I'm happy to say did not comply with those demands and in the end I must say the parents were proud of the fact that they did not. Story_ID: 11073 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss by the time we get to that thirtieth birthday [1965] for you--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --there's a long list of martyrs for the cause. We have Medgar Evers [1963], Malcolm X [1965], the four little girls [1963]--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Four little girls. Speaker 1: --from Birmingham, Alabama. Speaker 2: The three young men in Philadelphia, Mississippi [1964]. Speaker 1: Martyrs for the cause of freedom, but still you were out there. When do you decide to settle down or have you settled down? And I ask the question because I know of your association with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. Do people talk about this, about the reality of death and martyrdom and perhaps the possibility of settling down one day? Do you have those conversations with Dr. King and others in the movement? Speaker 2: You know, we saw the dangers as a necessary feature of liberation and the fulfillment of our calling, not everyone but those of us who were directly involved. By the time I reached '65 [1965], the year of '65 [1965], my first wife is now deceased. And I am now participating in the Movement with that reality and a baby daughter [Daphne Moss], but I do not stop my involvement. I do curtail a few activities because of the responsibility of fatherhood. But by the time I reach 1966, my present wife [Edwina Hudson Smith Moss] and I become engaged and we are married by Dr. King. She was on the staff of Dr. King's. Consequently some would say it was almost a, a marriage within the Movement, so there is no breaking of the rhythm of this kind of activism. And our children then grow up as a part of that historic experience and see Dr. King as a part of the extended family. And he truly was, and Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King and the entire King family. Speaker 1: So you said in '66 [1966] Dr. King performs the wedding ceremony--, Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for you and Mrs. Moss. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And two years later in 1968 he'll be assassinated. Speaker 2: [Nods head "Yes"]. Story_ID: 11074 Speaker 1: It's not uncommon today to come across history books where the author suggests that the Movement fell apart in '68 [1968] when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated because he was the moral voice of the Movement--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: --The spirit some suggest goes out of the Movement in '68 [1968] when he's removed from the scene and in fact the cities are on fire. And for--in the wake of his assassination, for someone who taught and preached and lived in a non-violent fashion with so much violence in the spring of '68 [1968], what are the people in the Movement feeling in that season of death and violence? Speaker 2: I think and you'll get different expressions, not conflicting expressions but different expressions. And let me also note that in '64 [1964], Dr. King is giving the eulogy at the funeral of my first wife and in '66 [1966] performing the wedding ceremony of my second marriage [to Edwina Hudson Smith Moss] that there's a special kind of, of, of linkage here. In '68 [1968] the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. was devastating at a personal level, at a Movement level, at a national level. It, it did not stop the continuing liberation thrust, but the dynamics were changed. Persons who had been exceptionally close to Dr. King like the Rev. Jesse Jackson moved into national and international prominence. Rev. Andrew Young [former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations], other persons moved into significant places in academic and civic life. Some became elected officials, some became directors of significant community programs and endeavors and brought with them these marvelous men and women. Dorothy Cotton at Cornell University [New York, New York], a Marian Wright Edelman establishing the Children's Defense Fund, just to name a few. And various movements became achievements in so many areas and in so many ways. The King Center is born, the birthday, holiday is born and yet the death of Dr. King created a bereavement within the Movement that a generation has not been able to heal. And that bereavement I think took on various expressions and one aspect of bereavement is hostility. So you got--you had a, a violent reaction for a moment. Another aspect of bereavement is withdrawal, some people withdrew. Another expression of bereavement is, is, is to take a path which is another form of withdrawal of nonparticipation and another form of bereavement is to find new avenues of expression. It might be in writing, it could be in musical creations, all of these happened. So we are still drawing from that great prophetic spirit and life and sometimes we draw from it and drink from that well and we don't even realize it. Just the other day in Atlanta [Georgia], a woman named Ashley Smith brought to bear for a fleeting moment the spirit of the power of nonviolence and an individual [Brian Nichols] alleged to have killed and created rage in the city gave up his weapon and turned himself in. It's interesting to note that he had gotten past the whole police department, the sheriff and all of the deputies who did not catch him but a kind and loving compassionate word in the spirit of nonviolence and in the context of the spirit of Jesus Christ sent him out disarmed and surrendering. There's a sermon there, there's a book there, there's a song there, there's some poetry there that, that must yet be written. The whole South African Anti-Apartheid Movement has a direct relationship with the life and leadership of Martin Luther King, Jr. So if you look and say, "Well we don't see him (pauses) at the headquarters of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] sitting behind the desk where he was once seen, but I see him walking beside Bishop [Desmond] Tutu. I see him standing in the pulpit with [Rev.] Dr. [Allan] Bosak and [Rev. Dr.] Frank Chikane and Mrs. [Albertina] Sisulu and Mrs. Winnie Mandela and I see him sitting beside President Nelson Mandela at the capital of Pretoria [South Africa]." So our definition of what happens following martyrdom has to be broadened--excuse me--because if we say the Movement fell apart we have to ask, "What is it that fell apart?" Are we talking about a few people, are we talking about a nation that lost its conscience? Then that becomes an indictment against the nation and maybe that's where we ought to give some serious thought to what happens to a nation when it loses its conscience. Martin Luther King, Jr. was the conscience of our nation and we can begin to delineate things that happened when a nation loses its conscience. And how can a nation regain its conscience once having lost it? It lost it in 1877, perhaps didn't regain it until 1954, 1955. I hope it won't take that long again. Story_ID: 11075 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss I'd like to ask what will perhaps be our last question about the Civil Rights Movement and the legacy of the Movement, because I know based on some of the historical works that have been published recently that the Movement is at least being revised in the textbooks--, Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --As people begin to go back and sort of weigh certain things in the balance and ask themselves whether the sacrifices and the deaths were, were worth it all. And so, and especially now too--this is a long question because it's my last one--because so much information has come to light about the government's role in undermining the Movement, perhaps in watching Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and other leaders so closely through the counterintelligence programs, bringing certain things to light that perhaps Dr. King and others would have wished to keep in the dark. But exposing him as an imperfect individual even if we continue to believe that he was a, a very good individual, a strong leader and a very moral and loving individual. But how do you feel about the legacy of the Civil Rights Movement? Are you still persuaded, that in spite of perhaps the imperfections of some of the leaders, that still it was a movement that made a positive difference in our history? Speaker 2: The Movement has made such a positive difference in our nation and the world that any flaws, strategically or personally, only accentuate the value and the greatness of the Movement and its contributions. The nation was and is flawed and here you have a sinful Director of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] in the person of J. [John] Edgar Hoover trying to make absolute moral judgments about a prophetic movement. The Movement was so great that when he tampered with it, it left him exposed and the principles of the Movement were and are so powerful that when you get through discussing any trivial or even non-consequential, diversionary aspect of it you still have to raise the question, "But what was it that he gave his life for?" Didn't he die fighting for sanitation workers? Didn't he risk his life marching with fifty-thousand people of Montgomery [Alabama], nonviolently for three-hundred and eighty-one days when the crime rate when down in the African American community? And why is it that we can't stop quoting him even the folk who don't like him or did not like him? And why is it that even the most conservative President forced by the hand of history had to sign the holiday bill, and make one of the best speeches of his career, the late [U.S.] President Ronald Reagan? Story_ID: 11076 Speaker 1: I'd like to move forward in history from 1968 and again not just the year in which we have the assassination of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] but also [U.S.] President [Lyndon Baines] Johnson announcing that he will not seek re-election. And the ongoing escalation of the war in Southeast Asia, and then Watergate and so many other things that seem to be going wrong not just in America but also the global community. And, and yet you're still standing through all this. Others' heads are bloody, people are in that period of bereavement, there's anti-war protests, the student movement, and where are you standing in the early 1970s? Speaker 2: Two great experiences in the early 19--, really three. Our younger son is born in 1970, Otis Moss, III, who is pastor in Augusta [Georgia] now with a wonderful wife Monica and two children. For a brief period I went to Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] as co-pastor with Dr. Martin Luther King, Sr.--Daddy King, then came back to [Mount Zion Baptist Church] Cincinnati [Ohio], and from Cincinnati to [Olivet Institutional Baptist Church] Cleveland [Ohio] in 1975 and continued my participation with the King Center [Atlanta, Georgia] under the leadership of Mrs. Coretta Scott King. Story_ID: 11077 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss, you just started to tell us about your work with the King Center [Atlanta, Georgia] and your ongoing activities in the 1970s. So would you like to continue with that? Speaker 2: Yes. Simultaneously with my activities, work, board membership at the King Center I was also working with Operation Push [Chicago, Illinois] and served as--a little later on, as Chair of the Board of Operation Push--I was Vice Chair at that time. So the, the activist involvement at one level or another has continued and my ministry at Olivet [Institutional Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] was begun in 1975. And it has remained for now thirty years or I'm in my thirtieth year. Story_ID: 11078 Speaker 1: You and I have used so many acronyms in the last hour, I just wonder if you could please tell us what each one stands for. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Starting with SCLC. Speaker 2: SCLC of course, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. Speaker 1: And how about SNCC? Speaker 2: Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. I remember quite well Easter weekend when the late Rev. A.D. [Alfred Daniel Williams] King, myself and a few others went out to business people in Atlanta [Georgia] and solicited funds in order to send our student representatives to Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] to the participate in the founding meeting of SNCC, Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, a meeting that was hosted by Sister Ella Baker as executive director of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference with of course, the presence and support of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Speaker 1: And I think you also mentioned CORE. Speaker 2: Yes, my sister [Josie Moss] in Detroit [Michigan] was very active in CORE, the Congress of Racial Equality founded by Mr. James Farmer, really another prophet in the Movement. Speaker 1: Okay. And I think the last one you mentioned was PUSH, Operation Push? Speaker 2: Yes, People United to Save Humanity, and later People United to Serve Humanity, and later Rainbow/PUSH [Coalition, Inc.], combination of the Rainbow, the National Coalition and People United to Serve Humanity--, Speaker 1: Thank you very much. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --founded by Rev. Jesse Jackson. Story_ID: 11079 Speaker 1: In 1975 you make this wonderful decision to come to Cleveland, Ohio to serve as the Senior Pastor of the Olivet Institutional Baptist Church. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was it about Cleveland that, that led you to believe that your ministry here would bear a lot of fruit in the city? Speaker 2: I had no plans to come to Cleveland, was very, very happy with the church [Mount Zion Baptist Church] in Cincinnati [Ohio]. And I received an invitation to give the anniversary message in the fall of 1974. And in that experience something happened that said, "You must say yes or no to the possibility and the invitation of becoming the next pastor of this great church," whose former pastor I had known well and respected, highly respected. He was regarded and gifted around the nation and across the world and we had served together as board members of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and as board members of Operation Push. And it's interesting how, how that developed. And you, you could even say at the last minute my name was entered into the process and I was overwhelmingly extended the call to become pastor of the church. And as they say, "The rest is history." Speaker 1: And for the record would you please just tell us who the, the former pastor was, your colleague in the civil rights movement? Speaker 2: Yes, indeed, [Rev.] Dr. Odie M. Hoover [Jr.] who was the really legendary pastor of Olivet prior to my coming, a leader in the Cleveland in the community, a leader in religious circles across the nation, gifted evangelist, unusually gifted vocalist and powerful preacher. Story_ID: 11080 Speaker 1: People joke sometimes about at least half of the black population belonging to the Baptist Church in the United States and those numbers probably aren't too far from wrong. (laughs) But the--there are millions of people I understand in the Baptist Church but I also see that there's great diversity among the Baptists. We've got Primitive Baptists and the Missionary Baptists and the Institutional Baptists. Speaker 2: Well--. Speaker 1: And others. Speaker 2: --the "institutional" in our name [Olivet Institutional Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] is not a denominational identity. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We are Missionary Baptists but at one period in our history churches in, in, in the African American community--not an extremely large number but, but some of them took on the name "institutional" just as in a later era they would take on the name "community". The institutional was an expression of mission and purpose. It was a way of saying that we are not just a Sunday morning ministry. We are an institution in the community providing services and ministry throughout the week. Therefore, the name institutional was designed to denote that fact that we are an activist congregation. And that's what that, that, that title historically has meant. If, if we were going through that naming process today the, the word community would probably be the, the operative term or in, in what my son [Otis Moss, III] calls 'the Post-Modern Era,' "ministry" would probably be the operative word. So today you will hear the, the, the, let's say the Bethel Ministry without the word church or denomination attached to it at all, although the congregation might have a Baptist affiliation, or Methodist affiliation, or a Disciples affiliation, or UCC--United Church of Christ affiliation. Story_ID: 11081 Speaker 1: I do want to ask about your thirty years here at Olivet [Institutional Baptist Church]--, Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in Cleveland, Ohio. Do you think under your leadership the church has really been able to live up to that institutional portion of its name? Speaker 2: We've certainly sought to do just that. One example, one visible example you might say would be our medical center [Otis Moss, Jr./University Hospitals Medical Center] across the street where we sought to bring back to the immediate community--to the inner city community, primary health care delivery with private physicians with the mission to provide excellent medical care in a spiritually supported environment. If you go downstairs you will see our computer lab attempting to carry out another aspect of that or if you go upstairs and talk to my assistant, Rev. [Clem B.] Norman, you will find him working with the PIVOT Program--Preparation is Vital for Opportunity Tomorrow or you'll find him getting ready for the Freedom School this summer and the Martin Luther King, Jr. After School Program a little later on this year. These are aspects of our continuing effort to be a seven-day-a-week ministry and not just a Sunday morning worship experience--as important that it is, but it ought to lead into something and it ought to come out of something that has already happened and set the stage for something that's going to happen. Or if you look at our faith and vision program--Faith and Vision for the 21st Century--we are seeking to acquire at this very hour some fifty acres of land where we can do an expansion--not a relocation but an expansion so we can do ministry not in one place, but ministry in the region because there are ministry needs both in urban, in the urban setting where our roots are and in the suburban setting where some of our fruits are. So we see this location as our sacred roots and the fruits of course ought to be cast beyond the boundaries of the founding location and that's what we are seeking to do just to lift up a few of those aspects. Speaker 1: So those rumors about Olivet abandoning the inner city are not true? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Thank you. Because there's so much history here near the intersection of 89th [Street] and Quincy [Avenue] that Olivet has been such an important part of with Karamu [House, cultural arts center] sitting cattycorner in one direction, and as you said the medical facility on the other corner so it's good to know for the record that Olivet also plans to be a part of the future of this community as well. Story_ID: 11082 Speaker 1: Since we're just a few months now beyond the most recent Presidential election, I wonder if you would be willing to comment on what happened in 2004. A lot of people trying to explain why George W. Bush was re-elected and some people even suggesting that his partnerships with black churches through faith-based initiatives really resulted in black ministers delivering the black vote to the Republican Party, which I don't find the evidence to support. But in any case those charges are out there. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: How would you respond to something like that? Speaker 2: One, we should not be surprised that eventually the Republican Party once again would rediscover the Black Church, either because it read its nineteenth-century history or because the political strategists like Mr. Rove, Karl Rove could see this as the possibility of strengthening the party base and creating a little more diversity where there's a great deficit. And I might even add that there is nothing wrong with any party reaching out to any constituent group. The question I think is, "To what end does it reach out?" Does it reach out because it wants to revive the commitment of Frederick Douglass and Charles Sumner and Thaddeus Stevens? Does it want to have a revival of the spirit of the leadership called historically the 'Radical Republicans' who wrote the 13th and 14th and 15th amendments to the [U.S.] Constitution? Is that where the party now wishes to return or does it want to create a new century conservative movement that carries a religious dimension without a prophetic commitment? Is it looking for its conscience again or is it looking for a few additional registrants who might provide the marginal victory? Now I repeat, every political party or movement has a right to reach out and I think the participation of the black ministry in the last election might be highly exaggerated but should not be ignored. And I think it ought to be understood in terms of what, what the appeal was, why the appeal was, and is it an appeal that grows out of human rights, equity, justice, universal education, universal medical care, strengthening Head Start and providing a broader base for every American to go to college; to have to the best medical care available regardless of economic status, or is this the common ground or is it some other appeal or intention? And I think that both Democrats and Republicans from the African American perspective as I see it, ought to stay on the human rights agenda forever. And unless we do that, we do a disservice to ourselves and the party that reaches out for us. Story_ID: 11083 Speaker 1: I think one of the strengths of the [Civil Rights] Movement, and you'll correct me I know if I'm wrong, was that many of the leaders came out of the Black Church and the Black Church was independent, didn't have to answer to anyone in the Ku Klux Klan or in the federal government, and perhaps they were one and the same in some communities. But in any case, that independence, you know, gave us the Martin Luther King, Jrs. and--, Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --the Ralph Abernathys--, Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --and the Fred Shuttleworths--Shuttlesworth--, Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --and the Otis Moss, Jrs. And now in 2005, we're dealing with the faith-based initiatives and some people are saying because the Black Church now has this relationship with the federal government through those grants, our independence or the independence of the church as an institution in the black community--a viable institution is being threatened. Are you concerned about that? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, I am. And I'm concerned about it not merely with reference to the African American church, but especially with reference to the African American church, but I'm, but I'm concerned with reference to the whole of Christendom as it relates to the American scene. And here again I quote Dr. King that the church should not be the master of the state but the conscience of the state, and the state should not be the master of the church. The church should forever be independent of the state. The faith-based initiatives I think have some dangerous aspects along with the possibility of providing some limited resources. What, what are these dangers? Number one, the church has all--for, for fifty years has had the opportunity of developing housing programs, various kinds of, excuse me, various kinds of community improvement or development programs by going directly under 501(c)(3) entities to Labor, HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], [U.S. Department of] Health and Human Services, the [U.S.] Department of Education, the [U.S.] Department of Interior and developing programs utilizing the resources that these various departments offer. If you cut back those resources and pull out a few of those dollars and put them at a political desk whereby they are funneled through a White House mechanism, we take that which legitimately belongs to the citizens and use those resources as though the President of the United States is doing somebody a special favor. That is a misuse of legitimate resources. And, and the danger then becomes, whoever receives those resources becomes eternally indebted to whoever occupies the White House or the party in power at a given time. That is a--I think a dangerous reinterpretation or reallocation of resources. And anyone who receives any of those benefits must analyze carefully, "Where does this put the leadership and the institution with reference to prophetic ministry?" Does it silence the voice of the prophet or does it strengthen the force for good in the community or does it simply substitute charity for justice? And that is what we can never do. Justice cannot be delayed through acts of charity because then--well that's justice denied. Story_ID: 11084 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss, you said at the beginning of the interview that you were born in 1935, which means you turned seventy years old this year and looking good. And I'm wondering with all that you've accomplished through your ministry, Civil Rights Movement, international reputation certainly as a, a powerful speaker, have you allowed yourself time to also have a good private life? Is there time for family? Speaker 2: Indeed. My most cherished memories are still in the making and they all center around family. And I must give credit to Edwina [Hudson Smith Moss], my wife of almost four decades who works at this consistently and looking at building our annual schedule in such a way that we always have some quality family time. And our children and grandchildren cooperate with her scheduling very well. And, and it is, it is a thing that keeps you smiling within and, and the smiles are, are healing, affectionate. I cannot tell you how great every single moment is that we share together as a family. Just this very week our son, Otis [Moss], III has been--has done our annual revival and so it's been a week of family reunion. The, the revival was not scheduled in a selfish manner by, by no means because the church [Olivet Institutional Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] and the community responded to his presence in an amazing and remarkable way and we are exceedingly humble and grateful for his ministry. But here every time there is a moment of family sharing we see it as a great moment to be forever cherished, with my wife's family, with my sisters [Susie, Callie and Josie Moss] and brother [Mitchell Moss], it's, it's that way. Story_ID: 11085 Speaker 1: The nation and many people around the world know what a wonderful speaker you are because in part, due in part to the fact that 'Ebony' magazine named you one of the "Most Influential African American Ministers" in the country. And we knew that in Cleveland [Ohio] because we hear you speak all the time, but your son is a powerful preacher as well. So I'm just wondering (laughs) how are father and son handling this, all of this recognition with people expecting so much when they sit in your presence and, and always Otis Moss, Jr. and Otis Moss, III deliver so much in their messages? Is there friendly competition there? Speaker 2: No, there is, there's an, there's an affectionate kind of profound respect and admiration and a learning from each other. We give each other books, we share with each other ideas, we, we seek to--and we, we get, get advice from each other. And although we have not done it here, several times we have preached together in Augusta. Speaker 1: Now is that the community where his church is located? Speaker 2: Yes, Augusta, Georgia. Speaker 1: All right, and what is the name of that church please? Speaker 2: Tabernacle Baptist Church, the historic Tabernacle Baptist Church, Augusta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And I have to ask because he's back in Georgia, is he also a Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] man? Speaker 2: Yes, he is. Speaker 1: Did he have a choice in the matter? Speaker 2: Well he did--not much, but yes he did. But it was his decision. Now I must say that we sought to give him the information and exposure and he decided that this was the school of his choice and, and, and I think it was influential in getting a few other folk, some of his, a few of his peers to make the same decision. So during his four years at Morehouse there was, there was a gang, so to speak from, from that high school experience of peers who went to Morehouse and they, I must say they all did quite well. One is here in Cleveland in the prosecutor's office, another is in the drama 'Julius Caesar' with [actor] Denzel Washington. Another is doing special work in education on the West Coast and can't give a complete record of them but they're all doing quite well. Story_ID: 11086 Speaker 1: Again I mention your international reputation as a speaker and a minister and a leader in this nation, and you mentioned that when you see Desmond Tutu you see Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] marching next to him. But I can recall and I'm not even sure where I was but I was at some event out of town, I saw you marching next to Bishop Desmond Tutu in a processional that included many other ministers as well. And since you've achieved that kind of recognition in the international community I'm just wondering as you move toward your seventy-first birthday, if there are other goals that you'd like to reach in the near future? Speaker 2: If, if time is, is gracious and I am still blessed with remarkably good health as I have been, I would like--as we look to the sunset now, not in a morbid sense but in a sense of gratitude, I would like to write down a few memories, if not in the form of an autobiography at least some form of recollections of experiences--excuse me please--and perhaps a few of the sermons that have impacted a few people across the years, put in publishable form. I did the Yale [University] Lyman Beecher Lectures last year which is one of the, the great honors in the whole universe of preaching. In addition to distributing those on CD [compact disc], I would like to put them in book form and maybe some of the meditations and moments of prayer that, that have taken on special meaning in my pastoral ministry as, as a part of sharing. And then maybe, at some point sharing with the next generation some of the learnings and failings (laughs) of one who has sought to be prophetic--not in the sense of, of greatness but in, in the sense of relevance. I--the Lyman Beecher Lecture Series at Yale last year sought to deal with 'Preaching As Prophetic Ministry', the personal, the social, the global. And out of that context I think my ministry or I have sought to, to, to glorify God through that kind of ministry context and I would like to share it in some ways with a new generation of men and women in ministry who will do so much in this century to redeem our land and push forward an agenda of salvation, liberation and reconciliation. Story_ID: 11087 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss I'd also like to ask as Olivet [Institutional Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] approaches her seventy-fifth anniversary in 2006, what are your hopes for Olivet in the future? Speaker 2: We have sought to define that through our faith and vision program and really lift up what the church can and ought to be in the 21st century. How can we be inter-generational, how can we practice love as perfected before us and for us in Jesus Christ in such a way that youth, adults, singles and elders, children at an early age will all want to share in that and make it a part of their daily lives, whether they are engaging in a Bible class or a basketball game, whether they are participating in the computer lab or in a praise service, they are all relevant. How can I be a better parent? How can I practice the unconditional love of Jesus Christ as a business person? How, how can we make educational excellence the goal of every household, and what are the after-school and summer activities we can provide that will make learning an all year-round adventure and African American history an everyday experience? How can we overcome mis-education and give to families and individuals a special kind of education undergirded with love? How can we celebrate and perpetuate the absolute necessity of a strong and effective public education system without which there is no possibility of a continuing democratic society? And while some might have their private religious academies and they have their value, we must never make that a trade-off for a great public school system. And those who are able to give their children or send their children to private schools should not do so at the desertion of the public education system. I think the church community must stay on the case here. So when we do something in our after-school programs we do not do it by demeaning the public education system, we do it in ways that we want to enhance what the student is doing--where they are now and, and at the same time constantly support the need for greater resources for our public school systems. Story_ID: 11088 Speaker 1: Reverend Moss we're here today because you are a HistoryMaker, and part of the backdrop for today's interview in addition to your library is a statue of a bird, the Sankofa bird, a bird that faces forward and yet looks back and it's just over your right shoulder. People have been wondering what that's all about. And I just want to ask for students of history who might take a look at this videotape, history of a HistoryMaker, what do you hope that they will learn from looking back over your life? Speaker 2: That we should never disregard or disconnect ourselves or disrespect what has gone before us. For to do so is to disregard, disrespect and disconnect ourselves from our ancestors, including our own mothers and fathers. At the same time we must do that while using all of our God-giving--given energy to move a few inches forward. And you will notice the bird has an egg which is a representation of the future and I often say, "Faith is hearing the bird sing before the egg is hatched. It is seeing the flower bloom before the seed is planted. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." Every generation must recommit itself to being connected in a respectful and learning way with its past and being committed to making some improvements in the present and laying a foundation for the future. Story_ID: 11089 Speaker 1: I do need to ask is there anything else that you would like to add at this point before we turn our attention to your photographs? Speaker 2: Well, I would say that family, faith, freedom and future ought to always be forces that impact our lives daily. Our faith must be our foundation. Our family must be at the core of our concerns always. Our freedom must be something that we are willing to fight for with renewed determination everyday. And the future must be something we are committed to. And if we, if we do this I think in our own time and in our own space by God's grace we can make a difference. And I think every individual has that possibility in his or her own time and in his or her own space by the grace of God can make a difference...