 Story_ID: 671250 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is William R. Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N. Over the years people have--as a kid they started calling me [HistoryMaker] Billy Martin and even as a lawyer I go by the name of Billy. So it's William R. Martin, but I really go by the name of Billy. Speaker 1: Okay now is there a story attached to that to, to the Billy Martin 'cause does it have anything to do with the famous baseball player? Speaker 2: It absolutely does. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Actually my, my mother's [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin] brother was Billy, and my mom was very close to her younger brother Billy. When my mom was set to deliver, my Uncle Billy happened to be with her. He rushed her to the hospital, stayed with her through my delivery, and they're very close and as a kind of tribute to her baby brother, she named me after her baby brother. And he was William and went by Billy, so I went by Billy, so over the years, as a kid I was called Billy. I played baseball, loved the game of baseball and became a Pittsburgh Pirate[s], big fan and over the years started watching a lot of baseball. And I would watch the [New York] Yankees and Billy Martin, and with a--I knew a celebrity by the name of Billy Martin, so I thought it's okay with that name. And when I became a lawyer, and people started calling me William or Bill, I always thought Billy was unique, and it was easier to remember because of the Yankees and Billy Martin. We get in, I'm sure down the road into my, my career, but I was assigned as an attorney with the Organized Crime [Strike Force], the Mafia strike force in San Francisco [California]. And I was assigned there same time that Billy Martin was the manager of the Oakland A's [Oakland Athletics], so I would you know it was a big name Billy Martin and Billy Ball. So I kind of picked up Billy Ball and Billy Martin, and that's my legal name, that that's my name that I use in, in my legal work is Billy. People don't forget Billy Martin. Speaker 1: The people in your family call, call you Billy or William? Speaker 2: They call me Billy. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: All my personal, all my friends and family call me Billy. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is October 29, 1949; I was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Husband, father, I'm a lawyer you know my profession. Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what is, I'm sorry. Oh, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is September the 20, I'm sorry, June the 25th, I believe, June 25, 2010. Speaker 1: And where are we, at the present time? Speaker 2: We're conducting this interview inside my law firm at Howrey LLP in Washington, D.C.; our address is 1299 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 671251 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require short answers. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I do have a favorite, food; yes (laughter) short answer is, yes. I have a favorite food. Speaker 1: What is it? Speaker 2: My favorite food is, is kind of boring, it's just a chicken Caesar salad. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Okay, you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring and summer, I hate the cold. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a vacation destination? Speaker 2: I do, the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite saying as a lawyer and as a dad and as a husband, a person, when people present me with facts and ask me what do we do with this and how do we fix it? My saying is, it is what it is. Speaker 1: Okay. It is what it is. Speaker 2: And yet people would accept that as a reality, it is what it is, and you go from there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Can't change it, it is what it is. Story_ID: 671252 Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm gone ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Felton Martin, Sr.] side. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Harriett, H-A-R-R-I-E-T-T, Isabelle, I-S-A-B-E-L-L-E, Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Jones. Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth is February the 25, 1919. Speaker 1: Okay, and where? Speaker 2: She was born, I believe in Sewickley, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace them and what they doing back then? Speaker 2: My mother's, more so than my father's side because my mother's side moved to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] with us, so I was able to meet my, my grandmother [Florence Jones], my great-grandmother and knew my great-grandmother. And through her and through family reunions on my mother's side know that we can trace my family back to the Lynchburg, Virginia area. Speaker 1: And do you know about what time when they came to Pittsburgh, I mean to Sewickley? Speaker 2: It would be the early 1900s. Speaker 1: Okay. What, what were they doing in Virginia, were they working the in a farm situation or---? Speaker 2: They work, they were working, they were farmers. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: They owned a lot of land in the Virginia area. Like most African Americans we can trace our family to back to the days of slavery and my fa--mom's side came from some large farms in Virginia around the Lynchburg area. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about those days that they tell about the end of slavery or what slavery was like in the part of the country? Speaker 2: They've--I, no. I don't know, no they've not told those stories to me, and unfortunately the ones who would now know those stories I think have all passed on. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so none, no stories at all. Okay, but they came up around the turn of the century you said? Speaker 2: About the turn of the century. Speaker 1: To a, the Pittsburgh area, and so, so what did the people on your side of the family do when they got to Pittsburgh? Speaker 2: On my mother's side, I think, they were doing, they were domestics. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They, they migrated or moved into this area outside of Pittsburgh called Sewickley, Pennsylvania and it's S-E-W-I-C-K-L-E-Y, Pennsylvania. Sewickley, Pennsylvania is known as an extremely wealthy suburb, it is the home of the Carnegies and the Mellons, the oil and the railroad barons who built Pittsburgh. All had their mansions and the estates out in the Sewickley area. The H.J. Heinz Company [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], the Heinz family still has their estates as do the Mellons, the Carnegies outside of Pittsburgh. My mom's family did domestic work for some of those families. Speaker 1: Okay. It's like the Main Line of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Like the Main Line of Philadelphia. Speaker 1: I hear you. So, all right so this is, this is a good place, to, to do domestic work? Speaker 2: It was a great place to do domestic work and I now will meet a lot of people who ask me where I'm from. If they knew the area, they say, "Oh, you're one of those rich folks from Sewickley." And I'll say, "No, I was one of the families who took care of those rich folks." Story_ID: 671253 Speaker 1: So I take it your grandmother [Florence Jones] was first generation [in Sewickley, Pennsylvania] on your mother's [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin] side or? Speaker 2: My great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Great-grandmother, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Goes that far, okay. What, what was your great-grandmother's name? Speaker 2: We called her Grandma Sally [ph.]. Speaker 1: Did you know her? Speaker 2: I did know her. Speaker 1: Okay. She had to be born in the latter, well mid-19th century I guess or? Speaker 2: Yes, mid. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I actually would have that information, I don't know it right off, but we've, we do our family reunion, she is the matriarch of our family. So we kind of trace our family through her parents and her moving to you know the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Grandma Sally was the matriarch of our family. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did she work for one of these the Mellons or the Carnegies or--? Speaker 2: I don't think that she did, I think that she settled her family down and her children and, and her children and grandchildren started doing that work. Speaker 1: Okay. And what's your grandmother's name or any other relatives that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My grandmother is Florence. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Florence Jones, it was Florence Franklin, she's Grandma Sally's daughter. She married a David Jones, David Brent Jones. Speaker 1: Now they--did was your grandfather also employed out there? Speaker 2: My grandfather was kind of an entrepreneur, was a builder, he built his home, built homes for others, but he did the same type of work. He would work on the estates, but he was a builder in addition to that. Speaker 1: Okay, so contractor, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now so, any stories from your grandparents about what life was like out there and--I know there's often stories when people work around the rich and famous or the powerful and stuff. There's always an interaction that's-- Speaker 2: The only stories that I would always get is that they would always or always telling me that everything is possible. These people didn't start wealthy, they acquired their wealth, see these estates, anything's possible. If you want it, go get it from my grandmother on, she was always telling me that you know you can have one of these houses. You got to educate yourself, you gotta work hard, there's no reason you can't have one of these houses. So from an early age, it was instilled in me that if I want it, I got to prepare myself to go get it. And they nurtured me along and kept pushing me, keeping me out of trouble, keeping me you know in church. Keeping me on the straight and narrow and saying, if you want it, go get it, so I had learned that from age eight or nine from my grandparents, my grandmother, go get it. Speaker 1: Do you think it was because of their interaction with these rich and powerful people that they knew that they were you know it was, it was more, that they were closer to their size than most people think people are? You know when they don't, they never interact with them. Speaker 2: They, they, absolutely. And they saw that you know that they put their pants on the same way that we put our pants on. But they had education and they thought you know if you want it--literally. My grandmother would always say, "Go get it, if you want it, go get it." So I had--I tell my kids that, I'll tell my grandkids that, if you want it, go get it. Story_ID: 671254 Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin] have--how, how far did she go in school? Speaker 2: High school grad- high school graduate, she married very early, right out of high school, and she had eight children. Some of them like clockwork almost every three years, she'd have another child. Speaker 1: Now were these (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: There were eight of us. Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about growing up in Sewickley [Pennsylvania], was there, was there a black--a name for the black community in Sewickley? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's its kind--and there is no certain section for the black community, there's a section for the wealthy families, but the blacks and whites who are not extremely wealthy kind of all live throughout the city, throughout the town. It's a small town, about five thousand people. Speaker 1: Okay, so no black section of town did, did where people work have to do with who they worked for, the proximity or? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or anything, okay. Speaker 2: No. It was just on where, where you could live. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you, when your mother came along were there segregated schools that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On a--when I say it was segregated schools, there were no segregated per, schools, per se in Sewickley because there's only one school. So when she went to high school, I guess she would've been, it would've been in late '30s [1930s] you know they went to classes with whites. Speaker 1: Okay so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So while there were segregated schools in the U.S., there were not segregated schools in Sewickley, they didn't have them, they only had one school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Black folks had taken what had been the minority, overwhelming minority. Speaker 2: Overwhelming minority. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Overwhelming minority. I think the first teacher in the school district, I, I believe that when I was in high school [Quaker Valley High School, Leetsdale, Pennsylvania] we got the first black teacher in that school, in the high school. Story_ID: 671255 Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Felton L. Martin, Sr. [Felton Martin, Sr.]. Speaker 1: All right, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth, I believe it's August the 13th, I think it's 1916. Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I believe his place of birth is Pelham, P-E-L-H-A-M, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your father's ancestors? Speaker 2: Not a lot unfortunately when my dad, my dad's family remained for the most part in Pelham, and my dad moved up. Speaker 1: Okay, so he--was he the only representative of his family in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] area? Speaker 2: Others, yes, yes. I think others came later, but he was the only one for years, that we knew. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did he say what his people were doing in Georgia? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: How they made a living or? Speaker 2: (Shaking head no). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean they lived--Pelham is a small town and they worked at the, at the shops, I, I have found Dolly [ph.], I do know my grandmother [Frances Martin], she's passed on now. But I, I've met my dad's family and have started many years ago going down to Pelham and meeting with some of the relatives I did not know. And they were shopkeepers and, and workers and they too did some farm work and, and domestic work on the farms. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I call them farms, they're plantations. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did, did your father have any stories about growing up down there that he shared? Speaker 2: The only thing that my dad was saying is that he could not wait to get the hell out of the South. I just remember him saying he did not like how the treatment that he as a young black man received, and wanted to get out of there. Speaker 1: Now did he go to school in Georgia? Speaker 2: He went to high school--he went to school in Georgia, yes. Story_ID: 671256 Speaker 1: Okay, so we're talking about your father [Felton Martin, Sr.] in Pelham, Georgia. So he went to high school there in Pelham? Speaker 2: He went to school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think he may have left while in high school and moved to a town called Aliquippa, A-L-I-Q-U-I-P-P-A, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Now this to me has--you can tell me if I'm wrong here, sounds like a railroad story, sound like a railroad story. I know I heard people like in those days during the [Great] Depression he would've come up you know in the heart of it. You know if he was about fifteen then, been about 1930 or sixteen, 1931, you know, in the heart of the, the hard hit Depression and people were getting on these trains and just riding. They couldn't wait to get out, just get on one and go. So I don't know if that's his story but. Speaker 2: If it is, he, he's never, he never shared that with me, but I know that as a, as a teenager he thought there were better times up here and wanted to get out of Pelham. And I don't know, he never shared that, I wish he, I wish we had that conversation, I wish I'd known to ask that question, but he never shared you know how or why. You know we always started with you know when I moved up here, and the, the lawyer in me now would go back and ask you know why'd you leave? Speaker 1: Yeah and how did you get here? Speaker 2: And how'd you get here? But I did not ask those questions back then. Speaker 1: Yeah I bet some, some railroad story there. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Jumping on the train or something you know. Speaker 2: And you know 'cause he--the railroad runs right through the Ohio Penn [Ohio and Pennsylvania Railroad], what is it, the Pennsylvania Railroad runs right through there. Speaker 1: Yeah I think it might be a story there, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right along, 'cause based on the Ohio River. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Sewickley [Pennsylvania] and Aliquippa were all on the Ohio River, so the railroad runs right down there you know down the Mississippi [River] and further south. Speaker 1: So, well, so he went to high school but not necessarily, he didn't necessarily, he didn't graduate down there? Speaker 2: I'm not sure he did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He then, because I believe he came to Aliquippa and finished and graduated at Aliquippa High School [Aliquippa Jr./Sr. High School, Aliquippa, Pennsylvania], I'm pretty sure, he graduated Aliquippa High School. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did your dad do for a living? Speaker 2: If you know anything about the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] area it was during the you know '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s] up until the steel crisis, you know Pittsburgh was the, was steel town. And Aliquippa was the home of one of the major steel plants, Jones & Laughlin [Corporation, Aliquippa, Pennsylvania], J&L Steel had its big forging plant in Aliquippa. My dad went to work at J&L as a teenager, young man and stayed there until he retired at sixty-five to sixty-six. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he had all those years as a, as a steel worker. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so you're sure that no stor- he didn't really share any stories about Pelham, or why he wanted to get out of there? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: None of that. Story_ID: 671257 Speaker 1: Let me ask this. Is there a story that your parents [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin and Felton Martin, Sr.] told about how they met? Speaker 2: Sure, my--you know, that's one of the things kids are always asking, how did you guys meet? And my mom was in Sewickley [Pennsylvania], my dad was in Aliquippa [Pennsylvania], they are probably twenty, twenty-five miles apart and my dad would say that Sewickley had all these pretty girls. And they would--the guys from Aliquippa would come up to social events and try to meet the pretty girls. And my mom was a very pretty young lady and my dad came up for a social event, they met, they started tal- liked each other, started talking and were married within a couple of years. Story_ID: 671258 Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin and Felton Martin, Sr.] personalities-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: You know, it's not a lawyer answer, but I have a lot of both of them in me. My dad is a no-nonsense hardworking rough and tumble millworker. In order to put myself through college, my dad helped me get jobs at the steel mills. So you know during the summers between college and during breaks, during Christmas, we had thirty days sometimes off, he helped me get jobs at the steel mill. And I put my steel toed shoes on and you know get into the mill and I had a chance to you know watch my dad. And so I think I have a lot of my work ethic is my dad. My dad, was, is a fisherman he loved to fish. My dad would be up at five thirty, six o'clock every morning, out the door at six thirty, quarter to seven, he punched a clock. And I think he had, I think the clock was at seven AM, so my dad's up at five, out the door at six and you know punching that clock. And he was never late, no excuses, and you gotta go to work, so I learned early on you know, gotta go to work. So I, I think I take that from my dad. And my mom was very polished, my mom was one who was into--you know she was a seamstress; she made clothing for the kids. So she always was very well dressed and help me to become very dapper in my dress. And very you know well mannered, in terms of you know were--which salad fork and how do you, you know she sometimes would take me to, if she was at, doing a catering event at one of these homes, I would sometimes go with her, just to--if she was going and I didn't want my mom to be alone. I'm, I would go with her, and I would learn you know how to set a table, I would learn how to properly make a bed. So you know it was kind of like you know these are--this is the way a beautiful home should look. So when you look at some of these magazines, I would say you know okay, I can do that. And so a lot of my etiquette I learned by watching her serve and handle some of these you know pretty elaborate dinner parties at, at these mansions. Fast forward, many years later, one of my older daughters, I, I have four children, and the--I have two older children, a thirty-seven year old [Nikki Williams] and thirty-two year old [Erica Richards]. And then I have six year old twins [Amina H. Martin and William R. Martin, Jr.]. But the thirty-two year old went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and part of the, the education that Spelman gives the young black ladies is they have you know etiquette. You know how do you handle these type dinner parties, how do you set a table, how do you, which fork do you use? And I learned a lot of that just by going to some of these big functions at these houses. So I think I'm a lot like my mom, my mom was pretty you know. My dad was you know kind of a tough guy, you know, after work, he'd have a shot and a beer, he'd stop at what they call back then a beer garden. He'd hang out with the guys at, from the, from the mill at the beer garden. I remember going to see you know my dad you know at one of the beer gardens and my mom doesn't drink, never drank. So you know it was kind of--he's kind of rough and tumble and my mom is, is complete opposite, so you know I kind of got the, could see the difference in both worlds. And which is one reason why I don't like to hang out in bars now; I've seen so many fights over the years, that they're trouble. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 671259 Speaker 1: Do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have six sisters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And one brother. Speaker 1: So yeah, it's eight children, right altogether, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's just one brother. Can you, you wanna name them and, and give us where you fit in the order? Speaker 2: Sure. My oldest sister is Adelaide [Quinn], Adelaide lives in the Detroit [Michigan] area, she's retired, she's retired from a bank she worked for many years as senior clerk at, at a bank. My brother is Felton [Martin] Jr., Felton still lives in Sewickley [Pennsylvania], he's an artist, he was a steel worker. Unfortunately when he was working at the mill, a load of steel collapsed, fell on his leg and crushed his lower legs, so he's been handicapped since then. He took disability from the mill, but fortunately he was gifted as an artist, so he does paintings and portraits in the Sewickley area. My next sister would be Patricia [Martin-Estes], and of all the siblings, I'm probably the closest to Patricia. Pat left Sewickley following high school, moved to New York, became a corrections officer and ultimately retired as a deputy warden at Rikers Island. So when I got into law enforcement, I, I was a local prosecutor in Cincinnati [Ohio] and a federal prosecutor. There were days as a federal prosecutor, my work would take me to Manhattan [New York, New York] and it was always fun to go out to Rike- to flash my badge and my credentials to go out to Rikers with badge and my credentials and meet the deputy warden, my sister, and have lunch. So Pat would be the third one and after Pat is my sister Frances [Martin], Frances still lives in the Sewickley area, she's a homemaker. Isabelle [Martin] is next, we have a nickname for her, they call her "Blondie." And we call her Blondie because my parents [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin and Felton Martin, Sr.] are both African American, but she has blonde hair, so they nicknamed her Blondie. And she recently retired as a clerk with the postal authorities after I think forty years there in the Sewickley post office. My next sister would be Nina [Martin], she's a homemaker, and still lives the in the Sewickley area, I think Nina is, is probably fifty-six to fifty-seven years old. And my youngest sister is Sandra [Martin], and Sandra is a clerical slash clerk in a, in a-she, she worked for years. She should have and could have retired as a reservationist with US Air [US Airways; American Airlines], but with the economy hit a few years ago, she got laid off. So she's suffering as, as are a lot of people in that area from the economy. Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] like Ohio, is suffering from the loss of a lot of jobs, so she is restructuring and, and doing different work now. But that's my family, and we're a very close family, and the one thing that I think that, you know, we learned, there's a lot of love, you know, from our parents and towards each other. So as eight children we're very close. Story_ID: 671260 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest memory of growing up [in Sewickley, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Oh I have a lot of memories of growing up. Speaker 1: Do you have a first memory, the first thing that you remember? Speaker 2: First thing I remember, I think I would've been three to five years old, and I remember just wanting to follow my brother [Felton Martin, Jr.]. I remember him going out on bike rides, I remember I couldn't ride a bike, but I wanted to sit back then used to sit on the handlebar or on the crossbar, hold onto the handlebars, while my brother peddled. And I remember you know coming out of the house and crying and demanding that I be able to go with him and his friends on these bike rides. So yeah, I got ear- I, I remember that to this day, tell him when he asks me for something, I'll say you wouldn't let me go on that bike ride you know (laughter). So there are times I remember that, I remember my mom [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin] coming home with my two younger sisters, I remember my, my mom being in the hospital. And you know my dad [Felton Martin, Sr.] and my, my siblings telling me that she's having a baby, and I remember when she came home with my two siblings. So that would've been in 1952, '53 [1953], so I can, I can remember, would've been my youngest one [Sandra Martin], which would've been like 1956, so I think I was seven. So I can remember that. Story_ID: 671261 Speaker 1: Can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in [in Sewickley, Pennsylvania] for us? Speaker 2: It was like Mayberry, it was a small quiet street, across the street was a small store, you know a family owned store. If you wanted you know food or candy or sodas or you know magazines, like a bodega in, in the city, and we had one in, in the neighborhood and it was in, in across from us. Up the street was a, a creek you know you go up there and catch small fish, you could play in the creek, so I learned to play in that creek. There were woods, lot of woods, so you know we learned to hike and, and play in the woods. From the very beginning I was always very gifted as a, as an athlete, I was very fast, and I can remember just racing, always racing up and down the street. You know just, you know you wanna race, so you know go the races then you didn't have a track so you didn't have a hundred meters or hundred, wasn't hundred meters, hundred yards back then. So it was two light poles, light poles, fifty yards, so you know you go two of them you gotta a hundred yards in there. So I remember racing and telephone pole to telephone pole through high school [Quaker Valley High School, Leetsdale, Pennsylvania]. Yeah I can remember it was a nice neighborhood, it was when you know people say it takes a neighborhood, takes a village to raise a, a kid, I knew all my neighbors. I probably knew every neighbor for twenty houses on each side of me. Speaker 1: So this is a--you saying this is an integrated neighborhood basically? Speaker 2: Integrated neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Well what other kind of people lived (unclear)? Speaker 2: My next door neighbors were Italian, beside them were Polish people, we didn't have any back then, any Hispanics, no Jewish people, but there were a lot of Italians, lot of Irish and lot of Poles, a lot of Polish people. Speaker 1: Okay, so I take it a lot of Catholic churches around. Speaker 2: Lot of Catholic churches, lot--if you didn't go to the public school, you went to the Catholic school. There were a lot of Catholic churches, and a lot of Catholics, absolutely. Story_ID: 671262 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Sewickley, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Some of the--we had a black community center, and the community center was you know when--down throughout the years, I, I learned the term environmental justice. And environmental justice, you know, I came to learn means that when you're, you're placing these elect, utility poles or the just the, the electricity from a lot of these placement of these utility lines all go through minority black neighborhoods. We had a community center that was located in the heart of town, small center (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What was the name of it, did it have a--? Speaker 2: Sewickley Community Center [Sewickley, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay, that was, you said it was a black community center? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was a white YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and for years, blacks were not allowed to join that YMCA. Speaker 1: So even though the neighborhood was integrated, black people went to the black community center? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. When I now, now though the Y is integrated, but when my older siblings were coming up, they, they were not allowed to join the YMCA. So we, they formed this community center and the community center was located in the heart of, of town. And when we started growing, and wanted to expand, they found a beautiful piece of property in a wooded area in another part of Sewickley [Pennsylvania]. Built a beautiful community center down there, beautiful baseball field, basketball courts, outside courts, inside courts and, a, a beautiful structure. As a community center that, the function for primarily the black families. Well fast forward while we were there, shortly after relocating the black community center there they put a sewage treatment plant right beside it, which is still there. So you know it's kind of like you know back then I wondered you know how could, how could they do that? Of all the places to put this place, why would you put it next to kids who were playing in a community center? So I always, always--. Speaker 1: Well needless to say, I'm gonna ask this question anyway it kind of messed things up, I mean did it stink or? Speaker 2: Stunk, so you talk about the stats and you put me in the sights and sounds and smells, that was one of the things we always imagined our great community center that the black kids and the families loved. Start stinking all the time because this treatment, sewage treatment facility. Speaker 1: So, so you're thinking that is because of the power relationship that black people had with the city that or the lack of power? Speaker 2: Lack of power. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And I, but I, I, think at Sewickley and over the years that's where the term environmental justice came from. We're gonna do this throughout other neighborhoods and not just in the poor neighborhoods. Speaker 1: Almost sounds like a test case from a community organizing class. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That is classic and so. Speaker 2: So you know they those are some of the, you know, the sounds were I, I can you're you know like kids you know playing in and the happiness. My memories as a kid were happy, my memories as a kid were that you know, life was good, that there's this more that I want, and I want to do, but it was happy growing up. Speaker 1: Okay now how old were you when that community center was built, the new community center was built? Speaker 2: I'd say I was ten or twelve. Story_ID: 671263 Speaker 1: Tell us about school now, where did you start school, what was the name of your first school? Speaker 2: Sewickley Elementary [School, Sewickley, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. So does that mean really there's like one elementary school in town? Speaker 2: One elementary. Speaker 1: One public school, all right? Speaker 2: Yes, back then it's a school, it's a Quaker Valley is what they call it, the Quaker Valley School District. But the Quaker Valley School District would have small towns; it would have a town called Osborne [Pennsylvania], a town called Edgeworth [Pennsylvania], a town called Leetsdale [Pennsylvania]. And each one of them would have an element, their own elementary school and after elementary school, the kids were all funneled into the Quaker [Valley] Junior High School [Quaker Valley Middle School, Sewickley, Pennsylvania]. Then after there, you went to the Quaker Valley Senior High School [Quaker Valley High School, Leetsdale, Pennsylvania], so living in Sewickley [Pennsylvania], I went to the Sewickley Elementary School which fed into the Quaker Valley Junior High School. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now, what--did you like school? Speaker 2: I loved school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I loved elementary school, I had some great teachers I was inspired by a couple of great teachers. Speaker 1: Who, who were they? Speaker 2: The first teacher I had would be kind of almost like-it was at the community center [Sewickley Community Center, Sewickley, Pennsylvania], almost like a preschool. Her name was Mrs. Harp [ph.], Miss Harp. I mean she was somebody who you know was real, real strict and wanted punctuality, when reading with her, I remember her telling us that you know you gotta learn, you know you gotta read. You gotta--if you wanna, wanna do anything, you gotta read. So she would read to us at the community center. I--my favorite teacher and I forget her name right now, was my third grade teacher at Sewickley Elementary School. And I'm gonna have to think about her, her name for a minute now. It'll come back to me, and for some reason, she took a real interest in me, and I remember her just saying that you know, I think you've got it. And I remember her taking a lot of time to, to work with me and to you know kind of encourage me, and she really did encourage me. And I remember you know kind of being motivated and, and excited and thinking that okay, I gotta keep this together. And that and my grandmother [Florence Jones] always telling me you know keep it together, but this teacher, her name was Janet [ph.] and I will never forget her, can't think of her, her last name. But I'm sure will before we finish, and she really was, was encouraging to me. Speaker 1: In the third grade. Speaker 2: Third grade. Speaker 1: I've, I've read now, I don't know when this occurred but in your school career, but I read that in elementary school you dreamt of having a Masters of Business Administration [M.B.A.]. Is this, is this an exaggeration I read or is that true? Speaker 2: Like you know, I, I think that I used to have the, the dreams of being---I used to talk to my younger sister Nina [Martin] a lot about dreams of me, seeing me with a, a suit and tie, and working in corporate America with a degree, absolutely. I've always seen myself that way, there was no doubt, there was never any doubt, if, if you ask people who'd know me. My friends that know me growing up, they would tell you in a heartbeat there was no doubt that he said, here's what I'm gonna do, I know what I have to do and I'm gonna do it. And as we get into this, you'll see that you know along the way, I worked a lot you know with eight kids and a dad [Felton Martin, Sr.] on the steel worker's salary, we all had extra jobs. And while even though I was an exceptional athlete, I had a full-time job, forty hours through high school. Which you know affected some of your grades and affected your sports participation so I had to figure out a way to do all of it. Story_ID: 671264 Speaker 1: Growing up, were you aware of the--a lot of people are not--you know that's why I ask the question you know. 'Cause no matter where we grow up, a lot of people are not aware of the significance where they are. Were you aware when you were growing up at that, that time of the rich people that lived there [Sewickley, Pennsylvania] and founded that community and you know the Carnegies and the Mellons, and who, who these people were? Speaker 2: I was aware of them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You're, you're taught that and as you go into history you know it's kind of difficult when you know, the Mellon Bank [BNY Mellon], you know and, and our field trips would be to the Carnegie Museum [Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. And you go to the museum and you'd say that it was found, founded by Andrew Carnegie, Andrew Carnegie and his family resides in Sewickley [Pennsylvania] so, absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Around the country the history books that we get in grade school always had pictures of Andrew Carnegie and Andrew Mellon and people like you know. Speaker 2: So you were very aware of that and was you know kind of cool to know that these people were from this small town. But you know the town's pretty divided racially, even though it was quote, integrated, there was not a lot of, of mixing, you know the blacks kept, we kept to ourselves and the whites kept to themselves. Although there was no per se rule that you, we had to do this, you know at lunchtime and I can remember as, as early as junior high school [Quaker Valley Junior High School; Quaker Valley Middle School, Sewickley, Pennsylvania], at lunchtime we all, black kids, all sat at one or two tables. So it was always an unspoken and unwritten rule that while we may go to class together, we may play sports together, we didn't party together. We didn't hang out together, and we didn't even eat together. Story_ID: 671265 Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Church was a big part of my growing up, a black Baptist church. Speaker 1: What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: Triumph Baptist Church [Sewickley, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay, and okay. How many black churches were in town, was there a Methodist church too or-- Speaker 2: There was an African Methodist [Episcopal (A.M.E.)] church and there was a third church, I wanna, think it was a Second Baptist Church [ph.], so there were three black churches in this small town. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have any particular role to play at church that they, I mean 'cause a lot times youth who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --are promising are nurtured along in church. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was taken in by you know Sunday school teachers; I went to Sunday school every Sunday. If I, if I didn't go, I had to have a good reason; you know why I wasn't getting up, by both my mom [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin] and my dad [Felton Martin, Sr.]. You know it's you know Sunday school starts at ten [o'clock] why, you know, how you gone get there in fifteen minutes? You better run you know so I went to Sunday school almost every day from the age of five until I left for college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. I would then stay for church, so I spent a lot of time in church growing up, and church did look out for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were very helpful, very, very, very helpful. Story_ID: 671266 Speaker 1: Who were the, I guess, the black leaders in town? Were there role models for you in the black community growing up? Speaker 2: The role model that I had in the black community was a man by the name of Stanley Rideout. Stanley Rideout lived in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], but he was the then director of the Sewickley Community Center [Sewickley, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: That's Rideout? Speaker 2: Rideout, R-E-I-D-E-O-U-T [sic.]. Stanley Rideout was I believe a probation officer, worked with the juvenile court facilities in, in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. And you know and part-time job of managing and running the community center, so I kind of thought you know wow, I, I--Mr. Rideout is, is a good role model for me. I like the way he carries himself you know always had a nice car, had a lovely wife, had a beautiful family. And was somebody who seemed to be about his business, so Mr. Rideout was somebody who was early on a, a mentor for me. Speaker 1: Okay, okay that's, I was wondering what the, who the mentors were in that, was your pastor [at Triumph Baptist Church, Sewickley, Pennsylvania] like a mentor? Speaker 2: Pastors was all--but he you know I didn't want to be, then I didn't think I want to be a minister, so he, his role you know clearly in terms of, of how he carried himself, I, I you know was very, he was very god-like in terms of you know his reverence and respect for, for the Lord. But you know I didn't see him outside the church having a role, a significant role in the community, and I, so my Mr. Rideout did. He went from you know Pittsburgh to the courts to the community center to the community and I always saw I could be more like that. And not just somebody who is is at the pulpit in a position of leadership. Speaker 1: Now did--would you say that you got, when you look back on church and everything, would, would you think that, would you say that you got your, your moral foundation from the family moral or from the church or a combination of them or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: From both. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Both, from the church I mean you really--once you, you know and I had my, my very, very best friend is a man by the name of Harry Banks [ph.], and who was very religious. So he and I you know would read the Bible, study the Bible you know you really know the difference between right and wrong. And you know at, at its core, you know kids could say I was kind of boring at the time, but I was always kind of you know, I was cool. And you know I'd hang out, but I had a pretty strong moral fiber that you know right was right and wrong was wrong. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 671267 Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier you played baseball, and you're a good athlete, could run and everything. So what role did sports play growing up? Speaker 2: Sports played a big role in my life, and it's, it's interesting, and I, I don't tell the story often, but I spur and very, very, fast. Fastest sprinter in, in my neighborhood and would always qualify and get to the quarter, semifinals for state champ, track meets. And I thought well I did not win those so you know if I can say that you know there are only two people or the people in the entire state of Pennsylvania, or western Pennsylvania that can outrun me, and that's pretty quick. So I, I was pretty quick, and nobody in my small town could outrun me. I can throw a baseball you know from the outfield to the catcher, so I had a, a very good arm. And I played quarterback through junior high school [Quaker Valley Junior High School, Sewickley, Pennsylvania], and had a very bad experience with a white coach in junior high school as quarterback. And I didn't know at the time, but it's gotta be 1964, 1965, and I remember coming out and you know being asked what position do you wanna play in seventh grade. In the first year in junior high school is quarterback because in all the pickup games it--we play with black kids, I was the quarterback. And I could you know throw a dime, through a ball, and hit a dime, put it through, you know the old days and you had the tire hanging, I could put a ball through that tire with accuracy. I could run, and, and could throw and was a pretty good kid, as a quarterback. I remember getting to junior high school and the coach asked me you know why you think you can play quarterback? I said because I can run, I can throw and you know. Intellectually. Give me a playbook, I understand the plays, I can run these plays. And I remember the coach look at me telling me he said well I don't think you're quarterback material. I said okay, let's see, so I remember going out there trying to compete for it, even though I ran faster, I threw further and I threw more accurate, I was never allowed to play quarterback. And I remember saying to the coach, I confronted him you know why can't I play? And he ignored me and I can remember then you know kind of say, saying you know I'm not going to let this happen to me, I'm fighting for my rights. And I confronted him again and it turned into you know not a pleasant conversation, and I can remember them, then he told me you know if, if you can't play anything other than quarterback, you can leave, so I left. And I regret you know that I allowed that man to force me to leave playing football at that time. I played other sports, I played basketball and ran track and-- Speaker 1: This was in junior high school? Speaker 2: Junior high school. Story_ID: 671268 Speaker 1: Did you play football at all in senior high school [Quaker Valley High School, Leetsdale, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: I did not. All I did was basketball and ran track and I--track more than anything because there nobody could--if you could outrun me-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It's me and you. So I say, I had a, such a bad experience from that [with the football coach at Quaker Valley Junior High School, Sewickley, Pennsylvania], that I turned to track because as a sprinter you know you go across that line you know first one on the other side of the, the track wins. So I started thinking, you know you can't take that from me, so I started running, putting all my act, energy into track and field and as a sprinter. Speaker 1: Now did they try to recruit you for football, I mean you, you would think that the fastest guy in the school, they would try to put on the football team. Speaker 2: They did, but not as quarterback, and I told them if I can't play quarterback, I don't, not gonna play. And that you know I now know how that plays out but I, I did not and should've gone back and played, but I told them if I can't play quarterback, you won't let me compete for quarterback, I'm not gonna play. Speaker 1: Now did you follow the old Pittsburgh Pirates and the [Pittsburgh] Steelers? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know and, and there's, there's a funny a bit of irony, the same football coach did, did that to me in junior high, maybe ten years ago, he was still around, did the same similar thing to another young black girl. And I think he said something to her that if you don't come out and play or if you don't do this, I'm going to tell people something racially about you. And she went public with it, and he was, was fired, but he was still playing those same games. Speaker 1: All this time? Speaker 2: All those, all those times. Kind of sad, and you know I kind of walked away from it, but he was still there and still messing with the minds of those young kids, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: At least you resisted the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I resisted it, and I fought it and that's--I kind of knew then that I'm not somebody, I, I fight for my rights. That was my right and he was, he was trying to take something from me, and that was the ability to be treated fairly. And even as a kid on the football field, I'm not somebody that allows--you know you can push me physically, but emotionally and mentally, I'm trying to think, well all right, how do I deal with this? And you know now I'm very active in youth sports, I think the kids need to have an advocate. You can't take a junior high school kid and allow that kid to fight with an adult on what's going on. So I, you know, for my kids and for other kids have been an advocate with them through youth sports, and even do that today. Story_ID: 671269 Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any sports heroes growing up? Speaker 2: Roberto Clemente. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was my guy, and I, and that was it, Clemente was, you know, everybody--he caught the ball differently and he had a slingshot a way of throwing the ball. And you know he had almost a lifetime average, .300 batting average, so Roberto Clemente, was kind of my guy. Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the great all around baseball players. Speaker 2: That was Clemente; I mean clearly I like Willie Mays, I like Hank Aaron you know when I went to Cincinnati [Ohio] there's Johnny Bench and Pete Rose. You know one of the great things is that now that I've become very successful as a lawyer, I've since had a chance to spend some time with Juan Marichal, a lot of time with Hank Aaron, Willie Mays so it's really nice to meet up with some of my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: These are heroes of growing up, great ball players, Aaron, Clemente, Frank Robinson those guys you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I--at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], people would ask me you know what's your college team and I would say you know for years I would like, don't ask me why, but I like the University of Michigan Wolverines football team. And I remembered why is that when I had the experience as a kid in junior high school [Quaker Valley Junior High School, Sewickley, Pennsylvania] as a quarterback, the University of Michigan had a black quarterback. Speaker 1: Hum, did they? Speaker 2: And, in, in the mid-'60s [1960s] and I can always remember that you know wow, you know they were one of the first schools that I remember watching having a black quarterback, so it was kind of like wow. Speaker 1: Do you remember Sandy Stephens played for Minnesota Golden Gophers [University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota]? Speaker 2: I don't remember Sandy. Speaker 1: He went to Rose Bowl [Pasadena, California], yeah, he was the first one I remember seeing, we're the same age pretty much so-- Speaker 2: And that would have been the '60s [1960s] yeah? Speaker 1: Yeah, 1960, '61 [1961]. Speaker 2: So you're going back even, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, then okay. So, okay, so in fact well later on you, you had Jefferson ["Street"] Joe [Joseph Wiley Gilliam, Jr.] in the, from the [Pittsburgh] Steelers, you know, but you know you're--I don't know if you were still there? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think, I think by then I was in, in college [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] but I'm still, I'm still a Steeler fan. I still drive back or fly back either one, to games. I usually catch two games a year, at least two or three games in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. I always catch if they make the Super Bowl or the playoffs; I always travel with them to the playoff and Super Bowl games. Speaker 1: Yeah, that team started really coming into its own in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the, the baseball team [Pittsburgh Pirates] too, I think, I think, now I don't know if you, you're able, how many people realize this, but they, they fielded (unclear) all black baseball team at one point. At one, at any one time, they, if they had Dock Ellis out there pitching or something, they would have an all-black team. Manny Sanguillen the catcher, everybody that were around the field were black. Speaker 2: I had no, I, I, I went to a golf tournament about two years ago and picked up a--Dock Ellis was there and had a chance to spend some time with Dock. And he got a bite, got a, got a baseball signed by Dock Ellis, I do remember the team and they went from that to the, 'We Are Family,' Willie Stargell. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Days, so absolutely and, and I started following those teams. And I'm gonna fast forward on you for a moment. But when I got out of my career in government and went from the U.S. attorney's office into private practice, I got a job offer from a Pittsburgh team. The managing partner of the--from the Pittsburgh law firm and the managing partner of that law firm, also happened to be the--wasn't the manager, he was the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: General manager? Speaker 2: General manager of the, wasn't 'cause he was the general manager of the Pirates, so I joined the law firm where the general partner, the managing partner was the general manager for the Pirates. And I got a chance to--so that would've been in 1990 and when they were doing all their runs for the pennant back in those days, I went to every playoff game with the team and the management. So it was kind of fun. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The sports practice that I have now, I developed as a result of my Pittsburgh relations. Story_ID: 671270 Speaker 1: Yeah, just off camera, we mentioned John Henry Johnson as a big (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Steeler [Pittsburgh Steelers]. Speaker 1: --big Steeler. Speaker 2: Big Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] guy. Speaker 1: Hero. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So interesting, there's a lot of sports tradition there, did you ever meet anybody or hear the old guys talk about the Negro Leagues in the--? Speaker 2: My--I was, I got married the first time when I was twenty-one years old, I was a junior in high school [Quaker Valley High School, Leetsdale, Pennsylvania], and my then wife's father was a, a great baseball player in Pittsburgh and he played in Negro Leagues. And he would always tell me about the, the games and the personalities and he played with all the Negro League superstars. So yeah, we heard from my ex-wife's dad, we, and he was a base runner, he was short and fast. And he had the nickname of Hooks and we asked, and we used to ask him how you'd get the name Hooks, and that's, 'cause he could slide so well, we he would hook that ball, hook it in there with his foot. So yeah, from him I heard, and I was married twenty years and I knew him twenty-plus years, from time to time he'd always talk about the Negro Leagues. And through him I had a lot of fun talking about the Pittsburgh baseball Negro Leagues. Speaker 1: You had the two teams there, the Pittsburgh Crawfords and the Homestead Grays. Speaker 2: Homestead. Story_ID: 671271 Speaker 1: You said in high school [Quaker Valley High School, Leetsdale, Pennsylvania] you played baseball then and, no, basketball and track. Speaker 2: Basketball and track, I played some, played a year of baseball. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had to make a decision if I wanted to play baseball or track and I for reasons I discussed earlier decided to go with track. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so you ran the sprints in track? Speaker 2: I ran the sprints and the relays. Speaker 1: Okay. Now in terms of basketball, did you, did you have any success playing basketball you know? Speaker 2: I had some success but I was not really able to put the time in you know at 5'10", I was one of the highest jumpers. I could probably out jump just about everybody on the team, even from a jump ball at 5'10", I could--we have six, five players, I could out jump them on a jump ball at 6'5". I was the only player on our high school team that could dunk at 5'10" so, I, I could play, but I, you know I couldn't shoot. I could you know I could drive, I could pass, I could rebound, but I never could shoot. Speaker 1: Well you know you had to spend hours in front of the barn you know (laughter) like Larry Bird or somebody to do that. Speaker 2: I'd put a brick up there in a heartbeat (laughter), but I couldn't shoot. So I figured that was not gonna be my best game, although if we played a pick-up game anywhere, I could be a good fifth or sixth man, I could play. But that was not gonna--I wasn't getting a scholarship of basketball, and I knew that. Story_ID: 671272 Speaker 1: So you went to, so junior high school was like Quaker Valley Junior High School [Quaker Valley Middle School, Sewickley, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Quaker Valley Junior High School. Speaker 1: And--now was junior high school different from, I mean--well I know it's different from grade school [Sewickley Elementary School, Sewickley, Pennsylvania], but what happened in junior high school? Speaker 2: You start growing up; I you real, I, I can remember then that you know it wasn't like elementary school where--because of course it started getting harder. You started seeing that this really was a preparatory school for college and the teachers were getting you ready for college, even junior high school. You were expected from that high school [Quaker Valley High School, Leetsdale, Pennsylvania], I think they had close to 90 percent, 95 percent college after high school, from the high school. And so it was a, it's a phenomenal high school, great academic high school, and they were preparing you from junior high on. And I remember that like whoa, you know fun and games were over and we, you really were starting to take tough classes and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now were you on a college track in, in high school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, I would, I took, I forget what they called it back then, academics or? Speaker 1: Yeah, college prep. Speaker 2: College prep, but yeah, I was on the college prep. Speaker 1: Okay, did they ever try to discourage you from doing that? Speaker 2: You know the only, the only thing that happened to me in, in college line, line was I was a senior and I remember a guidance counselor coming in asking me to go with him. They had some people from Westinghouse [Electric Corporation] who wanted to meet with some students, and I thought well, I thought it was a scholarship. And I remember getting in the car and going with him and we go out to the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] plant of Westinghouse, and they were offering jobs right after high school. And I remember turning to him saying, but I want to go to college, and I remember, he looking at me saying well, these are some good opportunities for jobs, if you're interested in a good job. And I remember looking at him saying you know, you're their guidance counselor, I told you I want to go to college. So yeah, I think at some point they did, and the kids they took were, were all black kids, and it was me and a couple other kids, they were all black kids. And that was the only time that I was ever steered away from college, and I essentially told him you know no, I wanna go to college. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how many black students graduated in your--well how, how many students graduated when, when you graduated? Speaker 2: Roughly two hundred graduated and there may have been ten blacks in the class. Speaker 1: So you're really the minority? Speaker 2: Really a minority. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Really a minority. Speaker 1: All right, now did you run for class office (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: Or anything like that or? Speaker 2: I didn't like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not, I'm not a I, I don't run for many offices, even now, I'm you know probably considered fairly very popular, but I don't like running for class. I don't run for--I've never done that in high school or college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I think the only time I ever did that, was in law school [University of Cincinnati College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio]. And I ran to be president of the Black Law Student[s] Association [BLSA], and I did that for two years while I was in law school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there was, there were issues I wanted to deal with, legal issues that I wanted to, kind of take, get a platform. And I had to run to get my platform, so I ran at that point, but before that, I'd never. Speaker 1: Okay, did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was pretty popular, I was very popular, probably one of the most popular guys in high school, but I just didn't have the interest in running for student government. Story_ID: 671273 Speaker 1: --Now did you have to--did the black students in high school [Quaker Valley High School, Leetsdale, Pennsylvania] have to have a parallel social life-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --with the white--. Okay. Speaker 2: We had a parallel social life, we absolutely did, I mean once they you know, there's just a lot of problems you know with socializing with whites back then. From coaches you know if, if the guys were socializing, dating, it's--you heard about it. But it was not looked upon favorably for you know black guys be dating some of the white girls and you know you knew then that was a problem, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Stay away from them. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. So, so the--most of your socializing took place back in the black community? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, parties and things like that. Speaker 2: We, we, or, or we would leave Sewickley [Pennsylvania] and across the river, you know Sewickley sits on the Ohio River and there's a bridge from Sewickley that goes to a town called Coraopolis [Pennsylvania]. And Coraopolis was a, you know predominately black town so we would hang out in Coraopolis or we would go to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to date. Or we would go to Aliquippa [Pennsylvania] where there were a lot of blacks, so you had to leave Sewickley for the parallel. If you wanted to a nice party, the party likely would be out of town. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have a car in high school? Speaker 2: I didn't, but you know some of my buddies did, you know, most of my buddies had cars; somebody always had a car in high school. I didn't have a car until I graduated from high school and bought it myself. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But my buddies had cars. Story_ID: 671274 Speaker 1: As a high school student [at Quaker Valley High School, Sewickley, Pennsylvania], were you someone who was--did you like the sciences and math and that sort of thing in school or-- Speaker 2: I hated the sciences and the math, I loved history, I love English, was, was very good, I'm a very good writer. Love writing as I majored in, in and doubled majored with English is one of them in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], so no, I didn't, I hated English and math--I hated math and science. Speaker 1: Okay, and, I, I since we have some time I may as well ask, did now one of the most, I guess important papers in the country has been the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]. And did, did your family get the Courier in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My family received the Courier every week, delivered by an African American newspaper guy and I remember sitting there waiting for the Courier. And I'd sit on my porch and I'd read the Courier, came out every Friday, I'd read it every Friday, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. And we, when--and did your family like follow the Civil Rights Movement in the paper and on TV and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yes and they talked about, but they weren't really active, in, in the Civil Rights Movement. I mean I became active with it in the '60s [1960s] and my, my parents [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin and Felton Martin, Sr.] talked about it, but you know, I don't remember them ever saying you know we're gonna go to the March on Washington. Or we're going to do that, they were very cautious; you know it was kind of like you know we got to be careful with what we're doing. I remember thinking, you know no we don't, you know you got to make some noise, you gotta get people listen to you. If you're careful, we're not gonna, they're not gone listen to us, so they, they followed it, but they weren't real active in it. Speaker 1: Was there a chapter of National Association for the Advancement of Colored People [NAACP] Youth [& College Division] in, in your town or? Speaker 2: There was not, it was, there was a Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] chapter, but not a Sewickley [Pennsylvania] chapter. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you participate in any of that when you were on? Speaker 2: Yes, I, I, I mean I did some, lot of stuff with the NAACP, I did. But it was through Pittsburgh chapter and not through the, the Sewickley chapter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Did a lot of stuff through church [Triumph Baptist Church, Sewickley, Pennsylvania], church was very active on this stuff. The community center [Sewickley Community Center, Sewickley, Pennsylvania] was active on it, they were very progressive, so they kept you abreast of the Civil Rights Movement and what was going on and you know some of the you know, the, the hosings in Birmingham [Alabama] and the, the shootings, especially in 1965. I can, I can remember the night that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was shot. Story_ID: 671275 Speaker 1: What were you doing that night? Speaker 2: I was working as a clerk at a grocery store and you know, at one of my jobs, the forty-hour job that I had as a high school [Quaker Valley High School, Leetsdale, Pennsylvania] was located in Leetsdale, Pennsylvania. And beside the high school was a shopping mall, big strip mall, and they had an A&P grocery store, and I got a job as a, first as a stock clerk. And then I built up some goodwill, and became a, a clerk, a salesclerk, cashier. And I remember working at the cash register, and somebody came in and said that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had been shot, and I remember you know just, I can remember the moment just like pausing like, what, what? So yeah, I, I, followed the Civil Rights Movement, I've always been interested in Civil Rights, I've always thought that people should be treated equally. Speaker 1: Okay, so did, were, was there any disturbances in, in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Sewickley [Pennsylvania], or? Speaker 2: But we went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: We, we drove to Pittsburgh and they had the--and you know Pittsburgh, if you've been to Pittsburgh you know Pittsburgh has several black communities. But we went to the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and they had the National Guard with bayonets and, and guns lined along Center Avenue and, in the street. And I remember parking the car and walking down just looking, I guess this would be '68 [1968], '67 [1967] '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968] yeah. Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], and I remember walking down looking at it, like wow, and you know they had their guns out and I remember walking by and they, they didn't lower the guns when you walked by. You walked by, the guns pointed right at you, and I can just remember you know this is--we're inside a major city, this American, we've got the guard, [U.S.] Army out here, now we're ready to shoot our citizens. And I was just kind of dumbfounded I was a kid, I still was in high school, but wow this is kind of scary. Speaker 1: Well this is, I guess, this is close to graduation from high school, right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: You come out in '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: I came out in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're close to graduation, this is April 4th. Speaker 2: April of '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's, yeah when he got shot, and all of the media coverage and everything and. So were there any--what did you-now, at, by that time the Black Power Movement had started as well, did you have any thoughts about that, at that point? Speaker 2: Say it loud, I'm black and I'm proud, you know James Brown came out around that time, with, with a song 'Say it Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud' and that you know put a lot of pride and I remember black kids that were really saying it you know. 'Cause for so long, if you had nappy hair or you had brown, dark you know you were, you were of color you know you kind, everybody wanted to be you know the, the old saying they used to have when I was growing up was you know, white is right, and you know if you're white, it's right, if you're brown stick around, if you're black, get back. Speaker 1: Or you better attack. Speaker 2: Or you better (laughter) so I remember thinking you know that's what, that's the way that with blacks we had been taught that you know that black was not good. And James Brown came out with you know 'Say it Loud,' I remember everybody saying like yeah, yeah, you're right, I am proud of myself. So I remember thinking then that you know I am what I am, I'm very proud of what I am and I think I'm okay and it's okay to be black. So coming out of high school, I was very proud of that fact, and you know, you know you kind of you know you watch the you know the Black Panthers, you watch the Black Muslims at the time you know a lot of my friends from the small town [Sewickley, Pennsylvania] were you know going with the Panthers. You know they liked the look, they liked the berets and that you know the macho look and, they liked the, the Muslims with the, you know no swine. You know "Brother don't eat that swine and pork is bad for you," so I kind of looked at it from a different perspective that maybe pork's not good. You know I kind of looked at the the life of the pig and so I kind of backed off of pork but not for religious reasons, it's just for educational reasons. So yeah, I, I you know I followed it and left relatively soon for college to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] undergrad, and you know the Panthers were on campus and the Panthers were here in the city. So I got a more of an up close look at them when I got to Howard than I did from back there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, that is probably a big dramatic thing. Story_ID: 671276 Speaker 1: How did you make the decision to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], now, how did that hook up take place? Speaker 2: Sure. You know when I came out of high school [Quaker Valley High School, Leetsdale, Pennsylvania], I think I had a 2.5 or 2.7 [grade point average], C plus, C plus student, but I worked forty hours. So I never had time to study, but I was still able to manage a C plus and I remember thinking you know I should be able to get into college on track scholarship with this. Well I didn't get a scholarship, and I couldn't go to college when I graduated from high school in 1968. So I thought you know what you gonna do? Then I start thinking maybe the guidance counselor was right, maybe I should've gone, I need a job. And I remember sitting down talking with my, my mom [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin] and my mom said to me, now don't quit, you can't you know, don't quit, just slow down, you've been slowed down. So we got to figure out a way to do this. Speaker 1: Now, now were there any other college graduates in the family at this point? Speaker 2: I'm the first and only still, one of eight children to graduate, my older sister Adelaide [Quinn] had gone to college, but she went two or three years and did not finish. So no, didn't have it. So my mom came you know when I sat there and, and talked and she encouraged me to go to--they had an open door admission policy at, in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] at the Allegheny Community College [sic. Community College of Allegheny County, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. And I remember going to community college enrolling you know two weeks before classes, I was admitted, got in and I think I did you know 3.2, 3.5 the first semester of the first year. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so this is in 1968? Speaker 2: This would be 1968, 1969 fall semester '68 [1968] the spring semester of '69 [1969], and I remember applying to Howard in '68 [1968], and not getting accepted. The reason I, I was attracted to Howard, I've a friend, Doug Boiek [ph.] from Arlington [Virginia]. And Doug would always--his grandmother lived in Sewickley [Pennsylvania], so Doug would spend every summer in Sewickley with us. And we always thought he was cool 'cause he's a city boy from, from [Washington] D.C., and in '67 [1967] he invited me to come spend part of the summer with him in Arlington. And I did and we hung out in D.C., in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] and at Howard, and I remember walking around Howard thinking, wow, this is really great. I'd never seen this many black students, I've never seen this many black people live, coming from Sewickley. So I was kind of like you know, there's another whole another world outside of my small community and I thought I'd like to go here. So that's how I was introduced to Howard and that's how I, you know, came to want to go to Howard. Story_ID: 671277 Speaker 1: And when I didn't get admitted [to Howard University, Washington, D.C.] they told me that you know you need to you know improve your grades a bit, so I, through my first semester [at Community College of Allegheny County, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and I did very well. I forget, a 3.2, 3.5 [grade point average], and I remember coming back to Howard with my transcript from that first semester and I you know walked up to the, to the admissions office, waited to meet the director of admissions. Walked in there with my application, my rejection letter and my transcript, and I asked him, "Do you have ten minutes?" And he said, dean, I think it was Vincent Johns, I think was the admissions officer, I think that's who it was, said you know, "Yeah." So he brought me in and I showed him my application, showed him my rejection and I showed him the transcript, and he says, "What are you asking me?" I said, "I'm asking you to, to admit me to Howard," I said, "I am, I, I can do the work, I just never had the time to study, you see what I can do when I study." He said, "You know this is pretty impressive," he said, "but you're at Allegheny Community College [Community College of Allegheny County] right now, it's brand new, it's not accredited. So what do you want me to do with this unaccredited courses?" I said, "I just want you to agree with me that I can do the work and that I'm the caliber of student that should be at Howard." And he looked and he said, "You are." I said, "If I get the same GPA or better next semester, will you admit me?" He said, "Yes." I got the same GPA and even though the credits were at that time not accepted, they admitted me as a freshman at Howard for '69 [1969] and within a year Howard--the community college was accredited and I received credit for that year of courses that I took. So that's how I talked myself back into Howard, and from that point on, I realized that you don't have, you don't always get a second chance. And so I've always prepared myself to do good on the test and the admissions opportunities the first time. So I got, gave myself a second opportunity and I made the most of it at Howard. Story_ID: 671278 Speaker 1: Was it hard to pay for it or--? Speaker 2: No, I made so much money during the summer in the steel mills, I made a lot of money, I think Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at the time was you know like a couple of grand a year. And I remember making five or six thousand dollars, so I would be able to pay for that tuition. And I paid for it on my own, my family didn't really have any money to help me out with, so I paid for it on my own and put myself through, through college at Howard. Speaker 1: Okay. So you didn't, you didn't try to run track for Howard? Speaker 2: I did not because I'd gone to community college [Community College of Allegheny County, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]; I was redshirted, so when I came down first year, I did run with them. Tried out for the team, made the track but they redshirted me and the same thing happened, I had to go get another job to stay at Howard, so I did not finish running. But I continued working out with the track team, a lot of guys had--were on the track team were still my friends and I ran socially. I worked out and ran with them, but just couldn't you know when it, when I get out of classes--I, I'll tell you what my day was like. I would go to work at eight o'clock in the morning, I'd work from eight to ten, I'd leave at ten [o'clock] go to class from eleven to two and then work from 2:30, 3 until eight o'clock at night. Like I said again working a lot but I did learn how to study, so I was able to study and work, and maintain a, you know, graduate from Howard with a 3.0, 3.2 [grade point average]. So I was able to work and still keep my grades up, but I worked full-time through Howard. Story_ID: 671279 Speaker 1: Well Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] is one of--is a great learning community, lot of fascinating personalities, people coming in and out of Howard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: As students and then coming back to the people like Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] other people, but who, who was there when you were on campus and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I still-- Speaker 1: I know they all--they had a lot of guest speakers and-- Speaker 2: I saw all of them. Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to-- Speaker 2: I saw Stokely, met Stokely, the--I had a chance, I got qualified then for work-study job. I got a chance to work with [HistoryMaker] Dr. Joyce Ladner, and Dr. Ladner took me under her wing, and kind of really helped me for two or three years that I was at Howard. I was her work-study student, she was in the middle of, of publishing a book ['Mixed Families: Adopting Across Racial Boundaries,' Joyce A. Ladner], it was the, it dealt with the, the adoption of black children by white families, bi-racial adoptions. And we, she was doing a, a text, a, a study in Howard County [Maryland] at the planned community of Columbia [Maryland], it was Reston [Virginia] in Columbia. And they're both planned communities both brand new communities at the time, and they both had a lot of white families who had adopted black children. So I spent a couple of years interviewing as many of those families who would agree to be interviewed, and I did that that was my job. And she subsequently published a book based on the research that I did for her with those families, and I, that was, that kept me busy essentially through undergrad. Speaker 1: Right, Joyce Ladner, we interviewed her for the project you know she's, her most famous book, 'The Death of White Sociology[: Essays on Race and Culture,' Joyce A. Ladner], I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Later on in the, early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Dr. Ladner was, is responsible for a lot of my success. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She took me under her wing, and really carried me, taught me you know with, what I had to do and how to keep up academically while at Howard. Speaker 1: Okay, what, what was your major; I know she's a sociology professor primarily, but what, what was your major? Speaker 2: I double majored; I was English major, and, and business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But because I was a write--'cause my English major, I took social, I took her classes, I took all the sociology classes, but I did not want to be a social worker. And she saw some of my writing, and she you know liked what my writing, during interviews I'd write on, you know where, there were no computers back then and you know. I'd write everything out in longhand, and give it to her, and she was able to use a lot of what I wrote, without a lot of changes to it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so what you--the research that you did informed her book? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I think John [Oliver] Killens was there wasn't he; did you ever meet him, the writer? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: John O. Killens? Speaker 2: I know who he is, but I don't think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I don't know he was full-time or not when he, I think he was there the one time. But who, who was in the English department? Speaker 2: You going back forty-two years here (laughter). Speaker 1: That's all right if you can't remember names (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I can't remember. Speaker 1: That's--Howard always had so many interesting people I just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I took a lot of classes in political science and I remember forming a good relationship with Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters], and he served as mentor on some of the political you know--we remained friends to this day. Even though he's left Howard and is now at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] you know we're, we still know, he still remembers me as his student. Speaker 1: Yeah Ron Walters yeah he's an important writer and commenter and you know commentator. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I don't know there's a lot of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You ever remember they had the shootings in Chicago [Illinois] of the [Black] Panthers? Speaker 1: Yeah Fred Hampton? Speaker 2: Fred Hampton. Speaker 1: And Mark Clark, right? Speaker 2: I remember being here at Howard when, when those shootings occurred and I remember thinking you know whoa, what, what's going there, I remember all the challenges they had to Hoover, to J. Edgar Hoover and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and the [U.S.] Department of Justice. And you know how these agencies were anti-black and I remember then thinking that you know that I would like to get into the Department of Justice or I'd like to get into the FBI. You know I always thought, you know I think I can make a difference, thought I could always make a difference in helping to investigate and enforce our laws equally. So I've always, you know, thought that was something I wanted to do. Story_ID: 671280 Speaker 1: Okay, Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]. So you got there in '69 [1969]? Speaker 2: I got there September of 1969. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: That's the best thing that ever happened to me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean it's, it's a, it's, it's I found myself at Howard, I met lifelong friends and I became part of the Howard establishment. Howard has recently honored me as one of their distinguished alumni; I was very close with every president. I'm very close with the dean and the faculty at the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], if you ask me what I really liked to do if I didn't have to make money, if I could just go out and do the job that I wanted, I'd like to be professor of law at Howard University. I'm sure and that's what I will do either soon or when I finish as part of my career. Speaker 1: Now did you know very many people in the law school when you were, as---there as an undergraduate (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Any of the people that were descendent from that Charlie Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston] line of lawyers. Speaker 2: I knew who they were. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I knew the law students, I had a lot of friends who had, you know studying with me, who had gone to law--who had gone on and stayed at Howard in the law school. And I would hear them talk of the Thurgood Marshall and Charles Houston you know James [A.] Cobb, I'd hear them talk about these heavyweights in the law. And I clearly knew who they are and what they were doing and you know when I got to law school myself and studied some of the cases, and studied what they did, I was even more impressed of who they were. But I, I absolutely knew who they were while I was at Howard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was very impressed. Story_ID: 671281 Speaker 1: And one of the things I thought of knowing that I was going to do this interview with you today, I thought when I was growing up [in Sewickley, Pennsylvania], I did not know a black lawyer. Not one, not one, I didn't know a black doctor, I knew there was one, there was one black dentist who lived in my community. So you know there was no role model for me as a lawyer until I got to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], which is when my whole life changed. Once I was exposed to Howard and the opportunities in the world through education and, and meeting people from all over the world. Speaker 2: Had, had you ever thought about--did you have a--have you ever thought about in those days what about being a lawyer at all? I mean I know popular lawyers on television Perry Mason (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: And I mean you know. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Then the movie with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: 'Love Story?' Speaker 2: With Gregory Peck what you know. Speaker 1: Oh, 'To Kill a Mockingbird.' Speaker 2: 'To Kill a Mockingbird,' I think that came out in 1960, mid-'60s [1960s] I guess, '64 [1964] or so [sic. 1962]. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I did, I thought about it at the time thought that I didn't you know I, I couldn't, I can't be a lawyer, you know it's not something I, I, I didn't think I could do it. I didn't--if you had told me that that was something that I could do, I would've said you know I was too afraid to go try it. And you know my parents [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin and Felton Martin, Sr.] couldn't say you know you want to be a lawyer, you're gonna be a lawyer. You know to my children I tell both of them you want to be a doctor, then be a doctor, you know you got to get your grades together, we can figure out and you know for you know I have a--one of my children [Erica Richards] is a doctor, she's a psych- a psychiatrist doing her residency now at Johns Hopkins [Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland]. And I would say to, to her and to her older sister [Nikki Williams] who also wanted to go to medical school, we'll go meet a doctor and bring a doctor over for dinner. I bring her--you know I have friends who are, who are doctors or I know people who are on the, the admissions at Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] or other medical schools. I could say you know let's go meet some people, if you wanna be a doctor, I didn't have any of that, so I didn't get any of that until I got to, got to Howard. Speaker 2: Okay, did, did anybody try to persuade you to go to law school when you were at, at Howard? Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah, once I got, you know once I got to Howard, people were telling me that you know--they wanted me, Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] and people wanted me to do a Ph.D. in, in political science. They thought that I was pretty good as a political scientist, that I was good at analyzing facts and strategy and law versus policy in the political arena. So you know they kind of thought that I could, I would want to get a Ph.D., so they were kind of pushing me more to do a Ph.D. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 671282 Speaker 1: Now were you, you a part of--I know they had a lot of discussion about international politics at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in those days. Did, did you take part in African Liberation Day when--I know they draw people from all over the country for that, you know. Speaker 2: I was there and you know I actually did a lot of my thesis not of my--I call it my thesis, a lot of my term papers on African liberation. So in 1969, 1970, 1971, during the days of you know the African Liberation Movement, clearly those were newsworthy items. And I would write my papers on a lot of that, so absolutely. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was wondering, because I know the focus of Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] changed really from domestic civil rights to African lib- liberation. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And Africanism. Speaker 2: And Africanism, and Africanism so I studied, I, I both studied that in class and would write about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Intellectual level it was, I mean, it's, it's like all of a sudden being, it's like being blind. And then having the ability to see, you saw these issues all over the world. And I would never think that you know they were so closely related to me as an African American, with some of these struggles and issues that were going on in Africa and the Caribbean. Which became--my world opened up from this small town in, in Sewickley [Pennsylvania] to the City of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to Howard University, to the world. And it was, once I saw that, it was I you know wow, I just wanted to get more education so I could really understand it more and figure what my real place might be in this big world that I now had been exposed to. Story_ID: 671283 Speaker 1: I read in some of the material that a car accident kind of kicked you over the line in terms of becoming, wanting to become a lawyer-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: You know, not to confuse that with the fact that I always wanted to be a lawyer, but I didn't think I had, I didn't have the-- as, as confident as people think I am and I am, you know I have, have grown to be. I didn't think I could do it, I was a little afraid to think that you know this poor kid from you know whose mom [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin] was a domestic and a maid, his dad's [Felton Martin, Sr.] a steel worker and you know dirt poor as a kid, could become a lawyer. I thought that was for someone else, I was almost afraid to really dream that I could do that, because I didn't want the disappointment. So while I was studying hard and, and wanted to do that, I was kind of afraid to, to go after it. And one day during my, my jun- I think it was my, the summer of my junior year [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], we were--I'd gone home, I told you I bought my first car for myself. It was a Volkswagen Beetle, and I'm driving in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and you know kind of a, what we called the Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] section of Pittsburgh which was Shadyside [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. The Shadyside section of Pittsburgh which was then, it's the '60s [1960s] or the early '70s [1970s] and it's kind of cool. You know the hippies are out and you know people are hanging out and I'm driving my Volkswagen down the main street where people were hanging out and I get rear ended. Bang and you know I get out and I got a big dent you know the engine's in the back. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's a big problem. Speaker 2: That's a big problem, and I get out and a guy in a Porsche has run into you know the, the back of my Volkswagen I now know he's probably a lot more upset with his Porsche than I am with my Beetle butt. And I get out and I you know without you know without cussing, fussing at him, you know I started a discussion with him like, "Excuse me, what you do?" And we--and he says, "Well you know I was looking"--I said, "Wait a minute, you can't just run into the back of my car." And we started talking and the guy start smiling, I said, "What you smiling about?" He says, "How old are you?" I tell him nineteen, twenty, he says, "What you do?" I said, "I'm, I'm a college student, why, what do you do?" And he said, "I'm a lawyer," I said, "Really," he said, "Yeah," he said, "Have you ever thought of going to law school?" I said, "I really want to be a lawyer, but you know that, that's a dream; I don't think I can do it." He says, "Yeah, you're, you're pretty good on your feet," so we started, I said, "Really?" Then my guy says, "Hey man, he's sweet talking you, make him pay for your car," so you know he said, "That's not a problem," he says, "What do you think that's gonna cost?" You know I looked at him, whatever it was, I said, you know, "Three hundred dollars," he brings out his checkbook; he writes me a check for three hundred dollars. He says, "I'll take care of your car, but you know why don't you come down to look at my law firm someday," and I said, "You serious?" And he said, "I'm, I'm serious [HistoryMaker] Billy [Martin], I'm serious," so I you know in a week or so, you know, got dressed up, I remember going down to his law firm, we're walking around, and you know thinking you know wow. A small firm, just a small firm and I remember thinking you know wow, he says, "You know, you can do this; it's not that big a deal Billy you could do this, if you train yourself. You really want to do it, you can do this," and you know I've lost his name, it's just recently, you know well I say recently, past ten years, we stayed in touch for years. But he really kind of gave me that push to say you know, hey man you're--you can do this. And it's, you know you talk about--we did a pro bono program here at the firm [Howrey LLP, Washington, D.C.] yesterday, and one of our pro bono, pro bono clients stood up and said that you know the help that we'd given to her was like God had placed an angel along the path. That guy was one of my angels, 'cause I probably would've been afraid to do it if some random man hadn't run into my car and not given me the idea but given me the encouragement, you wanna do that, try it. And it was a big, you know made a big difference in my life, it really did, and you know I don't think of, I don't think it's just happenstance you know. I think that you know, I'm very religious in my beliefs and I believe that God knew you know I needed somebody to help me out and give me some courage. And this random person just said, "You know here's what I do, I think you can do this too," and it's, it's like a story that's almost too good to be true. And my buddies who were with me, the one, there was only buddy with me, later said, you know, "Wow man, you know, it's kind of strange you--a lawyer like that run into us and inviting you down." And you know forty years, forty-five years later; it helped me in a time that I probably needed somebody to say you know you can do it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so. You're a junior then so, from your junior year on, did you kind of think that's what you wanted to pursue when you got out? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: There's no doubt that, that I wanted it, I was almost afraid to tell people that I wanted it because I didn't want the rejection. You know I, I had no failure, I started being very successful as a student, but being a lawyer was beyond my wildest dream. I wanted it, I really wanted it, but I was kind of afraid to reach for that ring. Story_ID: 671284 Speaker 1: You said that you were close with the presidents of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] when you were there, now who are they? I know [HistoryMaker James] Cheek would be one, I guess, right? Speaker 2: I knew President Cheek, but he was, he was contemporary, he was a contemporary of mine, it would've been Pat Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But who I was closest to, so after President Cheek left, and he came on, I was--been closest with him throughout the year and the new president. I've, I've met him, him and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, but not when you were in school? Speaker 2: Not when I was in school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Not when I was in school. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah that's what I was thinking maybe when you said it, I said oh, maybe, was it when he was in school, I said you can get in the with the president, you, you're in good (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But no, I mean I, I knew President Cheek, you know I knew him by name, I you know was one of the you know good students, one of the, the top people there. And I know him if you remember which I'm sure you do, those were the years we had the, the boycotts and the walk-outs and the you know, the, the riots you know you had Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] and Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi]. So we had a lot of, of, of issues as a campus, so I don't think the president then was close with many students, 'cause the students were all--you know it was the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Well its interesting dynamics some of the people we interviewed from Howard's administration and including Cheek--now Cheek had positioned himself as a Republican. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In those days he said it was pretty much so he can you know reap the financial rewards of being a Republican (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: For the school, but there was a dean of students and I can't think of his name right now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: [Andrew] Billingsley? Speaker 1: No, it wasn't Billingsley, I don't think, it's been several years ago, but a lot of people at Howard that we've interviewed from those days talk about how their--they felt that their priority was the safety and welfare of the students at all times. And they would let things happen, they would never you know call in the authorities to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: You know be with the students. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: As long as it, we contained it to the campus, you know D.C. MPD, D.C. [District of Columbia] Metropolitan Police [Department] were not on campus, campus police took care. It was maintained as security of the students, that's accurate, I mean there were students you know barricade themselves into the administration building. It's like at Columbia [University, New York, New York] and all the major universities, and the you know police and the administration you know ta--I wasn't in there, you know I remember you know, looking in from the outside but I was on campus what, but was not part of that protest. But I witnessed and watched it all go down and it was just you know--we were allowed to voice our opinions as a student body, without violence and without you know outside law enforcement coming on campus. Good time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: There was a family attitude. Speaker 2: It was a good time, they, they took care of the kids it--we were kids and they took care of the, the students. You know if you--you got kids now and having you know thinking of kids who are 19, 20 and 21 years old, you know that they're, they're still very young, very immature. And Howard you know, Howard does much educating and nurturing, as was required. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I love--you know there, there's--I love my experiences at Howard, I'm very close to Howard, one of my daughters, my oldest daughter [Nikki Williams] went to and graduated from Howard, so I'm very fond of the university. Story_ID: 671285 Speaker 1: Before we leave Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], is there any other experience you want to talk about at Howard that made a impact on you before I ask you how you chose to go the University of Cincinnati law school [University of Cincinnati College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio] (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, it was just a very good experience. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And good opportunity. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I chose University of Cincinnati, I got--I was admitted to almost every law school that I applied to, the University of Cincinnati gave me a full scholarship. And by full scholarship I mean they gave me tuition re- reimbursement, a living stipend and a part-time job. So I could, I moved to Cincinnati [Ohio] with my--I was married then, I got married in my junior year. The only thing I was gonna say that had happened of, of that was real memorable for me at Howard is my first child [Nikki Williams] was born when I was a senior at Howard. And I remember, I think it was Dr. Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters], calling Ron Walters and saying to him hey I can't take my test today, and he say's what you mean, it's a final, if you're not here, [HistoryMaker] Billy [Martin] you miss it. I said I'm at the hospital, my wife's delivering my child, he said we might make an exception for that. So I remember her being born the May of, May of my, my graduating year, so I had a brand new baby as I departed from the university, from Howard to go to the University Cincinnati law school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: So that's, that was my break there. Story_ID: 671286 Speaker 1: --All right, so that's a good reason to go the University of Cincinnati [College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio], so what was the University of Cincinnati like? Speaker 2: You know I started there in 1973 and so would've come right after the '60s [1960s] and was you know it was a time where I thought that I did very good on my LSAT [Law School Admission Test], the LSAT, college admission test. I know I had a 3.2, 3.3 GPA [grade point average], so I was a good student, I knew I was gonna be a good student in law school. My confidence was then up, you know I knew I could do it, and I got there and on the first day of class, I had--there was a, you have each student has a little mailbox. And you know there was a note in my mailbox, they wanted me to come meet a professor, and I thought you know, wonder what he's got in store for me? And I walked down, I was very excited, and I remember walking into the professor's office and he looked up and he said [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Billy] Martin, welcome, I said you know thank you. And he said I, we're here to offer you off, a tutorial assistance you need, I said why you think I need tutorial assistance, 'cause I don't want the stigma. And he said well we're concerned that you know we're admitting minority students who are not as qualified as our white students. And I looked at him and I said you know you don't know me, you don't know me. I said I got a good GPA, got a good LSAT, why we having this conversation, why don't you wait to see if I can do the work before, he said we don't want you to fail. And I thought well, you, it's a negative thinking, I remember having the grades, it's you know it's a self-fulfilling prophecy if you think I'm not qualified. I don't know if I want to go through this law school, with you thinking I'm not qualified to be here, I'm qualified to be here. And he said, well we think we wanna put you in this study group with other minority students, and I remember telling him I don't want it, I can make it, and I don't want it. And I'm a little put off that my first day of law school, my first week of law school that I had to have that conversation. So it was a tough conversation, it kind of, once again, you know all the excitement that I had, he kind of let the air, sucked all the air out of the room. When I thought it was unfair, and I you know later, that's why when I told you earlier that I want to become president of the Black Law Students [Association (BLSA)], I wanted to do away with that. I wanted to come up with a different approach to first year students, if by the you know second semester, they're having problems, let's deal with it. But to approach a student when he comes in that's essentially telling them you're not qualified to be here. And I remember saying you know, we may have some students, who, who need that help; I'm not one of them. So you, why you, why you have to group us all together, we're, we're like the white students that you have here. Some of us are probably are very smart and very talented, and some not as smart and as talented, you can't lump us all together. So I had that conversation with him, and you know to this day, you know I've been, received the Distinguished Alumni Award from the University of Cincinnati law school. So I, you know, was just was all again, once again saying I don't think it's fair to broad--to paint with such a broad brush, we're individuals. Story_ID: 671287 Speaker 1: Was the University of Cincinnati law school [University of Cincinnati College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio] what you imagined law school to be like? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's tough; it's very hard, very hard, you know I'm one of the, the weird students who actually loved the experience. It was very challenging, I was thirsting for the knowledge and I could remember, I'd sit there and I would say to my, my then wife, you know, it's like I'm having an affair with this, with Lady Justice, I'm having an affair with the law. And I couldn't wait to get home from class, open that textbook up, I couldn't wait to, you know try to figure out what the issues are. And I couldn't wait to try to resolve the conflicts that were in there, I, I loved the experience, it was challenging and it was very hard. But it was something that I, I really enjoyed and, and it was a natural fit with me in the law. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: From the beginning. Speaker 1: From--for those of us who have never been to law school, one of the examples of what law school is supposed to be like is, come from a movie called 'The Paper Chase' (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: 'Paper Chase.' Speaker 1: I don't know you ever seen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: It occurs about the same time period that you were in school. Speaker 2: I remember it was, it was (simultaneous--it was, it was in my first or second year. Speaker 1: Yeah, all right. Speaker 2: So that would've been 1973 or 1974. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Because I remember going with a classmate of mine to watch it, and it was just like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's, it's, it was like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's cutthroat. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I was gonna ask you about, about the cutthroat aspect of it, the competitive swimming with sharks aspect of it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It was it like, was it really cutthroat? Speaker 2: It was very cutthroat. Speaker 1: The people were trying--is it--can you give us an example of somebody trying to succeed by pulling somebody else back or? Speaker 2: The only thing that, that I remember, it wasn't they were trying to succeed by pulling you back; they were just trying to succeed by stepping on you. You know like if, if you're in class, the same people would always be like I know the answer, or I don't know, I know the answer you know. I'm prepared today you know, let me show you how bright I am. So they're always trying to distinguish themselves you know in class, but that, that wouldn't say that they're doing so by trying to you know steal your work or to discredit you. They just wanted to be brighter than you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you have to appreciate now that you know for lawyers, you have all those Type A personalities, all gifted, all bright, and all hungry. Thinking that you know that there's two people in this class who gonna make it, I'm one of them. So and everybody has that mentality, so it was very cutthroat and very competitive, but I enjoyed the, the competition, I enjoyed law school. Speaker 1: Is there anything particularly surprising about the law that you didn't realize before you? Speaker 2: The thing I didn't, yes. That the justice is defined not by the law, but a judge at times, you'd think law is very simple as to what is just, but it's discretionary as to just to a judge from Mississippi may be different you know coming from a judge in, in Michigan. And it was kind of frustrating to realize that some judges use the law to maintain the status quo, or some judges use the law to you know change the law. But it would change or change society, so it was, I didn't realize then that you know you, you read a case as a law student and you'd think all right here's how this case should come out. And you'd have a judge either at a trial level or the [U.S.] Supreme Court you know decide it in a different way, and you think that can't be. So what you realize is that the law doesn't always come out exactly as you think it should have, it's a lit- it's litigation you gotta win your trial. But just learning, you know the thing I, I walked away from law school with is that I had the ability, not to change the law, not to enforce the law, but to understand the law. If you understand the law, you can do a lot with that, just understanding the law and how it works. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 671288 Speaker 1: Did you have much time to get involved in the black community of Cincinnati [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was very active. I joined as a law student [at University of Cincinnati College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio], as a law student what they call the Black Lawyers Association of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio], BLAC, the Black Lawyers Association of Cincinnati, as a law student. And you met all the black lawyers, all the black judges and you know and the black politicians. You know they, they had a, I think at the time the mayor of Cincinnati, Theodore Berry, Ted Berry is African American. So you had a black mayor and you had several elected black city council members in the city. Speaker 1: Yeah, this was like a renaissance for, I mean or not a renaissance, 'cause they never been up before, but this is like the first time that black people had achieved any power in Cincinnati. Speaker 2: In Cincinnati, it was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I got a job during the summer as an intern working for then deputy, I think he was the deputy mayor, but I know, he was a senior council member, Bill Chenault, William Chenault. Bill Chenault hired me as his intern and I worked at [Cincinnati] City Hall [Cincinnati, Ohio] for him for I think two summers, my first year and my second year. Got to learn city hall, got to learn Cincinnati politics, learned my way around and then at that third, at the end of that second year, having met the then city solicitor, the city attorney, his name was Tom Luebbers. I had the nerve to walk up to Tom Luebbers with Bill Chenault's support, to say that you know I'm in my third year, I've been working downstairs for the politicians. As I get closer to graduating, I'd like to apply for a position in your law department as a third year law student. I got the job, so my third year, I worked part-time as a law clerk for the city attorney in Cincinnati. You know just as, as a side, probably about a month or two about a month ago, the Sixth Circuit Judicial Conference was held in Columbus [Ohio]. And you know the Sixth Circuit is from roughly Tennessee, federal circuit, from Tennessee to Michigan, and everything in between. So you got Ohio in there and Kentucky in there, so you've got all these lawyers and all these judges at the judicial conference and I'm one of the speakers on the panel on trials. I was the speaker and my, the other speaker was a lawyer who prosecuted "Scooter" Libby. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Patrick, Patrick Fitzgerald, U.S. attorney from Chicago [Illinois]. So the two of us were the two lead speakers, there's another lawyer on there, but we were the, the key speakers. And while I'm preparing to speak, a man walks up to me and said, "[HistoryMaker] Billy [Martin], I'm sure you don't remember me," and I looked at him, and I said, "of course I remember you. Tom, of course I do," and he says, "I didn't think you would," he said, "you know you worked for me as a law clerk and you're in law school and I remember you." And I was standing with a group of people and I said, "Tom, let me tell you why I remember you." I said, "You gave me my first start as a lawyer," because after hiring me as an intern, when I graduated, Tom hired me as a city attorney. One of the first blacks to be hired as a prosecutor in the City of Cincinnati. So while I only held that job for a couple of years, the fact that you know Tom Luebbers took a shot at me and allowed me to grow. I remembered it, and he remembered it. Story_ID: 671289 Speaker 1: So we wanna go back to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for a minute before we get you out of the University of Cincinnati law school [University of Cincinnati College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio], and ask you about Elijah Cummings. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: We neglected to mention him and-- Speaker 2: You know in, in 2010, you don't know how many days there are wish I could go back to those days at Howard right now, it was fun. Elijah, I met Elijah, Congressman Elij- Congressman Elijah Cummings when we were freshmen. We, we were in the same dormitory at Howard and while I didn't play football because I ran track and had played football previously, I'm real close with most of the football players. You know I hung out with the football players at Howard, and Elijah was one of those football players. I remember shooting pool with Elijah in the rec [recreation] room at the, at the dormitory, I've know Elijah since 1969, I'm a big supporter of his and a dear friend. And have been friends with the congressman since college, and he--what you see in him today, is the person that we saw back then, he's just hardworking. His word is his bond, he's a person of principal and he was somebody who would kick your butt if, if, if you bothered him, he was then you know a, a big football player. So Elijah is a, is a good guy. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did the surprising, were you surprised at all when he became you know congressman? Speaker 2: I was not because he always had interest in Baltimore [Maryland]; you know he's from Baltimore. He'd always talk of you know, doing things to help out people, no I was not surprised. I was very elated and happy for him, not surprised. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 671290 Speaker 1: University of Cincinnati law school [University of Cincinnati College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio], now you graduated in '76 [1976] right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is there any stories about law school we need to talk about before we get you out of law school? Speaker 2: No, law school, after the first event, you know that it was, it was really challenging trying to break down some of the, the, the barriers for minority students. You know we had, you know we're always struggling with professors to try to you know, we're just coming out of the '60s [1960s], it's 1974, 1975, '76 [1976] when I graduated. We're really trying to say that you know there was a time when there were not a lot of graduates; I think it was a twenty-year period when there were no graduates from the University of Cincinnati of people of color. So we're saying that you know there are a lot of people out here who qualified to go to law school, who would make good lawyers. And I remember taking you know in my senior year in law school, I, by then knew that I wanted to go into the practice of criminal law. And I can remember in my criminal law classes that there were not many who I thought were as, as sharp as I was and you know I was really immersed in the, in the practice of criminal law at the time. Speaker 1: Now, why criminal law, why, why did you think that was? Speaker 2: I, the Fourth Amendment you know search and seizure, you know, the you know the way that you get pulled over by a police officer. You know as a black kid, my encounter with the law was on, on the street with police officers. Now when you're driving the police officer confront you, so you know all black kids, young black kids have these experiences with police officers. And I always thought I'd like to know the law, so I once I start, once I--I took criminal law, that was something that I think I can make a difference. Practicing in the area of criminal law, I thought from the perspective of a prosecutor, you know [HistoryMaker] Eric [H.] Holder [Jr.], the attorney general and I are--I've known Eric for twenty plus years, he's a friend. You know he's a colleague and I thought I wanted to be like the attorney general, I wanted to be the attorney general back then. I wanted to go into the [U.S.] Department of Justice, I wanted to be a prosecutor, I wanted to have a voice in the Department of Justice that would try to balance and equalize-- Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --the enforcement of our laws. Story_ID: 671291 Speaker 1: Two questions that come immediately to mind. The first is that Cincinnati [Ohio] experienced riots in 2000, I think in that experience of riots (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --that the city has, had experienced riots when most of the riots are past in terms of other cities, you know you don't see, but you know Cincinnati has been unique in one of the northern cities that have, has had these riots and they're based on police brutality complaints and issues. With these and, and it's been said these issues have simmered over years and years that Cincinnati was that, was that a big issue when you were there? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know if you're aware, I was the lawyer for the City of Cincinnati, that was my client, I represented the Cincinnati Police Department during the riots. The then mayor of the city, Charlie Luken is a classmate of mine at the University of Cincinnati [College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio]. The mayor called me when the riots broke out; the [U.S.] Department of Justice had initiated a investigation for a pattern practice of racial discrimination. Or pattern of practice of excessive use of force against minority citizens. And the mayor asked me to come in to do an investigation for the city and to represent the city and the Cincinnati Police Department during those riots. So I'm intimately familiar with that entire matter during the riots. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And if you ask me did that exist, it did, but it existed in every major metropolitan city in the early '70s [1970s]. Cincinnati you know I mentioned, I think we were off camera, that Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] at times is a very racially polarized city. There are certain neighborhoods in Pittsburgh, when I was growing up that as a black kid in the City of Pittsburgh, not in the suburbs, but in the City of Pittsburgh, that as a black kid I was told don't be caught there by yourself at night. If you're going home, go around this neighborhood, Cincinnati was the same way, so I was not surprised you know that you had problems. I was surprised to have, quote, a riot, in 2000, but wasn't surprised it is a city that at times is racially polarized. Speaker 1: Okay, okay when we get to 2000 I'll ask you some more about that case. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 671292 Speaker 1: Oh, the Watergate hearings, when--as you were entering University of Cincinnati law school [University of Cincinnati College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio], lawyers at the national level were on prominent display on television (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --in the Watergate hearings. Speaker 2: I watched it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: On TV and more important than that, one of my lasting memories of Washington D.C. in 1973 is when my family and I moved from D.C. to Cincinnati. Watergate had just happened, the break-in had happened and I can remember driving by down Virginia Avenue and pointing out to my wife that, that's the Watergate [complex, Washington, D.C.]. That's where the break-in occurred and we rode out and went to Cincinnati for law school. And then I watched the hearings and the impeachment and the resignation of, of the president [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Impeachment related issues and his resignation prior to impeachment. Speaker 1: Yeah one by one his lawyers John Dean and, and [H.R.] Haldeman (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Haldeman. Speaker 1: [John] Ehrlichman, Sam, what's his name? Speaker 2: Sam Ervin. Speaker 1: Sam Ervin who was the head of the committee [Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities], you know under--I mean just one, you know it's like a--made, made me think about law school (laughter). Speaker 2: It, it had me, while I was in law school really thinking that I can do that, you know but again as, as a young, I forget whether I was first or second year at the time law student. But I remember thinking that in my wildest dreams, I could've never imagined that I would become one of the lawyers who ultimately would represent people related to those type of scandals. So you know so you sat there as a kid, young lawyer, young law student thinking I can do that, I wish I could get a chance to do that. And looking back you know, some thirty-five years later now, it's a dream come true. Speaker 1: Okay, I wondered about that, we hadn't mentioned it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sure, Watergate was a big part of why I enjoy doing what I do, I watched those lawyers go through those hearings. And I always thought you know I did pretty good, you know I understand what the system is you know I, it was always troubled me with that thirteen or eighteen minute gap in the tapes. As you know as a prosecutor, I always thought boy, I bet you I could prove who, you know, who had that tape, so I looked at it then as a prosecutor you know, could I prove that case? So I looked at it from both sides, prosecution and defense. Story_ID: 671293 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have a inclination to one side or the other to be a defense lawyer or, or a prosecutor, did--? Speaker 2: You know, my career choice would've been, I would think I would've liked to have done security enforcement, SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] work, but I couldn't. There, there were no jobs open at the time, so at the time I thought rather than going in to do defense work, I would like to learn our criminal justice system from the inside. So my goal always was to, to just learn it and to, if along the way I can make a difference or in, in you know was--I knew that I represented you know to, to people of color to blacks you know I've been the first of a lot of things. First black prosecutor to do that you know, the first black to do this, the first black to be the head of an office in the [U.S.] Department of Justice. And I always knew that I was setting, I was a role model so my goal always was to try to do the best that I could do. And to you know show people that you know blacks are competent, are qualified, should have these jobs, so I always knew that I had to do good, do a good job. And if I did a good job, that I could open the door for others and others could come behind me. Speaker 1: Okay, so, well okay. So you graduated [from the University of Cincinnati College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio] in 1976 and you served as assistant city prosecutor for the City of Cincinnati [Ohio] from '76 [1976] to '78 [1978], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Great job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a great job because as a city prosecutor, essentially all I did was try misdemeanors and I tried misdemeanors at you know the old guys, when I say the old guys, they may have been three or four years older than me. But they had been seasoned in the city prosecutor's Office, they had cases they didn't want to try, but they were jury trials. So I can remember that that I would walk down my office in the prosecutor's office, to say to somebody, to say to everybody, does anybody have a case today that they don't want to try? So I would find for everyday or every week, if I didn't have a jury trial, I'd go find one, and somebody always had a case, say you want to try a jury, here. So I'd pick up their file and next day, I'd take it in for, for trial, so I would solicit and find cases to try. It was a great job because I probably learned how to try a case with those misdemeanors. Speaker 1: Okay, why would they not want to try those cases? Speaker 2: They thought they were losers, you know they, they would call them the dogs, anybody have any dog cases? You know it was a case that they, that was tried, the police had arrested somebody, there's probable cause, they wouldn't dismiss the case or they thought they had witness problems. I would take it and say let me look at it if I concluded that the case shouldn't be tried, I you know, I'd dismiss it. But if I thought there was probable cause and that we had witnesses, I'd take them in and try them, so I got a lot of experience in my two plus years. Story_ID: 671294 Speaker 1: Are there any cases that come to mind that would be exemplary of what--the kind of cases you're talking about? Speaker 2: Absolutely, shoplifting you know the Federated Department Store [Federated Department Stores, Inc.] was located there and they'd have a lot of shoplifting cases. So the police had these campaigns to go against shoplifters, so you did a lot of shoplifting cases. My colleague was involved--you know Larry Flynt has been prosecuted on numerous occasions and convicted once; he was convicted on a misdemeanor course in Cincinnati [Ohio]. My officemate and, and friend was the lawyer and I sat through the trail, but you know I was there for the Larry Flynt trials. So you know you got a chance to see even in the small town, you'll get these big cases sometimes, these misdemeanors. So you gotta know how to try even, it would say it's only a misdemeanor, but if you learn how to try a misdemeanor, you can try the felonies and big civil cases. But you gotta learn how to try those cases. Speaker 1: Yeah Larry Flynt was a character from, I think he', he's I think he's from Columbus [Ohio] but he lived in Dayton [Ohio], Cincinnati and Columbus and he founded 'Hustler' magazine and all that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I (unclear). Speaker 2: And you know at the time you know the--remember Prosecutor Simon [L.] Leis [Jr.] who was you know kind of very conservative prosecutor, really went after Larry Flynt for kind of circulating publishing during the war and during some abortion related issues. So Cincinnati and the prosecutor for Hamilton County [Ohio], Cincinnati went after Larry Flynt. But I, I've tried misdemeanor homicide; misdemeanor negligent, negligent homicide I think would be the appropriate term. It's an accident with, with severe reckless or negligent conduct, which is still a misdemeanor that results in a death. So you know my first year out of law school [University of Cincinnati College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio], I had, was involved in a homicide trial, which was a severe automobile accident. So I learned how to try homicide one year out of, out of law school. Speaker 1: Was--maybe I'm, I don't know, was there, I don't think it was court actions after that, that, I remember a big fire in Cincinnati at one point that made national news (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's in Kentucky. Speaker 1: Kentucky, yeah okay. Speaker 2: Beverly Hills Supper Club [Southgate, Kentucky], the nightclub. Speaker 1: John Davidson the entertainer was there, I think or yeah. Speaker 2: That was in, that was, that was you know with the nightlife, Cincinnati was such a, is such a conservative city the night life was in Kentucky. So that, that supper club was in I want to say Erlanger, Kentucky [sic.]. Speaker 1: Erlanger probably yeah. Speaker 2: But I think that was a suburb, it's Kentucky but it's really a suburb of Cincinnati, and that fire was in, in Kentucky. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's where the airport is. Speaker 2: That's where the Cincinnati airport [Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport, Hebron, Kentucky] is, is in Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 671295 Speaker 1: So you served as assistant U.S. attorney in the Southern District of Ohio now, how did you make that move? Speaker 2: You know in--President [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] had just been elected I think Civiletti, Benjamin Civiletti was the United States attorney as you, as you know during the prior administration-- during the [President George Walker] Bush administration, controversy arose in the [U.S.] Department of Justice with the firing of certain U.S. attorneys. So there's a tradition when, when a new administration comes in, resignations are handed in by the U.S. attorneys so that the new party or the new--especially if there's a new party coming in, well the Republicans were going out and Democrats were coming in. And the Democrats were looking for candidates to be U.S. attorney, the [James] Jim Cissell who was then a Cincinnati [Ohio] city council member wanted to be U.S. attorney. And I know that Jim went about trying to get the support of you know the senators and the local elected officials. And some of them asked him well what are you plans on diversity, you know we got a U.S. attorney's office here in Cincinnati in Dayton [Ohio] in the Southern District of Ohio which is where I was a an assistant. Comprises Columbus [Ohio], Cincinnati and Dayton, so all three of those cities are the Southern District of Ohio. You know what are your plans for diversity, and they probably didn't say diversity back then, I think back then we probably used the term it wasn't diversity, we probably would've used minority recruitment or you know whatever the term may have been for increasing minority participation. Speaker 1: Equal Opportunity. Speaker 2: Equal opportunities, I know that Jim Cissell said that you know I clearly plan to hire some minorities and Jim then ask the local prosecutors and the local elected officials in, in Cincinnati to give him some names. And I remember getting a call from Bill Reck [ph.], I think it was William Bowen who was a state senator from Cincinnati who lived in my neighborhood saying you know we know you do a good job as a city prosecutor. We're trying to find some qualified candidates to submit as applicants for the U.S. attorney's office, would you be interested? So I told him (laughter) I would love that job. So he says if you're interested, you clearly have the background, we'd like to send your name up to the, a person whose planned to be U.S. attorney. If he gets it, we'll make a recommendation and they did, and I then got a job, interview with the U.S. attorney, and he hired me as an assistant. Story_ID: 671296 Speaker 1: Now was [HistoryMaker] Nathanial [R.] Jones in Cincinnati [Ohio] then? Speaker 2: Nate was the first African American hired in that district. And I have, funny story with, not Nathanial Jones, Nathanial Speights. Speaker 1: Speights, okay. Speaker 2: Was the assistant, Nathanial Jones was not there yet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nathanial Speights was an assistant, was the first African American hired in, I believe in the Southern District [of Ohio], or one of the first, if not the first. And my last interview, they told me you have to go to Columbus [Ohio], you, you cleared interviews in Cincinnati you cleared them in Dayton [Ohio], but you gotta be you know go to Columbus. And I remember driving to Columbus, you know nervous for this last interview, and I walked in and my last interview not that it should make a difference on the merits, but it was an African American who was, who was doing my interview. So the racial issue came off the board and I was able really talk and that was my, my interview, that was 1978. So from 1978 through 1979, I served as an assistant in the Southern District, [James] Jim Cissell gave me a choice, if I wanted to work in Cincinnati or Dayton. Cincinnati seemed to be kind of busy, and Dayton seemed to have a lot of cases and only two lawyers. So I chose Dayton, and one year later, in 1979 after being there for a year, Nathanial Jones was recommended and sworn in as a judge [U.S. Court of Appeals] for the Sixth Circuit. I was at Judge Jones' swearing in, Judge Jones has been a mentor for me, he's a friend and when Judge Jones left the bench in the Sixth Circuit, he joined the law firm of Blank Rome [LLP] in the Cincinnati office. When I, shortly after he joined Blank Rome, I joined Blank Rome, so for years, Judge Jones and I, before joining Howrey [LLP, Washington, D.C.], Judge Jones and I were partners at Blank Rome for years. We remain friends, I have cases that I still have a pending case with Judge Jones where he and his Cincinnati office represent one client and me and my firm represent another client. So we still work as colleagues on cases. Story_ID: 671297 Speaker 1: So you were in Dayton [Ohio] for a year? Speaker 2: I was in Dayton for a year and after the year, I had done a pretty good job, I was twenty-eight years old and at age twenty-nine, the United States attorney appointed me as the attorney in charge of the Dayton office. I was one of the youngest African Americans to be in charge of a U.S. attorney's office in the country. So I you know it was was an honor, and I got a lot of recognition from the [U.S.] Department of Justice [DOJ] as being you know pretty senior and very young African American. So I built a good name and that would've been around 1979, seventy--yeah, around '79 [1979], so from 1979 through today, the attorney that hired me is David Margolis. David Margolis is still a lawyer at the Department of Justice, David Margolis was then the chief of the Organized Crime Strike Force and David Margolis now is the second most senior career person at the Department of Justice. So I, you know I built friends and still have friends at DOJ. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So we, so we need to talk about the Organized Crime Strike Force I guess in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: You know having you know been appointed as the head of the Dayton office, what I didn't realize then is that you can only stay in those positions when your party or the party that brought you in is in power. So since I came in under Democratic administration [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], when President [Ronald Wilson] Reagan was elected, I was asked and told that I would have to step down as the head of the Dayton office. Speaker 1: Now who is the attorney general when you were in, in, in the Dayton office? Speaker 2: There, there would've been, it would've been-- Speaker 1: I couldn't think, I was hoping you could (laughing) Speaker 2: I just said his name. Speaker 1: Not Jody [Powell], no he was press secretary, who is it? Speaker 2: No, it was the Georgia connection from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: From President Carter. Speaker 1: Guy from Georgia I know. Speaker 2: [Benjamin R.] Civiletti was the second [attorney] general, I think it was Civiletti; it was Sevlay [ph.], Civiletti, then William French Smith, 'cause you know they when you're nominated you get a plaque from the appointment papers from that attorney general. But I think it was Civiletti signed my papers and William French Smith was the--it's William French Smith and Ed [Edwin] Meese. Meese was the attorney general when I was asked to step down. Speaker 1: Yeah under Reagan, right. Speaker 2: Under Reagan, and I did step down, but the [U.S.] Department of Justice having built a good name, told me that you know we'd like to keep you. And you know there's a difference between the criminal division in the Department of Justice and U.S. attorney offices. So I was told what if, if you want to leave the U.S. attorney offices, you can join the criminal division and you know you can tell us really where you'd like to go. So I told David Margolis that I'd like to go to California, I'd never been to California, always wanted to live and practice law in California. And they had an opening in the U.S. attorney's office in San- in the Organized Crime Strike Force in San Francisco [California] and the Department of Justice transferred me and appointed me as a trial attorney to the Organized Crime Strike Force in San Francisco. Story_ID: 671298 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that Organized Crime Strike Force in San Francisco [California]. Speaker 2: You may know Billy Hunter, Billy Hunter is the Nat- director of the National Basketball Association Players Association [sic. National Basketball Players Association (NBPA)]. Billy is a lawyer and Billy was the U.S. attorney in San Francisco at the time that I moved out to the strike force. So in addition to getting the job in the strike force you also, I also interviewed through Billy Hunter (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The U.S. attorney, so I moved out to San- moved my family out to San Francisco became a prosecutor and within a year of, of moving to San Francisco I had two of the biggest--I was involved in two of the biggest cases that the [U.S.] Department of Justice [DOJ] had at the time. One of them, and these are all public matters that I can talk about, one of them was the investigation of the Teamsters union [International Brotherhood of Teamsters] during a corruption, during the construction of the Great Alaskan Pipeline [sic. Trans-Alaskan Pipeline] throughout Alaska. There were allegations of, of, of fraud and abuse and I was assigned to Alaska, to Anchorage [Alaska] for a three year period to conduct that investigation. I was the lead lawyer; it was very (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You had to move to Anchorage? Speaker 2: I commuted. Speaker 1: Commuted, okay. Speaker 2: I would do two weeks in Anchorage and then go back to my home in San Francisco, but I did that for three almost four years, very you know, I learned a lot. And what's interesting is when Senator Ted Stevens [Sr.] had his recent trial; I learned a lot of same players when I was in Anchorage. Learn the law firms, the lawyers and a lot of the lay of the land, so it was kind of interesting to watch all of that. And some of the lawyers that I knew, I was still participating. Speaker 1: Stevens was the governor of Alaska that preceded Sarah Palin, right it would, had the big scandal around. Speaker 2: I don't know if that he was governor, I knew that he was the senator; he was senator (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, senator, yeah okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: He's a senator and I think he, I don't know what he did before senator, but I think he's been a senator for twenty plus years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was, that was one of the big cases and the other one which is probably the biggest case I ever had before the [Monica] Lewinsky scandal and the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton scandal, was the Chicago [Illinois] related case. A man by the name of Allen Dorfman, do you remember that name? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Allen Dorfman was--[Paul] "Red" Dorfman was the dad, Red Dorfman was the financier, the, the money man for Al Capone, for the Capone family. When Red Dorfman died, Allen, you know the allegations were that they passed on his operation to his son Allen Dorfman. And Allen Dorfman was associated with organized crime. So I had a chance to be involved in the investigation of the quote Capone family, I was lead, the lead lawyer from the San Francisco office with the Chicago office. And we were involved because they were trying, allegedly trying to infiltrate a union in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California]. Story_ID: 216930 Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about--okay so Allen Dorfman's the son of [Paul] "Red" Dorfman who was Al Capone's-- Speaker 2: Money man. Speaker 1: Money man, okay. Speaker 2: And that--the allegation was that the, they were--the mob was trying to infiltrate a union in the, the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California], so the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], we set up wiretaps and which an organized crime investigation so we're investigating the organized, the Chicago [Illinois] organized, Capone organized crime family, and it's you know kind of interesting. Earlier this year I had a chance to talk with the U.S. attorney in, in Chicago, and they recently returned indictments against people called Joey the Clown Lombardo [Joseph Patrick "Joey the Clown" Lombardo Sr.] and others. Those were same, some of the same people that we indicted, or we investigated back in 1983, '84 [1984] so they were still involved in the organized crime, that many years later. So it was a, a very fascinating investigation, I learned you know a lot about organized crime. You know I had FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents assigned to me full-time to work on this matter; I received death threats from the mob. But once we got too close to the money, and then you know fortunately you know we had the FBI and we knew where the threats came from you know on monitored phone calls. So the FBI the enforcement action go after the people who were making the threats. But it was you know kind of scary and, and challenging at the same time. We indicted Allen Dorfman, the government allowed that, when I say the government, the decision was made by the Department of Justice. Rather than to go you know send people out to arrest him this very prominent insurance executive in Chicago. They allowed him to voluntarily surrender and to travel to San Francisco [California] to answer to the indictment; this was a real eye-opening experience for me. Because I learned in time that you know these gangs are real, the mob is real. Allen Dorfman went to lunch, he was supposed to fly Monday morning, he went to a lunch on Sunday in Chicago as he's leaving the lunch, I can remember as though it were yesterday. He walks out of the restaurant whoever was with him, turns to him, kissed him on his cheek, pulled out a 22 caliber, put the caliber to his temple and fired two or three shots. After he fell to the ground, they laid a black glove on top of his body; it was the sign of the black hands. And I told people then that this stuff is real. Speaker 1: The Carbonari, the Black Hand. Speaker 2: So, I, I actually had a case where they, the client that I--we're hoping to bring to the Bay Area and hope to try to talk to him, Black Hands killed him before he ever got on the plane. So it was a lesson learned to me that that this stuff is real, and it's long before--you know we got gangs out there now, these street gangs and drugs, but this was the original gang. And the original sentence of death taken by who may betray or infiltrate or disclose information. And this young prosecutor--that, that was 1984; I learned a lot. Story_ID: 216931 Speaker 1: When you look back on it, do you think that may have been another method to have, you know I guess--was there another way to get [Allen] Dorfman there [San Francisco, California] without or without (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Killed I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: There, I'm sure, I, I'm sure there was an internal debate whether we [Organized Crime Strike Force] should arrest him on the scene [in Chicago, Illinois] and bring him back in custody or allow him to surrender. And you know the decision was made to allow him to surrender, had the decision been made to seal the indictment the way they've learned to do it now to avoid that, they seal nowadays they seal the indictment until the arrests are made. They don't normally let people in, in those type cases surrender, and that's one of the reasons once you know you tell people we're going after him. Those who may not want him to testify will never have a chance to go get him, so it's for witness protection, for protection of the life of the defendant. But now they'd probably take him into custody. Speaker 1: Did, I mean, did any of this 'cause you to consider how justice is carried out in the country in terms of--I mean if a you know you're driving in the wrong neighborhood in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] or something. You're black and you're in a white neighborhood and they don't allow you to turn yourself in (laughter). I mean you know it's just you know I mean for just something as simple as you, you driving on the wrong you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But, but here's somebody is indicted, and the big, he's allowed to fly himself to, and then he gets killed on the way by people who don't want him to tell. Speaker 2: I think that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't know it seems like a strange-- Speaker 2: I think that was kind of the practice at the time you know for any executive you know the judge probably would've granted him bail. He wasn't considered a danger to the community, although now days you know they would say by being involved in the gang with that much money you could be considered a danger to a community. But the laws and times have changed; nowadays he'd be arrested and probably would not get bail. Back then he probably would've gotten bail, so I'm not sure it would've--was avoidable. If they were gonna killed him, I think they would've kill; they'd kill him even now, because he would've made bail. There, no judge would've held him without bail, so once he made bail, same thing would've happened. So no, I, I used to always think, boy if we'd taken him into custody, but you couldn't have kept him in custody he would've ultimately been able to get bail. And if they were gonna do this once he got bail, they would've done it. Story_ID: 216932 Speaker 1: How do you deal with that kind of tension, now you're getting death threats, they find out who you are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: Threatening you; threatening your family-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: How did--you got a young family, you don't want that kind of-- Speaker 2: You know, the--you know an interesting story there is the agents [Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)] intercepted that conversation and (laughter) I knew that the agents paid a visit to the people who were making the threats. And back then, the [U.S.] Justice Department pretty much said, we play by the rules if you play by the rules. You don't play by the rules, you know they--because the mob always just wanted to keep making money, you know? But if you shut them down, they couldn't make money, then you know things changed, so I think there was a, a message that if you don't--that's not playing by the rules. You stop playing by the rules, we'll shut this whole thing down you know, and I--nowadays they shut it down anyway. But back then they played by the rules a little differently, but I know that there are some agents who visited the person or persons who were making the threats, and the threats stopped. Speaker 1: Okay, interesting, the rules (laughter). Speaker 2: These are the rules guys. And you know if you ever watched 'The Godfather',' they would even say throughout the movie, we gotta play by the rules. You know that's why in the early days they didn't like when the mob started dealing with drugs because you know the drugs bring in people who don't play by the rules, that's why they didn't want drugs. In the early days in the Mafia, they did not, now they do, but back then they did not condone--matter of fact they would cut you off or eliminate you if you brought drugs into their operation. They didn't want drugs, because that brings in too much, too many people that don't play by the rules. Speaker 1: You think, I mean in just reflecting on what's going on today, you think a lot of the neighborhood gangs and, and local you know urban gangs have they figured the rules out yet? You know in terms of--'cause you--in neighborhood meetings they always complain all the kill--street crime and killings and murders in the community, innocent kids being shot. I mean they, have they figured out what the rules are you think or? Speaker 2: They don't care. You know they don't, they don't care to do business. You know the, the present gangs all strive to be the most ruthless. They want to be, they wanna--they rule by fear and intimidation, they don't want to be businesses. You know the mob would have fronts as businesses, you know then when they infiltrated the casinos in [Las] Vegas [Nevada], they still wanted to build these businesses. They skimmed money from the businesses, but they had these fronts, and they learned how to you know do businesses, and then you know took money out the back door. So they learned the rules. The present gangs don't learn the rules; they don't care about the rules. A lot of these kids are--you know you see a kid out here with an Uzi, it's, it--if somebody in Prince George's County [Maryland], the--you know here in Washington [D.C.], one of the suburbs close to us is Prince George's County. Very affluent African American community, predominately African American community, some of the most wealthiest--the highest number of affluent African Americans in the world live in Prince George's County. At a school, they arrested a fourteen or fifteen year-old kid with an Uzi at school. So nowadays you know people, they're not learning the rules because the gangs are--you know the gang might be headed by a twenty-two year-old who's bringing in fourteen and fifteen year-olds. So all they're doing is, is killing. There's no--they don't care to learn the rules and to build a business. They understand what they're doing is a dirty business, and they're going to rule much like the Columbian drug lords do. You know we're here to sell this poison, we're here to make money off of it, and we'll kill you. So that's why these gangs, these street gangs are so very violent and very dangerous. They don't play by any rules. Speaker 1: So it, it kind of--you think it kind of speaks to as a lack of community, a sense of community, in, in most of the gangsters we have now I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it speaks to a lack of, I think it speaks to a lack of defeat, a sense of defeat, of not belonging, this is not my community. You know I'm not gonna lean on you. Story_ID: 216933 Speaker 1: When I was an assistant U.S. attorney here in--you know, we'll get to that. But I ultimately arrived, was an assistant U.S. attorney here in [Washington] D.C. and I would, you know, ultimately was appointed to create and head a homicide unit. So I was--had built a team of homicide prosecutors, and we would interview shooters who were fourteen, fifteen, sixteen years old. And you'd ask them, "Why did you do it?" "Aren't you afraid?" And they said, "You know, I don't expect to live past seventeen, so you know, what the hell." You know, your life--I don't value life because I, my life's not guaranteed, so I don't value mine, I don't value yours, I don't value anybody's. So they have no value of life, so they'll take your life, my life, their own life, because they don't think that they're gonna live. See you and I sit here and think you know I'd like to make it to seventy, eighty, ninety, if quality of life can be sustained. They don't think they're ever gonna make it into adulthood. They're prepared to die as teenagers. Kind of sad. Speaker 2: It is. Story_ID: 216934 Speaker 1: San Francisco [California] till 1984, anything else in--those the basic highlights of those? What about the oil pipeline [Trans-Alaskan Pipeline] now--? Speaker 2: That was a, that was, you know, we indicted some members of the [Teamsters] Union [International Brotherhood of Teamsters], I think went, had one trial, I think it--the trial was either a hung jury or guilty on some and not guilty on others. You know it was just a, a fascinating time to know that you know at a very young age, thirty, thirty-one years old that I was appointed to head this major investigation. It really you know had me you know respecting what I did. I knew it was a major assignment. Speaker 1: It seems like just thinking about this, this [Organized Crime] Strike Force and the two big cases here, they both had to do with union activities and thing about the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan administration was intervention of the airline (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah the traffic controllers. Speaker 1: Air traffic controllers strike and the demise of union since that time you know it seems, it just seems like these are all you know things that you know are spelling the demise, the demise of the power of the union in the country. Speaker 2: I think it was all during that, during that time period. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My dad [Felton Martin, Sr.] was a big union guy; I think he was with the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations], the [United] Steelworkers. I think the steel workers were part of the AFL-CIO; I know he was a member of the steelworkers union. Speaker 1: Yeah I yeah I--there's, there's even a book, movie about them, Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] black steel--it's called 'Man of Steel,' [ph.] I think it's called, about how the struggle of black men to get involved in the union in the first place. They're held back you know you couldn't get in it. When you finally get in it, then we got the unions you know go, whew, you go down. So-- Story_ID: 216935 Speaker 1: At any rate, in '84 [1984] you served as assistant United States attorney for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], so you coming (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Back to the [Washington] D.C. area. Speaker 2: What happened is, I was enjoying my job [as a trial lawyer for the Organized Crime Strike Force], my family and I loved San Francisco [California], you know what's not to love about living in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California]? If you ever visited that area, it's gorgeous out there, and my father [Felton Martin, Sr.] was diagnosed with terminal cancer in 1984, he was given six months to live. And you know living in California and unable to see my dad, so I asked the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] if they would assist me in relocating back to the East Coast. Because I'd like to spend you know my dad's last days with him, so the justice department agreed, they helped me arrange and transfer to the U.S. attorney's office in D.C. So I moved my family back to Washington, which is you know three and half hour drive so when we moved back here, I took some time off. Went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and spent--stayed with my dad before I started the new job and then would drive to Pittsburgh every weekend, had to spend time with my dad. So that's how I transferred back from San Francisco to D.C. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, so did your die--dad pass away then? Speaker 2: Six months to the day. Speaker 1: Six months. Speaker 2: So I was glad that you know that I took that time a lot--you know second guessing on you know, I left a great career in California and left the opportunities in there, but I really got chance to--there's real quality of life up until about the last month. When you know he didn't have the strength to, to go on, but I was glad that I was there. I was there the evening my dad passed, he passed in my arms, so you know I had a chance to say goodbye, so you know. It's a, it was a, you know I faced death with him and, and learned a lot. So to my son [William Martin, Jr.] and to my children I want to be able to pass on you know the knowledge that when I lea- even though I'm leaving here at some date, and that's the message my dad was giving to me, you have a long life ahead of you, enjoy it. You know those were some of the last words I heard from my dad, good luck to you, sorry I won't see it, I'm proud of you. So kind of motivates me every day to know that you know--he never saw the success. Speaker 1: Well he did get a chance to see you become a lawyer. Speaker 2: He saw me become a lawyer, he was at my graduation [from University of Cincinnati College of Law, Cincinnati, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I mean he, he never saw the--I got-much more success now than I did twenty years ago when my dad--twenty-five years ago when my dad passed away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he did get to see me as a lawyer and they were very proud of that. Story_ID: 216936 Speaker 1: In [Washington] D.C. now okay, it says here that this post is unique because attorneys here in D.C. handle both state and federal crimes. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: For district crimes in federal-- Speaker 2: D.C., D.C. is, is unique, because you know there is, it's not--they don't have a--it's not a state, so there's no state prosecutor, the U.S. attorney prosecutes both the federal crimes in Maryland and Virginia. You have the state's attorney's office with a commonwealth attorney office, 'cause state's attorney in Virginia, commonwealth attorney in--the other way, state's attorney in Maryland, commonwealth attorney in Virginia. And they prosecute all state crimes, all felonies and some misdemeanors, state crimes, we don't have that here. So the U.S. attorney does both federal crimes and state crimes, so because I was a local prosecutor in Cincinnati [Ohio], I was qual- I had already done the job of some of the state crimes, and since I was a Organized Crimes Strike Force [sic. Organized Crime Strike Force] and assistant U.S. attorney, I had already done the federal crimes. So when I came to Washington, they hired me, I was the first assistant U.S. attorney hired that did not have to do a rotation through the state unit, before being taken into the federal prosecutions unit. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I came in and you know once again, did well. Within six months of arriving, I was prosecuting homicides. Within a year of arriving, I was a supervisor. Within two years of arriving in D.C., I was the attorney, deputy director of the entire state court side of the prosecutions. And within three years, I was number two, number three in the office, we had five hundred lawyers, I was the executive assistant U.S. attorney for operations. Which meant that every major criminal operation out of the U.S. attorney's office had to be approved by me. Story_ID: 216937 Speaker 1: So this period of time as I remember was a time in which the local crime here in the District [of Columbia; Washington, D.C.] you know skyrocketed due to crack [cocaine] sales. Speaker 2: You know when I was in, when I was in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California], you know we [Organized Crime Strike Force], we although we were doing organized crime you know we had a pros, you know we were friends with the drug prosecutors. And drug prosecutors kept telling me you know, Richard Pryor set himself on fire around that time period. And you know freebasing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Everybody started talking about what the hell is freebasing? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And how do you, how do you freebase, what do you do? And then one--once Richard Pryor got you know--set himself on fire trying to freebase, you know the American public starts talking about like whoa, what is going on here? But crack hadn't really hit--crack hit in the Bay Area before it hit here. So when I was in the U.S. attorney's office in San Francisco [California], they were starting--there were crack houses in the, in Oakland [California] that I was aware of. Because my office was investigating them and we found that you know they were starting to have street sales of crack. And we start seeing the crack epidemic start in the Bay Area, and when I arrived back here, it hadn't hit yet, so I got back here just as the crack epidemic was starting to hit Washington. And you know within a year or two, the turf battles started cropping up where that people were battling no longer to sell marijuana or cocaine powder, but this new drug crack had taken over. And there were all those homicides were, were really turf battles, people were fighting for the right to sell crack on these particular street corners. And there was gang warfare, street gang warfare for turf battles to sell crack. Speaker 1: I mean, I remember it was really escalated to the point where [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry--now I heard this at home in Chicago [Illinois] on the radio. National Public Radio, National Press Club, Marion Barry tells the press he says, this is not the murder cap- capital of America. He says these are just some killings and not murders. He actually said this (laughter). Speaker 2: You know I can tell you that and I watch now and I think that the police chief here, last year said that there were like, I'm gonna estimate, 'cause I don't, I didn't look this up, but 199 homicides that year, last year. When we, when we were prosecuting, I think we'd gotten, we were as high as five hundred some odd homicides a year, so you get two or three times the number of homicides that we now have. We had a lot of murders, that was, it was frightening to head the prosecution unit that had to investigate all these homicides in the capital, nation's capital, it was out of control, out of control. And crack had taken over. Speaker 1: I know communities had called for the [U.S.] National Guard at one time, I can't remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were calling-- Speaker 1: Chicago which was, you know-- Story_ID: 216938 Speaker 1: What's your thinking about that kind of--communities often call for more repression when there are more murders in the community and they don't know what to do about it. But what do you think about that? Speaker 2: I think the police presence helps because if you can find out where the hotspots are you know, there, there's always--there are a lot of hotspots. So if you can beef up your police presence in those hotspots, it does reduce the incidents of, of shootings. But I think the real key is, is education you know, and I--you know if you look at the connection between the horrible school systems and the dropout rate and these kids are gangbanging, I think you'd see something, see something. My answer is that you know, I, I don't know what happened. My dream, I was always taught that my dream is to get an education, to get a good job, to learn responsibility to support your family and to be you know a, a--I'm a Christian in, in my religious belief--and to be true to your, your values. These kids aren't learning that now, you know we got--. I know now as a criminal defense attorney, parents will call me to say you know the drug boys are recruiting my fourteen year-old to hold these drugs. Or they're recruiting my fourteen year old to run these drugs or to do that, and if they don't do it, they're killed. So it's kind of, what's the answer, I, I don't know the answer. We were always taught to strive for something better, but we now have a generation or generations who are under me and under you in age who aren't being taught that. And without that hope, without hope--you know, I, I sometimes--you know my wife, Michel [Martin] is a journalist and does her own radio show on NPR. And for years had worked for 'Nightline' and ABC News, and we always talk about the boy soldiers in you know in some of these-- Rwanda and some of these African countries and the Congo and you know. We have a lot of those same boy soldiers walking around our streets in Washington [D.C.] and Chicago [Illinois] and Dayton [Ohio] right now, same age, lost. Over there you know whatever cat [Methcathinone] or whatever the drug is that they're chewing or smoking. Here it's, it's PCP [Phencyclidine] or crack or cocaine or marijuana, but there's some drug that they get high on. And are out on the streets with guns, and there's no motivation for them to do anything other than that. Until we can conquer the battles, and win that battle to show that there is something out here other than this, we're gonna keep repeating this cycle. Speaker 1: Well, one of the initiatives of the late '80s [1980s] early '90s [1990s] was community policing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about that, I know the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] did several studies about it and there was a some--I know lip service paid to it, but it wasn't always rolled out the same way or in every, in every place it came out so. Speaker 2: I think it's a good idea, Officer Friendly, the concept of police officer is friendly to the community, I think those days are gone. And I think now that we have international terrorism and that we have a fear by law enforcement. The reaction now, if you get pulled over now, you don't get a friendly police officer, saying hey sir, you were, you seem to be speeding, or sir you missed that. You didn't put a blinker on when you made that turn; you get a police officer on one side of your car, second police officer on the second side of your car. One may have the gun out, and if the gun is not out, the gun is on--the hand is on the gun as they approach your car. So I think the whole concept is now safety to the police officer and not friendly toward the citizen. So I think that you know the concept of community policing is gone and it's gone because to me police officers have been hurt, shot or wounded and they treat everybody now as though you are the, a potential shooter and that concept of friendliness, I think is gone. Story_ID: 671299 Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980], now this has nothing to do with being a district assistant United States attorney but Doug Williams did win the Super Bowl in 1988 and, in dramatic fashion as a black quarterback with the Washington Redskins. And you as an old quarterback aspirant, how did you feel about that? Speaker 2: Very proud, I, I was proud. You know we, we mentioned earlier "Jefferson Street Joe" Gilliam [Joseph Wiley Gilliam, Jr.]. And I was very proud to see a quarterback get an opportunity to play into, in the championship game for the NFL [National Football League] and, and win it. So I think that me and a lot of other African Americans were proud of, of two things. Number one an African American was given an opportunity; an African American has shown, that I too can be as qualified as a white quarterback to do this job. So it was a chance of equal opportunity and he persevered and, and won. So it was a real proud moment for me to watch a black quarterback win the Super Bowl. Speaker 1: Did you have any doubts about whether they were gonna win or not when the game started? Speaker 2: I think they were down, I think Doug Williams brought them back, I think they were down, I forget the score, at least three touchdowns. And I know that he, he brought them back so yeah, I didn't think they could win, and then as you know he started closing the gap and the score, I started thinking, well whoa. You know maybe destiny is, is here today, so yeah, I thought he could do it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I hoped he could do it. Story_ID: 671300 Speaker 1: So you served as assistant, as executive assistant U.S. attorney for the District [of Columbia; Washington, D.C.] until 1990. Now and, said, as you said, you--were over--that you had five hundred homicides a year you were averaging at some point. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Anything else about that before we, I mean did you, you have any reflections about like what could possibly been done you know I, I you just talked about the bigger picture. Education, jobs and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Being part of it. Speaker 2: Well you know D.C. is a small city. I think the time that these, the numbers were like that I think the population base was 600,000 people in D.C. proper. So for a city of 600,000 people to have five hundred homicides was startling. And the fact that at the time I think D.C. had a, rate, the ratio composition of the citizens of D.C. may have been 65 to 70 percent African American and 35 to 40 percent non-minorities. So you know you had a lot of black people killing black people, these were not you know black kids killing white people or white kids. These were you know young black kids killing other young black kids, so you know we had a lot of black-on-black crime. And I think the worry was what do you to kind of stop this violence from erupting in our own community. And that's when you went back to the concept of, of you know local police working with the community. Where you had you know groups trying to you know stop the violence, but yeah, it was very troubling then in the city, in the nation's capital, the capital of the Free World. You know the "Chocolate City" you had all these killings by young blacks kids of other black kids, it was something that was very troubling. Speaker 1: Okay, what, what do you think all of the men who worked to bring it down. I know it's, it's down it's now to about two hundred a year of five hundred so, it's been cut by you know three, fifths (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: A third. Speaker 1: Yeah, so. Speaker 2: I'd like to say that you know peop- there's been some education, but I think that the, the turf battles have been established, unfortunately. I think the--you know a lot of that I mentioned were for turf, turf battles, I think now the turf battles are established and there are fewer homicides. 'Cause I don't think that the motivation for the killings have, has changed, I think the drugs are still a problem, I think it's just been a reduction in the turf battle. And you know a lot, I think that there's tougher policing, but you know it's tough to stop a homicide on these drive-bys. I mean it's not like you know you can do an investigation, somebody--one party who hates another party, you can follow one to prevent it. These just pop up. Story_ID: 671301 Speaker 1: Now [HistoryMaker] Kurt Schmoke who's the mayor of Baltimore [Maryland] in those days called for the legalization of all the drugs, did you have any thoughts about that? Speaker 2: You know I, you know, one of the things that I know you know Kurt is now the dean of Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and is a colleague and a friend. And we've spoken, we've spoken on this, I think at the time he was the mayor of Baltimore at the time. And I don't know if legalization is, is the answer, you know I don't know if he was talking about legalization; decriminalization, I don't know if there's a real difference. But I know that what we've done is now created one--a vast prison community as a job industry. You know I've got clients now who are in Virginia and North Carolina prisons for drug offences. And if you look at the prison population, the prison population is comprised of you know 40, 50, 60, 70 percent of drug related, you know population. There's gotta be something, there's gotta be another way to deal with this epidemic, you know the times have you know said it's a mental health problem. You know we've got as many people who are using drugs in prisons, those who were selling drugs. I think there are aspects of being a, a mental health issue as well. But I, I'm not in favor of, of legalizing, I think that would create other problems, so I, I don't know what the answer is there. I, that's, that's a tough one. Education--I think you see fewer young people using crack, I think you see, you see you know fewer young people using you know--I, I say that but then you know you've got epidemics now you have young white children in the suburbs especially in, in Northern Virginia here with heroin. You know you got high school kids who are--a lot of kids now are strung out on heroin are suburban white children. So you know you could say education, but these are educated kids, these are you know kids from affluent families who were college bound, who somehow got onto heroin and got addicted. Now you clearly don't want to legalize heroin, so you, that you know you can't do that. What's the answer, that's a tough one. I mean because you know you got to teach your kids that you know, why you think they call it dope you know? You know 'cause it's stupid to use it, but I don't know how you--that's a problem that you know when you listen to people in Mexico and Columbia and they talk about you know, you know why should we feel bad about growing the poppy or growing the cocoa plant or growing the marijuana when you know, you people up there wanna use it. You know you key, you stop using it, we'll stop selling it. So that's kind of their mentality and you know but I, I think that if you'll look at Europe and other industrialized and, and modern countries, civilizations, the drugs are spreading to those countries as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know the, that's a scar- I don't know the answer. Story_ID: 671302 Speaker 1: You went into private practice in 1990, now what happened, what caused this was it? Speaker 2: In 1990, I had, my first daughter [Nikki Williams] was about to graduate from high school and wanted to go to college and on a government salary I realized I may not be able to afford college. Speaker 1: Well most people consider the executive assistant of the United States attorney to be a good job. Speaker 2: It's a very good job. Speaker 1: Better than the post office even then (laughter). Speaker 2: Ver- very good job, but I can tell you that in 1990, once, once I made that realization, and I decided to leave, I tripled my income immediately, tripled it. Speaker 1: Okay. You became a partner with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: A Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] based law firm. Speaker 1: Yeah, Eckert Seamans Cherin and Mellott, LLC. Speaker 2: Eckert Seamans Cherin and Mellott. Speaker 1: And Mellott, okay, okay in Pittsburgh. So, so did you move back to Pittsburgh? Speaker 2: They had a Washington [D.C.] office. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they wanted to establish a white collar practice here in D.C. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so okay. So what were some of the cases that you or the types of cases that you handled for them? Speaker 2: That's when I learned you know the, the firm represented the Pittsburgh Pirates, the Pittsburgh Penguins, and the Pittsburgh Steelers. And there were baseball players for the Pirates, football players and hockey players who got into bar room brawls, who got into other you know contract problems or domestic abuse allegations. And I, the firm--the club would call the firm and the firm would allow me to go out to the team and to the players and handle some of these cases. So I learned the, from the, and once I started doing that, the firm started appreciating that you know this guy knows what he's doing. So the team, I learned how the team handles matters and then would learn again how the player handles matters, so I had a chance to learn the practice of law from the management, ownership side first. And once I knew that, and I--they introduced me to the players, I then learned the player issues, so once, you know I had a couple of hockey players who got in some pretty tough legal issues. But I was able to resolve those without filing criminal charges, and the firm looked at me and said how did you do that? And I told them you know I have a way of doing some of these sports cases, so they then start promoting my practice as having a sports related litigation practice. And that's how I started building the name of [HistoryMaker] Billy Martin in sports practice, it was through that firm. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 671303 Speaker 1: In 1990 you also met Johnnie Cochran, for the first time. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Johnnie Cochran, so, so tell us about how you met him, and-- Speaker 2: Johnnie at the time had a Washington [D.C.] office, his partner was Ralph Lotkin. Ralph headed his D.C. office, I think it was Cochran and Lotkin was the firm. The firm had a, had an investigation in San Fran [San Francisco, California], in, in Los Angeles [California] that they needed white collar expertise. Somehow Ralph I knew, I knew Ralph asked me if I'd be interested in working on a case. And you know it was another case and I said absolutely, and I get out to L.A. [Los Angeles] with Ralph and we go to Johnnie Coch, go to the office and meet Johnnie Cochran, and I'm thinking whoa, it's Johnnie Cochran. And I you know had, had, had known Johnnie had you know, know who he was so I met Johnnie, met his, his wife, met his dad, had a chance in L.A. to spend time with him. And we, we got along, we hit it off immediately, and Johnnie became like a big brother to me. You know he, he was like, I was like little brother who was like him, who you know kind of wanted to do what he did, so he started, he took me under his wing. We became dear friends, he became and I you know I had a lot great mentors; he became a mentor to me. I had never handled a quote high profile big case; he had, so I kind of had a chance after that to watch how he did what he did. And after a couple of years, Johnnie started bringing me in to try cases with him. So he first you know kind of checked me out, saw that I was as good at what I do, brought me on to kind of watch how he does, what he does. And then brought me on as a member of some of his teams, 'cause at that point Johnnie was kind of backing away from doing criminal work. He wanted to do more of the civil work, major civil rights work, may, civil police you know abuse, excessive use of force, those high profile, high litigation related type cases. Johnnie started doing those and less criminal work, and he brought me on to do some of that criminal work. Speaker 1: Okay is there, are there any memorable cases that you can share with us? Speaker 2: I think I can share, it's, it's a public matter, I know we--Johnnie and I stood out on, on in, inside the courthouse and talked about it, but the last one that we did together Johnnie rep- was representing heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe, when Riddick was accused of interstate domestic violence in North Carolina. Johnnie was brought on to handle the case. Shortly thereafter, Johnnie brought me in to take the lead in, in handling that case. That was our last case together. Speaker 1: About what year was this? Speaker 2: I think that would've been '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, yeah, '98 [1998]. Story_ID: 671304 Speaker 1: Stop me if I'm going too fast here, but I wanted to go to '93 [1993] to the Allen Iverson case. Is that too, are we going too fast? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay you defended NBA [National Basketball Association] all-star--he wasn't all-star then, he was a high school star who is Allen Iverson and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I didn't have Allen until he got out of high school. Speaker 1: Oh you didn't, okay. Speaker 2: I did not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The incident at the bowling alley when he was in high school. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Was handled by some lawyers down in Virginia Beach [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. This is the incident that happened in Hampton, Virginia. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Where he got in trouble and you de-you, you didn't handle him till later, much later, and what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Much later when he, I think Allen was, was, I forget actually, the first thing I did for Allen. But I think there was some investigation after Allen had graduated from Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] and was playing professional ball. But I should tell you that it wasn't the fact that I was representing Allen, when I told you I had met some mentors along the way. I also met Coach John Thompson [Jr.], the dad. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Big John. And like Johnnie [Cochran], Coach and I got along. Coach liked the way that I handled myself as a prosecutor, he knew that I you know was very active in the community. And when I left the U.S. attorney's office to go into private practice, Coach Thompson contacted his agent; he's represented by sports agent, David Falk. David was Allen's agent and he took me to lunch with David Falk, said David I want to introduce you to a young lawyer that I think is a great lawyer. I know that you know you don't have a lot of lawyers of color that you, you use and I'd like you to you know if you, if you think he's competent and qualified, consider using him. David and I got along and with that introduction from Coach Thompson; David started using me on any criminal or litigation matter. And David had--I didn't do anything for [Michael] Jordan, but David had Michael Jordan and every major NBA player at the time. So any legal issue that came of up for any of David Falk's clients, or ballplayers, David brought me on to handle the trial or litigation issues. So Coach Thompson really was responsible for those introductions. Story_ID: 671305 Speaker 1: That's a really important introduction (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a-- Speaker 1: David Falk handles a lot of high profile-- Speaker 2: He was the first agent to negotiate a deal for $100 million, so yeah (laughter) that, and that was for Juwan Howard. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And down the road Juwan and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For Juwan Howard from yeah-- Speaker 2: And Chris Webber. Speaker 1: One of the Fab Five. Speaker 2: Were accused, two of the Fab Five were accused of some incident out in Montgomery County, Maryland and David called me and asked me to talk to Juwan. I talked to Juwan and Juwan retained me and we were able to show that there was no crime, nothing happened. He was innocent and we were able to prove that before he was criminally charged. It was public but we were able to show that the allegations that are being made are not true. Speaker 1: Okay, that was before he was charged publicly or? Speaker 2: He was, he was, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He, he was charged, he was--it was referenced publically but he was never charged or arrested. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. So it got in the media or something. Speaker 2: Got in the media. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His home was searched, they were trying to put a case together and we were able to show nothing happened here. Actually, we showed that they--that the two bos- two basketball players were the victims of a shakedown. Story_ID: 671306 Speaker 1: Now did--did you pay attention to the [Allen] Iverson case though, I mean just as a matter of interest? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah that was a big case around here and-- Speaker 2: Yeah I thought it was, you know, pretty sad--the [HistoryMaker] Governor [L. Douglas] Wilder later came in and commuted his sentence. So the governor thought that you know that it was not a just resolution, I you know I did, I did follow that. Speaker 1: Yeah I think later it was the Virginia court of appeals [Court of Appeals of Virginia] overturned the conviction. He actually went to jail, right for-- Speaker 2: He served time for it. Speaker 1: Hitting a, a girl with a chair, I think. Speaker 2: Allegedly. Speaker 1: Allegedly, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He said he didn't do it and of course they said he did, but okay. Story_ID: 671307 Speaker 1: Oh, in '94 [1994] you, it says here you changed firms, right? You went to work with William R. Martin & Associates [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Oh that's you, (laughter) you stopped working with the other firm. Speaker 2: I formed my own firm. Speaker 1: Right, okay, all right. Speaker 2: What had happened is Bob Washington [Robert B. Washington, Jr.] who was a very prominent Washington [D.C.] lawyer, had a minority law firm Washington and Christian and I left Eckert Seamans [Eckert Seamans Cherin and Mellott, LLC] to join Washington and Christian, to join a black law firm. I think we had twenty-five lawyers, one of the largest minority law firms in, in the country; and it was based here in Washington. And the firm had a lot of contracts with African governments, we did a lot work in Nigeria a lot of work in (unclear), a lot work in I forget the several other West African countries. And I got a chance to travel to Africa for the first time as a lawyer working with that firm, and I did that maybe for a year, year and a half. But then the firm started losing money and the firm was losing lawyers and breaking up and I still had a very good client base. And Bob and I were very, remained then and now as very good friends, so I said I'm gonna spin off and take the business that I have, and start my own law firm. So I did that for a little while. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And you know business got too good. Speaker 1: Now how can it get too good? Speaker 2: Because you can only be in one place at one time, so I realize that as a, as a solo practitioner, it was me and one other lawyer. A, a young lady by the name of Shawn Wright, Shawn is now a partner at Blank Rome [LLP]. But Shawn and I agreed to, I'd be the partner, she'd be the associate and we formed our own law firm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we, we did that and we picked up the [Monica] Lewinsky case, while I had my own firm. And that's what real, that's when I realized that the type of cases that I may be get in the future, I can't do a solo practitioner. Because once we got involved in Lewinsky, it consumed my time and Shawn's time, full-time. And all the other client matters that we had, we had to bring in outside lawyers to help us with. So we realized we can't do this type practice as a solo practitioner, we started looking to join up with another large firm. Story_ID: 671308 Speaker 1: So well is it time to talk about the [Monica] Lewinsky case? Speaker 2: It'd be a perfect time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 1998, so, well tell us about how, how did you get involved. We all know the, basically the story of Monica Lewinsky (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sure. I mentioned early on in our interview Nate [Nathaniel] Speights. Nate was the assist- Nate was the assistant U.S. attorney in Columbus [Ohio] who was last interview of me. Nate moved from Columbus and moved to Washington [D.C.]; Nate married a lady by the name of Grace Speights. Nate and Grace both practice here in D.C. and Grace had a law practice that, one of her clients in California was Attorney Bill Ginsberg [William H. Ginsberg]. Bill Ginsberg, as you as you will remember was the lawyer for Monica's father [Bernard Lewinsky]. And Monica's father who owns several cancer hospitals would use Bill as a civil lawyer to handle those matters. So when this and he sent his daughter back here, Monica you know as an intern and when this matter erupted, he asked his lawyer, Ginsberg to come back here. So the only lawyer that Bill knew back here that did this kind of work was Grace Speights, because he and she worked together on other matters. Ginsberg called Grace Speights and asked if her, her husband, Nate would agree to be local counsel for him as he defended Monica Lewinsky. And so Nate and Bill Ginsberg were doing the defense of this case and I didn't know anything about it, I was out of the country. I had been in the Caribbean on business, so I missed you know the news on this, you know we didn't have, I didn't have an iPad back then. You know you didn't have 24/7 news coverage, and when you're out of the country, you didn't get CNN in all the hotel rooms. So I was not on, on the news, so I got home and I get a phone call from Nate, asked me have you been watching this thing on the president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and Monica Lewinsky? And I said no, and he, he explained to me what was going on, asked me and then told me that they had issued a subpoena to Monica's mother to come to a grand jury. We have to find a lawyer for her, would you be willing to take that job? Well sure, so that's how I got, that's how I got brought in. You know I had to go meet the mother, the mother had to interview me, the mother had to agree that I could represent her, but the mother's name was Marcia Lewis. And you know Marcia and I got along very well and I became her lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay, now what, so this is, when, when we hear about these items in the news and it's, it's a lot of hearings and things going on and charges. Everybody involved goes gets, gets a lawyer, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely, and they should. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so what, what specific role did you, I mean does a lawyer play I guess with Monica's mother in a case like this? Speaker 2: The issue there is the prosecutors were trying to--Monica clearly talks to her mother, just like you know any mother daughter, father son, parent child might do. And what they wanna do is put her in the grand jury and force her to tell them what if anything, Monica said about the president. So the whole goal was to, you know, get information on Monica that they could use against Monica to force Monica to talk about her relationship with the president. Story_ID: 671309 Speaker 1: Okay, defending Monica Lewinsky's mother [Marcia Lewis], now you just set it up I think before we took a break-- Speaker 2: Sure, I was describing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: Kind of what it's like for the engagement how we met, how you know what I thought she was going to do. I can tell you looking back at the matter, or actually if I put myself now back in my shoes at that time, I knew then that this was a case that was both frightening and exciting. Frightening in a sense that I knew that we had the witness, the testimony and the evidence that the independent counsel wanted. And in his efforts to successfully impeach and remove a sitting President of the United States [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. So you know, we, we've done a lot of talking about you know this poor kid from Sewickley [Pennsylvania] who you know dreamed of being a lawyer, is now sitting there with the key witness and the, the evidence that could topple a president. Speaker 1: Yeah it's very similar to, to Watergate. Speaker 2: Very similar. Speaker 1: In a sense that, in a sense that the jeopardy you know that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Very similar. Speaker 1: What's at stake. Speaker 2: And I thought about that, and I thought about you know what I learned, my feelings and my thoughts going back to Watergate. So what I told my client that I would do is we would fight like the dickens, fight like hell to protect her and we did. Our job was too clearly, I'm never involved in anything that could be impeding, interfering or obstructing justice; but my job is to make sure that the system works. And how do I that, I do that by protecting my client, that's making sure that the police, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], prosecutors respect the Constitution and the rights to my clients. And when we did that for Monica's mother, we were able to force them to slow down a minute, 'cause they were just trying to steamroll the mother in there as though she were not relevant as a, as a human. To have her spit out this information so they could then go after her daughter, then go after the president. And we don't think that's the way the system works, there's a grand jury process, that she has constitutional rights and we try to make sure they follow those rights. Speaker 1: Yeah the prosecutor was Kenneth Starr, I guess the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The head prosecutor anyway, right, special-- Speaker 2: I knew Ken Starr, I, at the time I--Ken Starr was, was friends with--I told you I served as the executive assistant U.S. attorney. The U.S. attorney at the time was Jay Stephens, Jay middle initial B. Stephens. Jay Stephens and Ken Starr were friends and colleagues, so I've--Ken Starr would visit the U- the U.S. attorney. I think Ken Starr was then the solicitor general, they were friends, so I, I met Ken Starr when I was in the U.S. ottorney's Office, I knew Ken Starr. I think he's a very nice person, but I think that the way the investigation was run; it was run the level below Ken Starr by some senior prosecutors. I think that they were not respecting the rights of either Monica or her mother, and those were the people that we objected to the judges, that they're now following their obligations as prosecutors. And they had to respect their rights and that's our job as lawyers or to make sure that they respected the rights of these potential witnesses. Speaker 1: Okay, so that, so basically that's the role you played in that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the role I played. Speaker 1: --Lewinsky case. Speaker 2: That's the role I played-- Story_ID: 671310 Speaker 1: Monica [Lewinsky] has described me at times as kind of, you know, her minister of defense. So although I represented the mother [Marcia Lewis], I was able to negotiate a deal so that the mother was not paraded in and out of the--if you remember the pictures of the crowd at the U.S. courthouse here in [Washington] D.C. Well, the mother had a breakdown at that, as a result of that, emotional, she was drained, and did not want to go back through that. So we negotiated a deal--this is all published and the report of the special prosecutor that, that it's published. So I'm not disclosing privileged information, but we were able to negotiate a, a meeting without going into that grand jury setting. And after we did that, the mother asked me you know you seem to know your way around Washington. You seem to know your way around at the courthouse, and you seem to be able to negotiate these deals for me. Can you help me with, with Monica? And I told her we'll be glad to, she said we're gonna; we're they were changing lawyers at the time. They wanted to get somebody who knew Washington; they were still using the California lawyer. They wanted to get somebody--a Washington quote, insider who knew white collar and government and, and Washington. And the mother asked me to take the lead and selecting finding a colleague of mine to represent Monica. So my job shifted from just representing the mother to helping her daughter, Monica, retain new counsel. And I knew there were a couple, for a lot of reasons which I can't go into, there are two lawyers who are probably the best suited for that. That was Plato Cacheris and [Jacob A.] "Jake" Stein, two old line prosecutors, former prosecutors and current white collar defense lawyers, here in D.C. And after she interviewed them, they decided that they'd be best suited to represent Monica. And Monica, thereafter, called me you know her quote master of defense, I think she has a book, I forget the name of the book, I forget Monica's book. But in her book, she describes the people--somebody asked her the publisher or the author asked her what was my role. Since she had these other lawyers, she said [HistoryMaker] Billy [Martin] was my master of defense, there were no decisions made in my defense without Billy's blessing. So I got a chance to play a really different role and that I was part of the defense team for Monica, as well as lead counsel for her mother. Speaker 2: Okay, so and so that was--I know I remember the scene of [HistoryMaker] Betty Currie being lead over there to be you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was, it was a--it's a chilling time. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's almost like an inquisition-- Speaker 1: People, people voted. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know the, the [U.S.] Senate could not, would not, would not affirm the impeachment. The [U.S.] House [of Representatives] did, but the Senate would not. Story_ID: 671311 Speaker 1: Now in 2000, see you--did, do you have any reflections about the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton administration, I mean in terms of otherwise, I mean. Speaker 2: No, I actually, I was a, I thought that President Clinton was a good president; I thought he did a lot of good things for the country and for civil rights. No, I you know, you know thought I'm I was a--I'm not one of these people who would be viewed as a quote Clinton supporter in a sense that I was there saying rah, rah, rah, because I try not to get into that level of politics. As a defense lawyer, I you know I represent you know last year or two year, last year, year and half ago, I represented then you know Senator Larry Craig for the incident in the Minnesota airport restroom. Speaker 1: And I was gone get (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so I represent-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Democrats and Republicans, so I try not to get into--I don't--I'm not on the political level, but represent-- Speaker 1: Political identification level. Speaker 2: I don't do that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I thought he was a good president and I thought he was fair to people of color and, and for civil rights initiatives. Story_ID: 671312 Speaker 1: Okay, 2000 you become a partner in the litigation department of Dyer, Ellis & Joseph [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Watergate, they were at the Watergate, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Small firm. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about the Chandra Levy. You had, you played a sim- I guess a similar role with Chandra Levy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I played a very similar role, I actually, actually I was in Cincinnati [Ohio] representing the City of Cincinnati at the, at the, during the riots. I was in my hotel room; I get a phone call it's the mother [Susan Levy] of Chandra Levy. And she said that you know we have a mutual friend who's given me your cell phone, I would like you to assist me in representing me and my husband [Robert Levy] as we try to find my daughter. And I remember thinking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now explain what the case was again it's-- Speaker 2: Chandra Levy was an intern, congressional intern. Worked, she had worked on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] and was working as an intern, I think for the [Federal] Bureau of Prisons. She's from California, had come here [Washington, D.C.] to do her internship. There are allegations that she had some type of relationship with a congressman. And that following that relationship she had gone missing. So the whole country was now looking at the story of another Washington intern with a, with an elected official. And the intern turns up missing, so the family was not pleased with the efforts of the D.C. [Metropolitan] Police Department. They wanted to hire me and we have you know various teams of investigators, some of them are former homicide detectives. In this case, Dwayne Stanton is a retired homicide detective and what's Joe's last name? It'll come back to me, we had, we had two lead investigators, and Dwayne and, and Joe were both homicide detectives. And we hired them to lead an investigation and they you know haven't conducted--I worked with them, I told you I was head of a homicide unit, these were two homicide detectives at the time. So I knew they knew homicide and knew detectives, detective work here in D.C., so they started doing our own internal investigation. You know we investigate allegations that, every allegation you could imagine. That her body had been chopped up, that her body had been--she was a sex slave, that her body had been here, that these people had ordered her removed or eliminated. That she was a victim of some type of conspiracy, that some political theories were born that you know that were she was related to politics. So we were asked to do nothing more than to look into all these theories. The detective that I was talking about is Joseph McCann, Joe McCann. So with Joe McCann and Dwayne Stanton and Mike Dyer from Dyer, Ellis & Joseph, we put a team together and tried to conduct our own investigation. See if we could find her, and as you know the ending of that is that, I think some eighteen months later, she, she was never found live. Her body was never found, her remains, her skeletal remains were found in Rock Creek Park [Washington, D.C.] about a year and half after she went missing. They ultimately charged a man who is not the--an elected official-- with her murder. Speaker 1: That's a fellow from El Salvador. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that was now 2000 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Guandique, I think it's Guandique. Speaker 1: Right, Guandique, Ingmar Guandique. In 2009, this is like many, many years after that. Speaker 2: He, he became a person of interest I think the original year is what, 2003? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I think it was 2003, so sometime in 2002. Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002]. Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Sometime 2003 or 2004, his name surfaced as a potential person by the police department. I know he was interviewed at some point by the police department, but not charged back then. So I, his name had surfaced as somebody they were interested in, even back then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sad story. Story_ID: 671313 Speaker 1: Oh, well tell us about the Cincinnati--now back to the riots in Cincinnati [Ohio] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --and the defending of the city and the police department-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --did you--now someone who's--you're a lawyer and a prosecutor, and a defense attorney, and, and as an African American man in Cincinnati, you, you know kind of the history of some of the urban, think of things that go on (simultaneous) -- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: In urban city, so, so as you are defending the City of Cincinnati and the police department what are you thinking? At the, at the, I mean, wha- what's going through your mind? Speaker 2: What's going through my mind is the police chief of the City of Cincinnati is a man by the name of Tom Streicher and I think that Streicher is still the chief. I know he was chief at the time. I met Chief Streicher you, you go back you interviewed me about my early days as a assistant city prosecutor for the City of Cincinnati. When I was a young prosecutor, I met a rookie police officer and we tried a case together. The rookie police officer was Tom Streicher, so fast forward again from 19 what 76 [1976] to 2003 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So now he's the chief? Speaker 2: He's now the chief and the mayor [Charles J. Luken] calls me to represent the city and the police department. I walk in, and he remembered me and he said, "[HistoryMaker] Billy [Martin], I don't know if you remember me but we did a couple of cases together," and I did remember. Well I remember him and he said and you know we need your help, he said you know I, I'm not here to tell you that we've done everything right or we've done everything wrong. We'd like you to conduct an internal investigation and tell us what's going on. So they really opened the, their files, they opened the door, they didn't hide anything from me. We brought in a team of experts who were retired police officers who were expert witnesses in the, you know use of force. And we went through and, and looked at every allegation, first we looked at the training, we then looked at the reporting procedures, we looked at how they're handled by the police department. How they're monitored and we were coming up with whether or not the city as a whole could be accused of having a pattern practice within the police department. Which is different and where there's one officer or two officers or three officers who have engaged in excessive use of force. What I was not asked to do is to decide these individual cases whether or not this officer used an excessive amount of force or that officer did. We were asked to determine whether or not the city and the city, the Cincinnati Police Department engaged in a pattern practice as a city. And that was pretty easy to show that they did not as a city, but there may have been some bad apples or some bad police officers, who at times had used excessive force. But as a city, they were not guilty of the pattern practice, which is different than looking into whether or not this police officer used too much. Story_ID: 671314 Speaker 1: A city like Cincinnati [Ohio]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --that has like repeated allegations like this, the allegations themselves did not let's say constitute a pattern, official pattern of behavior that's condoned by the city, that's what you're saying? Speaker 2: Correct we looked (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Even though they may have a pattern of doing these things, it's not an official policy of the city to do them. Speaker 2: Or even to fit a pattern there has to be a certain number you know it's, it's whether, it's not whether or not there's one, two or even three incidents. But is there what you call a pattern, is there enough to say that this is how the depart- the police department itself is run? And I know if you go to [Washington] D.C., if you go to Richmond [Virginia], if you go to Dayton [Ohio], you're gonna have reports of excessive use of force, by individual police officers. And depending on how they're trained before the allegations or how they're investigated, after the allegations, is, may constitute whether or not there's a pattern. What does the city do when it receives this information, what do they do to these officers? And what we were looking into is whether or not the city was volatile, had violated that federal statute. That's not to say that there was not excessive use of force used those cases were, there are, there are several cases that were, were brought. If you remember we talked about it, but at the time, there was an allegation that several, there had been a recent rash of shootings by police officers of black young men or teenagers. And we were brought in to look into whether or not there was a pattern. We looked at every allegation that was made, and at the end what we did, is with the help of, there's a federal judge there by the name of Susan [J.] Dlott. Judge Dlott is now the chief judge of the U.S. District Court in Cincinnati, and what we did, or I think the U.S. District Court in the--I think she's the Southern District which would include Cincinnati, Dayton and Columbus [Ohio], but I know she's chief judge in Cincinnati. She was assigned all these excessive abuse of force cases, so on the individual cases that were brought, we looked at all of those. And rather than say that yes, there's excessive use of force here and no there's no excessive use of force, we came up with a way to--we were trying to heal this community and so we came up with a way, we call it a collaborative. So we took all those cases brought the cases into the investigation by the [U.S.] Department of Justice. So while we're looking at the DOJ allegations, we brought all those cases in and we settled all of those cases. So we looked those cases with the individual lawyers from the Amer- from the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] and Defense Bar and said you know, let, let's see your cases, and we came up with a settlement. So we didn't say yes, there's excessive use or no there's no excessive use. We went back and looked at the training and said these cases are, are part of the allegations. Story_ID: 671315 Speaker 1: But the real thing is, what training do these police officers receive, what you know, do we have monitors, we have t- cameras on the, on every individual car? You know now you can see if a police officer pulls you over, when they pull you over, there's a automatic camera that supposed to go on. So part of what, what we did was make sure that those cameras were on all the cars. That the recordings from the police officer to dispatch were saved, so if there's shooting or excessive use of force allegation, there should be a camera on the car. And there should be a line of communication trail to see what really happened. So we really went about trying to make sure that the officers were properly trained and that there was appropriate supervision in monitoring of the police officers. In addition to just all those individual cases, which we settled. Speaker 2: Okay so in resolving this case what you saying is that some improvements were made in the Cincinnati Police Department that were not you know in place before. I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Some procedures. Speaker 1: Yeah improvements. Speaker 2: Were not in, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, improvements and supervision and training, you know we wanted to make sure that they has enough training and you know when you got out to simulated you know training. When you go out to the, the range with your nine millimeter you know and they have you know friendly face, bad face. Citizen, another police officer when you, when they put you in this machine, and have you fire you know your, your gun and all these pop-ups, you know are police officers panicking are they, are they trained enough to know what's a friendly face or when they should or should not fire. So we had increased supervision, increased training, so we thought there was some real positive training parts. 'Cause it the issue really is not whether it's not just whether there's excessive use in these cases. I mean if they, if excessive use of force was used, the, the individual or their family should be compensated. That's not something I condone, the law condones or the city condoned, but what I thought was more important in this, was that we were able to implement better training. So that hopefully those incidents of shootings and you know what they call stopping people from driving while black you know would, would be curtailed. You know as a black man, I've been pulled over for no reason other than being black. So you know these are not mythical issues that black men raise, and there was complaint that too many black men were being stopped. So that was part of our training we also implemented a way of recording, every time a police officer makes a stop like that, that police officer has to record. I pulled a car over, the car was driven by a white male, black male, here's why I pulled that car over. That information was then put into a computer so that could be monitored by and the monitor was appointed. Saul Green, who was an African American, he's former U.S. attorney in Detroit [Michigan], he's a partner at a big firm in Detroit, and serves as a monitor. Saul Green was appointed as the monitor to oversee the training and implementation of these policies and procedures. And I think he was in place for three to five years, I forget the exact number of years, but it was at least three. It may have been five years, so when I say that you know my job was go in to do this investigation, we did the investigation. We made recommendations and then a monitor was appointed by the court to make sure that these changes in training were put into place. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I think a lot of good came out of that. Story_ID: 671316 Speaker 1: From the groun- you know from the grassroot level, a lot of times people look at the police department and how they act. And they see the acts of brutality committed over and over again (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --of officers of every city, Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], other cities, and they say well this must be the policy this city to commit these things. In, in your opinion, is it is it more the caprice of the officers in the squad cars or on the street that cause these things? Or the actual plans of city volatile (laughter) I mean I, I guess it's not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: It's probably a ridiculous question on second-- Speaker 2: No, but it's a fair question. Speaker 1: But, but people think about that-- Speaker 2: It's a fair question. Speaker 1: At the level, the City of Chicago Police Department likes to do this to us rather than this cop likes do this us, you know. Or this, this district of cops have a culture where they practice a lot of this. Speaker 2: I think it's the individual police officers, and I think that you know it's, it's up to the police officers who witness it, not the officer who was, who was, whose you know wielding or yielding that baton or the, the blackjack as we called it. But it's up to the individual officers to either stop the conduct or report it. There was a recent incident at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] here following one of the basketball games where a kid videotaped a very severe beating, these were all white kids, these are not black kids now, these were white kids. So you used to say that it's you know white cops who are beating you know poor black kids. Now you have black cops beating black kids and white cops beating white kids, they videotaped that and, and showed it, and it was these police officers. There had been adequate training, there was supervision, there was monitoring, but these were bad cops. And what you have to do is, is prosecute and remove the bad cops, so that they don't taint the goods like bad apple. You know that bad apple will spoil the, the bushel, so you try to get the bad cops out. Speaker 1: Okay, to your knowledge I mean, were, were there many officers convicted of brutality in Cincinnati [Ohio] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: As individuals? Speaker 2: No. There were none, and that was part of the, the investigation, should this matter be civil or should it be criminal? Is there enough to turn this over to a grand jury, I think a, a U.S. attorney looked it, I think a grand jury may have looked at it and said there's not enough here for you know for criminal prosecutions. They could not show on some of them, on some of these the people who had been you know beaten and shot, had weapons. On one of them it was a man with a weapon who was shot and the question was should they have used a taser, you know he had a gun. On some of them you know they did not have guns, but so I you know it's--you can't I can't talk about the individual cases. But I don't think there was any of those incidents that I investigated were sufficient to rise to criminal level. Civil yes which is why you know substantial amounts of money were paid, because it was violation of their rights on the civil matter. But they couldn't show that there was a criminal conduct. It also didn't mean they couldn't show the officer acted with criminal intent, but he acted, he used he hit him more the time that he should have. Or maybe he should've gotten a taser instead of a gun, but you know there was not any criminal, and I didn't that it was appropriate for the filing of criminal charges either. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. As far as you know and I this just came to mind now I don't know if you know the answer to this or not. But do the incidents of police brutality sort of match a pattern of escalation in terms of street violence in the black community. As, as people fight over turf and drug selling and stuff and, and murders rise, do the incidents of police brutality rise corresponding? Speaker 2: I think they do, I think because you see a level of frustration by law enforcement. First there, there more police calls, second there's more pressure on them to both stop that violence and to catch the, the drug dealers or the, the murderers. So you know they get more aggressive, the criminal element, they get more aggressive and there's a clash you know. Back in the old days, police officers used to come into the neighborhood and say, "All right, break it up and go home," and people would break it up and go home. Police officer might get shot doing that now. Speaker 1: That was different times (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These are different times. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 671317 Speaker 1: Let me go on to another case here. You had some high profile cases and now what is the--tell us about the, the Bill Campbell case. You defended Bill Campbell in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Former mayor of Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Bill Campbell, William Campbell, William Bill Campbell was one of the smartest men I ever met. Bill is a graduate of Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee] and Duke law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina]. Bill's parents, Bill's I think his dad, I think he's from Durham [North Carolina], it's either Raleigh [North Carolina] or Durham, I think, I think it's whichever, I think it's Durham, but I think his dad was president of National Association for the Advancement of Colored People [NAACP]. And Bill was used when-there are pictures of Bill when he was four years old, five years old walking with his mother to integrate the public school system. They had segregated schools and he was one of the children around Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] times who was used to desegregate the school system at that time. And you know the pressures so it--he was raised in a civil rights era, but I'm saying he came up in the civil rights era. He, after Duke went to I think a private law firm, then went back to Atlanta, went to Atlanta and decided to run for mayor. Was a very good mayor, was a very popular mayor, was you know it was during the [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton administration, and he at the time was being courted for a post on cabinet level for the mayor, for the president. When allegations came that he was under investigation for corruption in Atlanta, that investigation took seven years. And during the seven years, he denied any allegations of wrongdoing, and was prepared to defend that. Well, they did indict him, they indicted him for pattern of racketeering, RICO [Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act], they call it, and they charged that he used the mayor's office to conduct his, his pattern of racketeering. We were hired, a colleague of mine here, Carrie Verde [ph.], a young lady Carrie Verde, an Atlanta lawyer, [Jerome] Jerry Froelich [Jr.] and Atlanta lawyer [W.] Fred Orr [II], God bless him, may he rest in peace. Fred just passed away about a month ago, but that was the defense team we put together to go down to take on the U.S. attorney and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. And they had had seven years to build this case, so you know we really were at a disadvantage. Story_ID: 216958 Speaker 1: Okay, the [Mayor] Bill Campbell case you were saying. Speaker 2: There was a racketeering investigation and you know and I mentioned that we had, we were at a disadvantage because they had really so much more time. They also had promised not to prosecute are the so-called key witnesses, so people who were accused of giving bribes to the mayor who should've been charged, either with taking a bribe or with tax violations, were never charged. So they said we've got enough information on you, either you testify or you get charged. So we were able to use that against all of those witnesses at trial before a jury, and the jury came to the same conclusion that they did not believe the witnesses whose testimony had been bought by the prosecutors. That's, that was our defense argument, and they didn't, they didn't believe them enough you know whenever you have a, a jury, jury trial in a civil case you know the, the scales are equal. And whichever side tips that scale just the slightest by, what they call it a preponderance of the evidence, wins. But in a criminal case, it's gotta beyond a reasonable doubt, and they may have shown something by a preponderance of the evidence, but they could not show in the Campbell trial beyond a reasonable doubt. That the mayor had engaged in this bribery in the, you know racketeering, we were able to get the jury to acquit him of every racketeering count. Unfortunately, the mayor admitted that on Friday nights he would go to various houses and they played poker and they gambled. And over the five year period of time, he may have earned seventy thousand dollars in gambling over that period of time. Which he did not report on his taxes, so he was convicted for earning that money while gambling, and not reporting it. Speaker 1: So he, did, did he spend time in jail for that? Speaker 2: He spent about two years, less than two years in jail. Speaker 1: Okay, but you got him off from the major (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh had he been convicted he would've been spending seven to ten years in jail. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Big difference. Speaker 1: It is. Story_ID: 216959 Speaker 1: Also now this is another high profile case, another basketball player, Jayson Williams, 2004. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He accidentally shoots his chauffeur. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know and again this case was televised by then Court TV daily on TV. So it's the first time I ever tried a, a big case like that that was televised. Jayson at the time, Jayson at the time had already retired from the NBA [National Basketball Association]; Jayson had been one of the other athletes who had 100,000, 100 million dollar contract with the [New Jersey] Nets [Brooklyn Nets]. And midway into that contract, he broke his, I think his foot and could not play, the insurance policy that he had guaranteed his income. So he retired with a lot of money as a professional athlete, he was picked up by I think NBC to do color commentary on NBA games. Speaker 1: Now from what I remember he was a colorful personality. Speaker 2: Very colorful. Speaker 1: And I know the [Chicago] Bulls went after him once before they got Dennis Rodman, they were trying to get him to rebound, they needed a rebounder. Speaker 2: He's a rebounder. Speaker 1: And that's what he primarily did, but he, he's the guy that has an interesting background. Didn't he raise his brothers and sisters or something? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, very interesting background. His, his sisters, one was murdered and he found the body, one was the victim of a, a robbery or some other street violence, and was hospitalized. And was given blood and then transfusion, she contracted HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], tainted blood, so she got HIV, she died of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. And the children, those sisters were left without parents and he raised them, he took care of his, his mother, his dad. He was, Jayson's a very nice person, and the night of the, the incident, as we've said, you know he brought the gun in, was showing the gun off. He can re- had some Harlem Globetrotters, he had played in a, in a kind of a what would you call it, a volunteer basketball game. He was a fundraiser (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Celebrity basketball game. Speaker 2: Yeah, celebrity basketball game and against the Globetrotters, I think he had actually gone to just watch them. Did he play that night or did he watch them? I think he played and his fa- he took his family, his dad, his nephews, his family was, was at the game. And after the game, he invited Glove- Globetrotters to come back over to his house, come back to have dinner with him in the area near the game and his house. After dinner, he invites them back to his house, he's being driven there by, the limo driver's not his limo driver. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The limo driver's driving the Globetrotters. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They you know it's a van and they're driving these, these guys. Well the van driver comes into the house and Jayson had a very expensive shotgun, a Browning Citori over under, I think it was a skeet shooting or, or shotgun used for that. Our argument was that the gun malfunctioned; first off he didn't know it was loaded, and I know we all say you don't handle guns but he thought the gun was unloaded. And it wasn't unloaded; there was a safety in there, well the, something jammed the safety and when he closed it, you know he turned around at that moment the limo driver, the chauffer, the driver walks by and the gun discharges. We thought it was an accident, but unfortunately Jayson panicked and you know he was convicted of you know covering up the, changing the crime scene and, and covering up. But they were never able to reach a verdict on whether or not it was a homicide or an accident. Speaker 1: Okay, so the jury was hung on the case? Speaker 2: The jury acquitted him. Speaker 1: Acquitted him, okay. Speaker 2: On the most serious homicide charge, they hung eight to four for, for acquittal on the second homicide charge and that's what he went, he had to go back to trial on that second charge. Speaker 1: I would imagine this is a jury in a, in a probably predominately white, second in New Jersey I would guess. Speaker 2: That's accurate. Speaker 1: Okay, I was just guess, I guess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But we were able, that, that we were able to have--they were I think four to six people of color. What we argued at the time was that you know the prosecutors removed every black male, but went into the jury box and we thought that was unfair. And we raised that as a legal issue that you know with a jury of his peers would mean that a black man qualified to serve as a juror should be able to sit, rather than being you know dismissed during jury selection. So we raised that as an issue at the trial. Story_ID: 216960 Speaker 1: I guess we can talk about working in the litigation department of Sutherland Asbill & Brennan [LLP] here in [Washington] D.C. You said, it says here that you, you were working defending Fortune 500 companies involved in commercial and civil litigation, including claims of negligence and racial discrimination. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well tell us about some of that. Speaker 2: Without ident- this is one where I, I I'm not comfortable identifying the clients, some of those are still clients who were accused of racial discrimination. And we were asked to come in to do internal investigations to do our own investigation and to defend these corporations at trial. And I can tell you that when I, when I come in to do these investigations, again you know I can't use, lose my, leave or lose you know my identity, I don't leave my you know the fact that I'm a you know sixty year-old black man at the door. I don't leave my experiences in life, you know I've been the victim of discrimination, I've, I've witnessed discrimination, I think I know discrimination. And I would never defend a corporation that I thought was guilty of some type of discrimination if they were not prepared to accept my findings. So if, the discriminating, if I go in and I tell them I think the discrimination has occurred based on my, not on my gut or own my, my feelings, but on this investigation, my clients listen to me. And they will say to me what do you propose, and I would say you gonna have to settle this case, you going have to institute some procedures to avoid this from happening again. This day and age you know corporations cannot get away with this, and most of my clients listen to me. Most of my corporate clients listen to me on that, so while you know people will say how do you defend these corporations? What I'm trying to do is get the corporations to say you know we've got a good lawyer, you know a person of color who understands some of these issues. Very good in the courtroom, and we've, they, he's made some findings, they adopt my findings. And if there's discrimination, we deal with that case and put in protective measures so this does not happen again. You know some of them might be instituting a hotline you know so the employee feels he or she's been discriminated against by, as a result of ethnicity or gender or social orientation. There's a hotline that you can call. By instituting other rights within the corporation by appointing an ombudsman to you know oversee or look at all this stuff. So when I go in, I don't go in to help a corporation cover up these allegations, but I go into investigate them, if they're not true, help them prove that it's not true. If they are true, help them resolve that matter and institute procedures that would hopefully prevent that from recurring again. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not naive you know. Speaker 1: Um, okay. Speaker 2: It's just like we talk about police officers you know the corporation is not a per se bad corporation, what's the individual employees and management of that corporation. So if it's bad management, you get bad results, so we get them to look at the manage- look at their personnel. And their training of the personnel and how their personnel are reviewed to see if we can make some changes and corrective aspects of them. Story_ID: 216961 Speaker 1: You make an important point here I think that a lot of people, once again at the grassroots level, you hear talk in the barbershop or on the street. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well they said Coca-Cola is bad, or some so and so is bad, Duz soap is bad you know rather than thinking of it as terms, of terms of organization where (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Individuals who are in there doing things good and bad you know all the time. So 'cause some would argue that oh you know why you know we don't see a settlement, we want to see, see this corporation pent to the ground. We wanna bring them down you know, but how likely is that in a you know lawsuit like you know I mean for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Discrimination or something you know? Speaker 2: It shouldn't reach that far, and the reason it shouldn't reach that far is because if it's that clear that there has been discrimination, a judge you know procedurally, we have what you know there's civil rules of procedure. And in the civil rules there's something called rule 56, motions for summary judgment. So after you go through all discover, you know you do depositions, you file demands for production of documents you take statements from everybody. You pretty much know your case, and the side who's the plaintiff, who's suing the corporation, if there's discrimination, should be able to put together a motion for summary judgment. To say there are no issues or material fact, this case shouldn't go on judge. We want summary judgment; we want you to grant us the, a victory because these facts are indisputable. And you know so if you get that far, the judge had decided, if a judge does not decide it on summary judgment, then you know both sides know, well you don't have a clear cut case. So the side who's the plaintiff, well people would say we want you to don't settle, they're saying I might lose this case. So if I can get you know one million, five million, ten million dollars on this case, I'm gonna settle it. And get enough money to make my clients whole. I had cases where you know I've said to lawyers on the other side in, in these type cases, that I'm not sure I buy you're, you're theory of case. I'm not sure you can prove that, but you know my client's authorized me to give you two million dollars to settle this thing. They don't want the public scrutiny, they don't want you know be embarrassing for these allegations to become public, we settled. You know if you want me to see that there's changes put in place, we'll put these changes in place, and then still the client will pay you a settlement. Sometimes they say yes, sometimes they say no, some of those when they say no, we go to trial and won some of them and I don't think I've lost many of those. And so you know in civil cases, if you can get a good settlement, that's probably the best way, unless you're trying to air these issues publically and make a statement. If you're doing that, there's another reason to go, but if you're just in it to make your client whole, you know if your clients been beaten and can't work again, you wanna get money for them so they can live the rest of their life comfortably. You don't want to make a statement, you want money, so a lot of it depends on what you want, and you know remember, I'm a defense lawyer, so I do a lot of that. I sue people for discrimination, I mean I understand it and we just advise clients, we don't get into our personal views of you know what I think. The client doesn't want me to say [HistoryMaker] Billy [Martin], what do you think, what they want me to tell them is what I think after I have all the facts. And I can say, well these are the facts, here's the law, now here's what I think based only on the facts and the law. Not on the fact that I'm Billy Martin. Speaker 1: It is what it is. Speaker 2: It is what it is, remember that's, that's where that statement is so popular to me. It is what it is. Story_ID: 216962 Speaker 1: Now, Michael Vick. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This is a big case; you become Michael Vick's lawyer in 2007, for the Bad Newz Kennels dog fighting investigation. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Now this is a, you know, big impact on ESPN (laughter) sports news then changed his life, so, tell us about this case. Speaker 2: You know I watched this case unfold, I do a lot of work for the NFL [National Football League] Players Association [PA], Gene Upshaw was the previous executive director, De[Maurice F.] Smith is its current director. When I had a law firm William R. Martin and Associates [Washington, D.C.] for a period of time I was the land, my landlord was the NFL Players Association. I had an office inside the headquarters of their building down L Street here in Washington [D.C.]. So I got to know you know the people who run the players association, and I think they saw me handle a couple high profile cases with press conferences in the, their lobby and out in front of the building, and they kind of watched what I did. So I think that when some of the players had issues, the NFL PA would give them my name as somebody who knows how to handle these sports related cases. So when the Vick case came up, a lot of people gave Michael my name to say he's somebody you should talk with. Michael talked with me; decide to hire me as lead counsel to handle his defense. At, but by then, you know the, a lot of the decisions had already been made; I was not there in the early part of the case. His co-defendants had hired other lawyers, they had accepted deals with the government and part of their deals with the government was that they would give their version of the facts so that they could testify against Michael. So when we got in people had already said you know the facts are that it's Michael's money, Michael's dog fighting venture and he's involved. So we, our role then was to try to minimize any exposure that Michael might, might suffer. There was never any doubt that there was dog fighting, there's never any doubt that dog fighting occurred at property owned my Michael. So our job was to get in to say okay, what was Michael's real role and what's the appropriate penalty for Michael? That was what we did. I you know felt very bad for Michael and his family, Michael was you know very, he's a heart, is very nice person. He'd give you the shirt off his back; you know there are people saying how could he do this to these dogs? I think Michael's had to answer that, I'm not trying to justify or explain dog fighting or, or what happened. I just know that the client that I had is a very good person, he supported his family, his mother, his father, his brother, his sisters, a community was supported by Michael-- Story_ID: 216963 Speaker 1: Yeah, I was gonna say that, that this case when you look at--in these individual cases with athletes seems to suggest that a lot of them have a whole community they're supporting. Not just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Immediate family. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Lots of people. Speaker 2: Lot of people, I mean from the rec [recreation] center, he [Michael Vick] sponsored camps for kids, so that it impact a lot of people. And we were trying to say that you know, he's gonna plead guilty because he was involved, and we were hoping that you know with all the good deeds that he had done, that he qualify for probation. Or that he qualified for some penalty that would not expose him to losing his chance at, at his job. You know for me and you, if we're away from our job for a year, we have a chance of coming back. But for somebody who's in the prime of his life at twenty-eight, if he's out of the [National Fooball] League [NFL] for two or three years, he may not be able to come back. So our job was to try to find a way to resolve this that Michael could come back, and you know I thought the sentencing he gave was very tough sentence. Michael ended up serving you know two and a, two years then he missed two years of the NFL. But you know I, I would, would say to him all along, you're gone have a chance when you get out you will be twenty-nine years old. And he got out at twenty-nine and has walked that straight and narrow line and has done a very good job. I know that you know that today you know and sitting here to do this interview and you know ESPN and, and the other news stories are breaking that there's been some, some type of shooting or incident involving one of the guys who was involved in the dog fighting. Michael you know I can tell you statements that I think his, my co-counselor Larry Woodward, his lawyer in Virginia has made is that Michael was not there. So you know once again, his name's gone be brought in, it was a birthday party that Michael was attending with his family. There was an incident after the party, but once again now all the scrutiny goes Michael, but we are pretty confident that Michael was you know we will show that he was not there. And Michael will be able to go on you know he's built a career for himself a second time. And we're hoping that you know he can step away from some of those people, and this is one of those people who would not let him step away. Story_ID: 216964 Speaker 1: Now that brings us to the [Senator] Larry Craig case, okay? So let's, tell us--now this is the Republican conservative Senator Larry Craig and he had a, a lewd conduct charge (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: In a New Jersey restroom. Now, tell, tell us. Speaker 2: Well the, according to the press reports and police reports, Senator, then Senator Larry Craig of Idaho. Speaker 1: Idaho, right. Speaker 2: Is traveling from Idaho back to the capital [Washington, D.C.] on a layover in Minneapolis [Minnesota], steps into a restroom, according to an undercover police officer who is you know--how anybody could do this. Is serving as a decoy in a bathroom for lewd conduct and he's sitting on a, in a stall and says that the senator comes in and sits beside him. Closes the stall door, puts his bag in front of the door and has sat there and somehow tapped his feet. Which was a signal that he wanted to engage in some type of lewd conduct and without any lewd conduct occurring, the officer arrested him. So that's, those were the allegations, they said that there, there's some known code, there's a certain way of tapping your feet in a bathroom means something. I know from this point, I'm sitting here tapping my feet right now, I try to be careful if I'm ever in a stall in a public bathroom. Speaker 1: That, that's right (laughter). Speaker 2: I tap my feet or I make sure that my foot doesn't go outside my stall and touch the other stall. But they said that his foot touched the other, a foot in the next stall and that tapping occurred and that was a signal. And the Senator, thinking that he would find a way to resolve these charges you know said you know I'm a, I can't have this. And he says well you know, he what he said publically was if I agree to--by mail never appearing before a judge to say that I did something, this won't become public. Well that's what he thought was gonna happen and very, it did become public, and once it became public, you know he wanted to go back and say let's, let's have a public trial. So I can say what happened, so he hired me to try to undue his guilty plea, and I was not able to do that, but we did an investigation and we were very confident that had we been able to get this back before a judge or a jury, that there's no way that they could've convicted him. Speaker 1: Is Craig a lawyer himself? Speaker 2: He is not. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wondered you know a lot of legislatives are but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: A lot of people thought that he was a lawyer but he is not a lawyer. Speaker 1: Right, so he, he, had he known better, he'd probably could've done better in this situation. Speaker 2: Had he thought, had he just thought and try--that's what happens with a lot of people with you know if I can make it go away, you can't make it go away, it never goes away. You gotta deal with it and the best way to deal with it is to get counsel, let your lawyer deal, 'cause he's dealing with a lawyer who's a prosecutor. Let your lawyer deal with that lawyer and see what's there, then if it can't go away, then you might think of resolving it. But first you should see has a crime actually occurred, and we were very confident giving him legal advice that based upon what we knew the evidence to be, that we thought we could've won that case, had it gone to trial. Speaker 1: Okay, this incident basically cost him his, his seat, right? Speaker 2: Well, not really, he, he said that he retired, he has, he qualified for a pension from the [U.S.] Senate, I forget how many years he had been there. Twenty-five or a number of years as a congressman and a senator, I think he said this is enough I, you know I, I don't need this. But he was not acquitted, I mean he was not convicted of a, a felony, he could've, he could've litigated whether or not a misdemeanor conviction for what he did under the facts violated the rules in the senate. But I think he and his family said you know we've had enough, and it's time to go back home. So I think he's home now enjoying his life without the public scrutiny. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of, if you ask me one of the things I, I think that I do for a lot of people is with the legal skills, experience and the contacts and relationships that I have here in Washington [D.C.] and elsewhere. We're able to try to improve their plight and if it's a quality of life issue, try to get their life back for them. If, if they have done something wrong, to try to minimize the penalty they're going to receive, so in all the cases we've discussed, we were able either to show that no crime occurred or to lessen the severe penalty which might otherwise have been imposed. Story_ID: 216965 Speaker 1: One thing we always ask is when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now, if you could? Speaker 2: No. My life has exceeded even my, my wildest dreams. No, I've spent a lot of time, I believe we're in--and we'll talk briefly about you know family time and, and that. But I spend a lot time with my family, with my parents [Harriett Isabelle Jones Martin and Felton Martin, Sr.], with my siblings, with my children, no. I would have no; no regrets and I would do it the same way. Story_ID: 216966 Speaker 1: Another question we always (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --ask is what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: You know my hopes and concerns for the African American community today are that we go back to understanding that we have to educate our youth. We have too many children when you--when we talked earlier about some of the gangbangers and kids who are on the street committing crimes. Some of them have a second and third grade reading ability; some of them have dropped out of school in elementary school. Some of them have no dreams; I think we gotta go back to educating the children, letting them know that, that there, there is hope and giving them a reason to want to be part of the society as opposed to being outlaws of our society. When I was coming up, you know education was just pounded into us, you need an education, so I'm hoping that that's something that we can instill in, in some of the youth that's out there now. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 216967 Speaker 1: Another question we always ask is when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy, I think would be that when I served in, in management capacity, either in government, with the [U.S.] Department of Justice or as a partner in these major law firms, that I've tried my best to be a mentor to those who were there working with me. And I tried my best to make sure that I helped either the law firms or the government find other minorities who are candidates and are qualified for the job. So I helped increased, to increase a number of lawyers, African American lawyers who were brought in to every job that I've ever had. So my legacy would be that I helped to open the door for others. Story_ID: 216968 Speaker 1: And you've been a part of--we didn't mention this, the various law, law associations and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: And the National Counsel of Black Lawyers [sic. National Conference of Black Lawyers] I think. Speaker 2: The National Bar Association [NBA]. Speaker 1: National Bar Association. Speaker 2: NBA. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: Very active in the national--been active with the NBA since probably 1978, so for some thirty-two years, I've been active with the NBA; I am somebody who gets my firm to be supportive financially of the bar. Somebody who does all that I can do as a, as a major partner with the NBA. I do the same for the local bar, I, here the Washington Bar Association, I do the same with the Cincinnati [Ohio], the black lawyers association, when I was in San Francisco [California], I did the same thing with the bar association there. I, absolutely, I, I think that I've been very successful, I think that I'm viewed as one of the top lawyers in the country, so I try to mentor and help as many other younger lawyers as I can. Speaker 1: Okay and I just want to mention that Washingtonian magazine listed you as one of the seventy-five best lawyers in Washington [D.C.] and you know you're known as a one of Washington's top lawyers. So and yet there's lot of other awards and distinguished alumni recognition here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Here a lot of. Speaker 2: I'd like to say that Washingtonian and I'm actually--not last year but I've twice been rated as the number four top lawyer in the D.C. area. And that's pretty breathtaking for me that my peers would rate me as, as that high as, as a lawyer, it's humbling and I'm very, very thankful. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I--these high profile candidates certainly don't choose their lawyer based on affirmative action (laughter). Speaker 2: No, they really don't. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Speaker 2: It's results. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 216969 Speaker 1: Now tell us something about your family, you know. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Your wife [Michel Martin] is a sort of a high profile person out here too, for those of us who listen to intelligent radio (laughter). Speaker 2: People like to tell me that my wife is the real celebrity of our family, and I'm okay with that. When I met Michel, Michel was very successful correspondent and substitute anchor for Ted Koppel with ABC 'Nightline.' So I used to enjoy going home watching you know 'Nightline' with her stories. She's traveled the world, she herself is a unique story, was able to get a scholarship to go to a boarding school, St. Paul boarding school [St. Paul's School, Concord, New Hampshire], at a very early age. Went to the boarding school, graduated with honors early, was admitted to Harvard University, [Cambridge, Massachusetts], went to Harvard. Graduated from Harvard in three years with high honors and came back and became a reporter with the Washington Post. Did a very good job and then went into TV before we were married and after we were married, she took a job in radio, in part to have more time to be home with our twins. After we were married, Michel and I were blessed with the birth of twins, who are now almost seven years old, William [R. Martin] Jr. and Amina [Martin]. The love of our life, and I don't know what we'd ever do without our, without our kids. So my family is is part of what I get up every morning and I work as hard as I can so that I can provide for them and to be an example to my children. I was married once before, I was married twenty years; out of that union I have two, two children, two daughters, Nikki [Williams], who is thirty-eight years old. Nikki is a chemist at NIH [National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland], Nikki is the proud, she and her husband, Perri Williams, have two children, Perri, P--E-R-R-I, a little girl and what's my second granddaughter is Payton [ph.]. So Nikki has the two children. My second daughter--Nikki lives here in the [Washington] D.C. area--is Erica [Richards], Erica is thirty-three years old. And Erica is a psychiatrist in the D.C. area, and she and her husband Ramon Richards are expecting their first child very, in the next few months. So I'm--be my third grandchild, part of what makes the quality of my life so very rich is the fact that I have my family. And there's nothing that you know, that's when you asked would I do anything different. I'm really blessed. I have happiness because I have love of my family and I have success at my job, and I have my priorities, I think in the right place. My priorities are that I'm going to first show my love and respect and reverence for God, to live you know in a, in a, to represent a, a, Godly existence to do things as I think that my heart and, and the Lord would want me to do. To be prepared as, as a lawyer and to love my family and I'm very wealthy man, not in material things, I'm blessed. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 216970 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked, we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, I think you've asked the--some, you know I think you've, we've covered my life, one of the things, that you know one of the--an experience that would put things in perspective for your why is when I look in the mirror, I know who I am, I know what I look like and I know what my values are. Early on in my career, as a young prosecutor in Cincinnati [Ohio], we've talked about Cincinnati and you know how things happen. One day we decided to go for a drink from the office, I mentioned I was the only African American prosecutor at the time in the prosecutor's office. So me and some buddies, male and female who are all hap- were white, go to a club that doesn't exist anymore in Cincinnati. And I happened to be the last one in line, so there may have been six or seven in front of me, and me, we were all equal in terms of being assistant prosecutors. They went in, when I got to the door, somebody looked over at me, a white bouncer, bodyguard, looked over at me and saw me coming to the door, did not see that I was with this group. Stepped in front of the doors, a big guy stepped in front of the door and told me that it was a private club and I had to leave. And I asked him you know how can, can that be, I didn't realize this is a private club. And he said well you just don't know, it's a private club, I said well I'm with a group of people, he says no, you're not, you're by yourself and you can't come in. I said no, I was with those six people he says I saw you standing by yourself, you're not coming in here, and he says if you don't leave, I'm calling the police and ask that you be arrested for trespassing. So I said I, call them. So he called the police, the police came, by then my friends had come back out to see what was going on. The police arrived, I filed a complaint against the club, others had, they had done the same thing to others, so a class action lawsuit was filed against the club. I did not join the class, but I was one of the, the key witnesses and the allegations were that blacks were not allowed in the clubs, while whites were. And the fact that seven prosecutors came and they let seven, six white or seven white and not me in, kind of proved the case for the African American plaintiffs, and they won a money judgment. So early, very early on you know, I, I knew that sure fact that I had a badge in my pocket, did not exempt me from people who willing to judge me simp- simply by the color of my skin. So I know that that happens, and you know I know that I have to deal with it and that we as a people have to deal with it. But I think that hopefully that's something we can overcome and my hope is that one day as the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] says we can become a colorblind society. But we definitely are not there yet, but I aspire for that. Story_ID: 216971 Speaker 1: Okay, and you mentioned the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], I mean I don't know, since this is all still fresh. What are your thoughts about the Obama administration? Speaker 2: I'm very proud of President Obama, I'm proud of the fact that, he's a very bright man, very smart, very qualified very competent. If there's ever gonna be a, a president of color, I think that this is a man who extreme, is extremely qualified as a politician and is, is very smart. I think he--no one person could ever enter that office at the time that he did with two wars [War in Afghanistan and Iraq War] and if you ask then Iraq with the economy with the spill, with all the crisis that are facing our country. It's probably the very worst time in history that a president had to serve and it happens to be him. I think given the chance to kind of balance out the economy, and to bring our, our troops home from those wars and allow him to just run the country with the types of issues that normally confront us without these, these international wars, people would see a very, very bright man whose good at his job. So I, I pray for him, I wish him the best, and very proud of him. Speaker 1: Are you tempted to run for office yourself? Speaker 2: Never happen. My family tells me never say never, so I shouldn't say will never happen, but I don't see that happening. I enjoy right now as a partner here you know we've at Howrey, LLP [Washington, D.C.] you know Howrey is a firm of almost seven hundred lawyers unlike most law firms, Howrey is a firm of all litigators. So all my partners and all of the associates here are trained in this skill and art of litigation, so we're very good as a law firm at doing litigation. I'm sixty years old, I would hope that, I, I've been at several law firms, I would hope that the opportunities that exist here will allow me to stay in place here to you know work on issues of diversity which I do with and for the firm. To build my law practice to the extent where I'm what as very profitable, you know when we we've not talked about money. Either money earned or money billed, but at my level, we're expected to generate millions of dollars of, of business, and I've been able to do that. With the help of you know corporations and, and individuals and major trials, so I know that when I mentor young lawyers in private practice, you know what I, I try to help them understand is that you have to find a way of generating business. You gotta be able to go out and get your own book of business, and you do that by showing people that you're very skilled and hungry and responsive. So you know I, and I mentioned mentoring, and that's what I try to do is teach younger lawyers how to get business and how to handle it appropriately. So, no, I don't see myself ever running for office when I'm finished with practicing law, or I slow down practicing law, the only thing I really want to do as I mentioned earlier is teach, teach law. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 216972 Speaker 1: Now, my last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a man who is very proud of the fact that he's African American, a man who is proud of the fact that I represent the hopes, dreams and aspirations of, of my people. That as an example of somebody who qualified myself, prepared myself and when that door opened, I raced through it, and took advantage of opportunities that existed. I'd like to be remembered as a very good lawyer, a lawyer who understood the needs of his clients and was very skilled as a lawyer, in helping clients to accomplish those goals. I just want to be remembered in the practice of law as a good lawyer, if I have looked for the--what I would like to be remembered at is a person I'd like to be known as a, a good husband, a good father, and a person who is very fond and, and dear to the Lord...