 Story_ID: 578417 Speaker 1: So my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Gillian Lipton, your archivist is observing. And I want to start off by having you state your name and spell it for us and give your date and place of birth? Speaker 2: Ready, my name is [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell. A-R-T-H-U-R, last name is Mitchell, M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L, and I should add junior 'cause my father is Arthur Mitchell [Arthur Mitchell, Sr.]. And I was born in New York City, I was born in Harlem [New York, New York] actually, 113th Street and Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard]. And I grew up in Harlem. And they tease me, they say, Harlem is in my heart, 'cause I'm always trying to do things for it. And, I, what else did you like to know? Speaker 1: Well, no, date and place of birth, and then I wanna have your--which you--you gave, I wanna have your occupation? Speaker 2: My what? Speaker 1: Occupation. Speaker 2: Oh, I am an artistic director, but I started as a dancer. But I think basically my calling is being a teacher. And I use the art as a wonderful way to get things done. And the arts ignite the mind. They give you the possibility to dream and to hope. And so that's something I feel young people need desperately, so I'm saying it all, this is one of the things I'm saying. (Cough) And I grew up in Harlem. Speaker 1: Now wait, I wanna, just a couple things, 'cause we have--would you say that is--what you just said is your favorite quote? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 578418 Speaker 1: I wanna ask four other favorites, these are People magazine-ish questions, some people like them. But I'd like to know your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite? Speaker 1: Food, food, F-O-O-D-- Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: Food. Speaker 2: Oh, fried chicken, collard greens and I--you know what I really loved is the yeast that my mother [Willie Hearns Mitchell] and father [Arthur Mitchell, Sr.] would have to bake bread. And they'd put the yeast and they had to put it, it had to rest for twenty-four hours and it would come up. I love that. I don't know how to do it, but I love it. And my mother said when she married my father she didn't know how to cook. She was a Hearns girl from Savannah, Georgia, beautiful. And she said finally my father came and said, "No this is not gonna work, you've gotta learn how to cook (laughter)." So he taught her to cook. And he-- Speaker 1: Hold on one second, I'm gonna ask my other favorites, hold on-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then we will--what about your favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: And favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: I don't--you know, I don't vacation (laughter). I'm--I don't vacation, I'm a workaholic, I'm a controlled maniac, and trying to get the arts into everyone's life. I am maniacal about it. And so being an artist, I'm always insisting that they've gotta have the arts and that's where the phrasing, the arts ignite the mind, they give you a possibility to dream and to hope. And this is what I tell all the kids in school when we would do lecture demonstrations and master classes. And I always said that anyone that does not have the arts in their life is living in a desert. Story_ID: 578419 Speaker 1: Your date of birth 'cause--? Speaker 2: I was born March 27th, 1934 in Harlem [New York, New York] on 113th Street and Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], and I grew up there and I went to junior high school, which is Junior High School 43 [New York, New York], which is still functioning, and my elementary school was P.S. 86 [sic. P.S. 186, New York, New York] and it's 145th Street between Amsterdam [Avenue] and Broadway. Speaker 1: So let's talk--give me your mother's name? Speaker 2: My mother is Willie Mae Mitchell [Willie Hearns Mitchell], was Willie Mae Hearns, she was a Hearns girl. And she was born in Savannah, Georgia. And she had two sisters. And then my father was born in Atlanta [Georgia], and he was one of those men that was very much a go-getter and do. He didn't have the formal education like my mother, and he was a bootlegger. And they said he was very lucky because when Prohibition came, he built his still underneath the ground of the--this building and they knew he was doing it, but no one knew where and how. But I found out afterwards that it was like in a subterranean basement, and that's where he had has still. My grandfather did not want him to marry my mother. He was too dark, he was short, and things--they eloped. Speaker 1: So wait, who was too dark, she was? Speaker 2: My--no, no, no, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your father? Speaker 2: My father, Arthur Mitchell, Sr. Speaker 1: So was--he was to--so why didn't he want him to marry your mother then? Speaker 2: Because my mother was a Haines gir- a ho- a Hearns girl. Speaker 1: Hearns girl. So explain to me who a Hearns girl is in Savannah? Speaker 2: Well back there--there's--you know, you know, I should get that picture of my grandfather, and they said he had a-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: --he had a horse and he was very important if you wanna put it that way. Speaker 1: So Hearns--so Hearns is an established family in, in Savannah? Speaker 2: Yeah, well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so it was a middle class family in the black sense. Speaker 2: Yeah, yes. And my mother, the Hearns girls were very pretty and my mother looked like Lena Horne. And so consequently I've been trying to get my family history pulled together, so I've assigned one of my nieces, but she says, "Oh no Uncle Junior [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell]," they call me Uncle Junior, my mother's sister lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and they have a history much better than I would know. And it's something I've been after them to really research. And apparently, my--my family was part American Indian [Native American], Jewish and Irish. And apparently, my grandmother was one of the last slaves that came over on the ship from Africa. And she was so beautiful that my grandfather fell in love with her and she didn't speak English. And they used to dress her up and da da da da da, very beautiful, but if you see my family, we all have the exact same cre- features. Speaker 1: You've got very chiseled features. Speaker 2: Cheekbones, the Mitchell cheekbones and the eyes and the nose and all like that. But it's been very hard to find out what happened. Speaker 1: Did your mother share any stories of growing up? Speaker 2: She gave--she told everything to my youngest sister [Shirley Mitchell Mills] who passed last year. And so I'm trying to get my nieces to get it all together and so they said the ancestry.com was something they will--you know. Speaker 1: Well ancestry.com is really helpful. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's, you know. Speaker 2: And she said that's where the mixture in the family came about. And I'm not a great one for going back and checking and things like that, but my nieces, I'm assigning them to do it. Speaker 1: So tell me though about your--can you describe your mother to me? Speaker 2: Yes. She was very beautiful. She looked like Lena Horne. And she was very--she was a Hearns girl so they're like upper middle class and she didn't work. And so my mother and father eloped from Atlanta and they moved to Philadelphia. Story_ID: 578420 Speaker 1: Do you know how they [Mitchell's parents, Willie Hearns Mitchell and Arthur Mitchell, Sr.] met, did you ever hear that story? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Do you--did you ever hear of how they met? How the two of them met? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. But I, you know, I have some pictures in my--at home under my [maternal] grandfather's picture. I don't know how they met, but I--it was unusual for them to be going with the person that fell--my mother fell in love with. And I think it's because they met at a dance. And he--he didn't have the skill, he never went to college, he didn't have the skills, but he can make anything with his hands, he can do. And so they eloped, came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and while they were there, my father became a bootlegger and he was famous that they never caught him because he built the still underneath the basement of the building they were in. Story_ID: 578421 Speaker 1: Do you know the birth year of your father [Arthur Mitchell, Sr.] and the birth year of your mother [Willie Hearns Mitchell]? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother was--it's, it's--I put something in-- Speaker 1: You have it in here, okay. Sorry. Okay, oh no, there's no birthday there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not there, it's in-- Speaker 1: But that's okay, that's something, we won't worry about that. But-- Speaker 2: Yeah my mother when she was go--she was eighty-one when she passed and my father was sixty-five. And the thing is, I didn't have a--my father got in trouble with the government and so I never knew him. And what happened was, I remember I was like ten, twelve, and it was embarrassing 'cause they wanted my father to go to jail. And so I called the family together and I said, "I will take care of everybody, don't you worry." And I've been doing that ever since. Speaker 1: And you were twelve years old? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: You were gonna-- Speaker 2: I always worked, I always had jobs. I--there was a young--not a young man, he was a like a pimp and he had all these beautiful girls working and--and I was like, "Why are you doing that, you're so beautiful," but they just have no self-esteem. And then across the street, I lived at 536-534 West 143rd Street [New York, New York], but across the street was like a bordello, they had an apartment. And I was very young and they always asked me to go to the store. And that's how I learned everything because I would just--they would talk and Mr. Dickie [ph.] was his name. And I couldn't understand what all these beautiful young women were doing for him, 'cause he looked a mess to me, but anyway. And I started working by cleaning the--scrubbing floors. I would go to the store for them. I then started a newspaper route and then I got a job in a butcher shop, and they used to pay me with a few dollars but give me food, which I would then take to the family. And it was the, the, the area, everybody knew everybody else so they would take care of your children if you were--they were working and things like that. My father got a job--no, he liked to fish. That's why today I don't really like fish 'cause I had to go catch them. And we'd go out to Long Island Sound and we would fish and catch crabs and things like that. Then my father he was the superintendent of the building. He started a fish store in the basement. "Hi Miss Brown [ph.], you want with the heads or without the heads," that kind of (laughter), and I would clean the fish. And that's how I got to know everybody. Now my basic early things, I came up during the musical period, you know. Hines, Hines and Hines [Gregory Hines, HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr. and Maurice Hines, Sr.] lived on the same block with me, and they would be going on tour, they came back and I thought it was glamorous and wonderful. And I remember seeing the movies, not it was about show business and that impressed me. And so consequently, my father became the superintendent of two buildings on 143rd Street and we had dumbwaiters where you--the old fashioned dumbwaiters you pull the rope and they would put the stuff in the kitchen. But sometimes it broke and I had to go or we had to go to the top floor and collect it from every floor. And I--I'd make it into a musical, (singing) "Howdy neighbor, happy harvest." And they said, "This kids got a great personality," and that's how I got tips and that's how we collected everything. And I always liked to dance. And so in those days someone would come, knock on your door and say, "Do you have a talented child." And they said yes and you pay a nominal amount of money, but you'd go downtown to CBS [CBS Building, New York, New York] and you had a half hour dance, half hour singing and things like that. And that is how my whole life was always involved with theater. And that's how come I went to Lucky's [New York, New York] which was the in-house bar to go to where they had all the different singers and dancers, and stuff working there. Speaker 1: So when you were going to Lucky's how old were you? Speaker 2: I was underage, and I'd have a Shirley Temple (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think you were saying about, were you saying about fourteen? Speaker 2: I would say fifteen. Story_ID: 578422 Speaker 1: Well I wanna take you a little earlier. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanna take you back a little earlier. And I want to--so you--you were born on 113th [Street] and Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard], but then you moved several times right, the family moved? Speaker 2: Yeah, from there we moved to--from 113th to hundred and into, on between 7th [7th Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard], and Jacques d'Amboise, you know, he has that program [National Dance Institute], he said, "Oh Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], we've finally got a building." It's an old school that's been since shut down and the government said, "Well if you get someone to renovate, they can have it for a very nominal price." And I went, it was my elemen- my old elementary school [P.S. 186, New York, New York]. And so it, it's like 147th [Street] at 148th Street. And I remember I was a kid and I used to see all the children going in and I would follow them 'cause I was underage and they would put me out. So finally the principal called my mother [Willie Hearns Mitchell] and said, "Look, he keeps coming and since he's interested, we'll accept him." Said, "Fine," and they said, "Now young man, you're underage so you'll have to sit in the back in the back of the room." I said, "I don't sit in the back, if I'm in that class I wanna sit in the front row." And that is how I started going to school. And it was 147th, 148th. Then we moved up the hill to P.S. 186 [New York, New York]. And my father [Arthur Mitchell, Sr.] was superintendent of these buildings--let me go slow. We left Harlem [New York, New York] and they offered my father a job and we moved to 152nd Street between Amsterdam [Avenue] and Broadway. Then we moved to 151st [Street]. Then the last job my father got was 143rd Street and that's where I grew up most of the way. Speaker 1: Most of the time at 143rd (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes and on the corner was a bar called Lucky's [New York, New York], another bar called Lucky's, and my father he didn't have all, didn't have the higher education but he could do things with his hands, make--he could build, fix and stuff like that. Story_ID: 578423 Speaker 1: I am the oldest of five kids. Speaker 2: That's what--so you had two brothers and two sisters (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two brothers and two sisters, and one that was the daughter of my sister and she's part of the family. But I had an older sister who passed, Frances [Frances Mitchell], very beautiful, and she's the one that looked like this beautiful black woman that came from Africa. And so she taught me how to dance, social dancing. And she died of sugar diabetes. And there was a big gap. My sister was like twenty-one and I was around about ten. Speaker 2: I see, so your--the oldest was Frances-- Speaker 1: Yes, Frances. Speaker 2: She was the oldest and then who was, who was next? Speaker 1: Me. Speaker 2: So you're next, so you're the junior? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And my the thing is, I've seen pictures-- Speaker 2: Wait, but your saying between you and Frances was eleven years? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So she was an only child for a long time (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, but very spoiled. And she would go to school, they had a private car to put her in to take her to school, yeah. And Frances. And she is the one that taught me how to jitterbug or Lindy Hop and stuff like that. But I--I didn't really know her 'cause she was much older than I. Speaker 2: Right. Well that, that's, you were a surprise sort of, you know, I mean that, that's, in those days, I mean, that's quite a gap. Speaker 1: And the thing is, after that everybody came, the next five a year apart. And-- Speaker 2: So next to you is a brother (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My brother Charles [Charles Mitchell]. Speaker 2: And then after Charles? Speaker 1: After Charles it was--and this is where I'm a little muddy, but I have to make a note for me to ask my sister this stuff, is that Charles, then there was I don't know if it was Lisa [ph.] or Jaynette [ph.], I can get the sequence for you, and then Jaynette, then Lisa and then the last, the youngest, was my brother, my little God-brother which was PeeWee [ph.]. Speaker 2: He--he had the nickname PeeWee? Speaker 1: Yeah, PeeWee. Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): You just--those are your nieces and nephews. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): But, she wants to know about your brothers-- Speaker 1: Your brothers-- Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): --and sisters. Speaker 1: They've all passed. Speaker 2: No, but their names. Speaker 1: Oh Charles, Lisa, Jaynette--see I'm saying it out sequence, but I'll get it all correct for you--Julie, the beautiful Julie, Jaynette and-- Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Now these are your nieces and nephews. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Just your brothers and sisters. Speaker 2: Sisters. Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): There's Frances-- Speaker 2: I never knew, I don't remember much about Frances, but then-- Speaker 1: She was the twenty-one years old. Speaker 2: But it was told to me she passed at twenty-one. And then there was-- Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): You. Speaker 2: You. Speaker 1: First was me, and then Laura Mae [Laura Mitchell], Lau- my other sister Laura Mae, then after Laura Mae it was, Laura Mae, Shirley [Shirley Mitchell Mills] was the last in between there it was-- Speaker 2: It was a boy-- Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Your other brother Charles, your brother-- Speaker 2: Charles and it was-- Speaker 1: I don't have it. I don't have that. Speaker 2: I'm leaving one out, so it was me--Frances and me, and then I'll give you the names, it was-- Speaker 1: Laura Mae. Speaker 2: Laura Mae, and-- Speaker 1: Shirley. Speaker 2: Shirley was the youngest. Speaker 1: Youngest. Speaker 2: And now Shirley would tell me, "Oh Momma Mitchell [Willie Hearns Mitchell]," my mother would te- tell her everything. And so she knew more about the family history (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The history. Story_ID: 578424 Speaker 1: I want to understand about what it was like growing up in the Mitchell household and I, you know, and also what you were like as a little boy, but let's talk about growing up in the Mitchell household. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. It's, I've always worked, I've always worked. I used to do floors, go to the store for people, had a newspaper route. And I started doing those sort of things to get extra money. And then it was a good family, difficult because my father [Arthur Mitchell, Sr.] was very frustrated because he never got to be what he wanted to be. And he became an alcoholic like. And he--I never really knew my father. Speaker 1: So, so your mother [Willie Hearns Mitchell], so is your father in and out of the house? Speaker 2: Yes. He--he left when I was around twelve. Speaker 1: Twelve. Speaker 2: Ten, twelve, between ten and twelve. Speaker 1: But isn't that when he got in trouble? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He got in trouble with the law, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So what, what did he get in trouble? What was-- Speaker 2: Well, okay, what it was is that someone got murdered, this is a terrible thing. And my father said, "You know what I'm gonna make all this money. I will take the responsibility and then I'm gonna go to jail and they gonna give me all this money." And I was like, "You gotta be kidding." 'Cause I always been no, I'm very Carrie Nation, no you must be right and correct, that kind of thing. And that's how he, when he got incarcerated, that's when I took over the family. The other thing was that I remember childhood diseases, I caught them all at the same time. And I remember distinctly, I was in bed and my mother brought the doctor in. He said, "Um, I don't know. We don't think he's going to last." And I heard that, I said, "Well they've got another thought coming, I will make (laughter), I will do it." And that's when I became very, put everything down, know what you're gonna do and stuff like that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Story_ID: 578425 Speaker 1: Let's talk about you as a little boy. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So what are you observing, you know, I know music is around. Speaker 2: Right. Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know music it's around. I know you're exploring the neighborhood which is Harlem [New York, New York]. I know, that the Hines, Hines, Hines [Gregory Hines, HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr. and Maurice Hines, Sr.] are-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, down the block. But what, what is this-- Speaker 2: I know what you're--you wanna find out what made me tick. And I love to read. And we had a fire escape on the outside of the building. And everybody would be playing ball and things, and I would be reading. I always loved going to the museum, to the library and getting books and reading them. And I would sit, they'd go, "Hey come one, hey Mitch [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], come on we're gonna play a game." I'd say, "I'm not interested, I've gotta read these books." And my nickname was Artie Babe [ph.]. And we had a gang, it was called the Rebels. And then from--when we got a little bit older we became the Hilltop Lovers. And it is very hard for people to fathom that I was a hood, but I was--whatever the guys did I was part of it. Speaker 1: Right, but back then--not back then, I mean, there were gangs and people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Exactly right. Speaker 1: You were part of a gang, you know, weren't like our gangs today I'm told, but were they? Speaker 2: No, well we--not, we weren't killing people, but we were like the gang that was in competition with the gang around the corner, five blocks away. And I think I--all this I need to say is that my father [Arthur Mitchell, Sr.] being a superintendent, we were one of the first black families to move up on Sugar Hill [Harlem, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: I see. Now Sugar Hill is very famous. It's a very famous area (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I, I remember catching the trolley, it was trolley cars to and from school. And we had to go through the Irish neighborhood to get to the school, 43 [Junior High School 43, New York, New York]. And now I was very young, actually because, you remember they had the race riots in Harlem in the early four- [1940s], well I was in that. And what happened was, I had a newspaper route and I would go to the bars selling newspaper and I had a--and then there was a big race riot with the Irish against the blacks and stuff. And I remember it was 140- 140th Street and there was a bar on the corner and I would go and I'd sell newspapers. I've always been enterprising, taking care of the family, do--and living, you know, that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 578426 Speaker 1: My mother's [Willie Hearns Mitchell] church is 153rd Street [sic.] and Amsterdam [Avenue], it's still there. Speaker 2: And what was the name of that? Speaker 1: Convent Avenue Baptist Church [New York, New York] and I can get-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'll get the name from my nieces and stuff like that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so, so this is the thing. So church is not an influence, music is, school, you know we know your schools that you're going to, but what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 1: Okay, I was at 43, Junior High School 43 [New York, New York] which is still functioning on 129th Street and Amsterdam Avenue. And I was a good social dancer which my, Frances [Frances Mitchell], my eldest sister taught me. And they said, "Oh," the guidance teacher said, "Oh Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], they're starting a new performing arts school, High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. Why don't you audition for it since you like to dance and sing and you know," like that. And I said sure. So they contacted the school and they said, "Prepare a dance routine to come and audition to get into the High School of Performing Arts." And I had to be fifteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen. And I went to the audition and when I got there, all these kids were auditioning to get into this school and it's the school that 'Fame' was built around. And I saw these other kids that were trained either ballet or modern, and I didn't have any formal training. And I said well, I said okay, and I liked Fred Astaire, so took the song 'Stepping out with My Baby' ['Steppin' Out with My Baby'] and I choreographed that and I made that as my audition. And that's when I was getting tap classes down at CBS [CBS Building, New York, New York]. And I said well, they took me 'cause they needed boys. And I went to the High School of Performing Arts and I didn't have any formal training and they put me in modern dance. And I kept saying, "Well you know, I don't know," and I was always exploring what things were about. And I said, you know, these books are very good, but there's nothing about my people. And, and so they said, "Well Arthur, we're that--that's not the subject for today, we're gonna send you to the principal's office," I said, "I don't care." I was always very feisty, that kind of a person, typical Aries. And that changed my life going to Performing Arts. And what--and it was a elem- it was a pilot school so you had four majors or eight majors. You have, the morning you would do academics, in the afternoon you would dance or vice-a-versa. And that's where I became really indoctrinated into the performing arts. And there was beautiful girl, Leona Laviscount, was her name, absolutely gorgeous. And at lunch we would always have dancing, and Leona and I would dance. We'd go to the cafeteria and we would dance and I would take over. And that's where I was getting my beginning taste for theater. Story_ID: 578427 Speaker 1: Describe the, the School of the Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: It was fantastic. Speaker 1: So what is the racial makeup of the school? Speaker 2: It was mostly Caucasian and a few minorities. Diana Sands, you know Diana--Diana was there also. And I being a very enterprising young man, I became like an agent and I said, okay we need money, I got a pianist, I got Diana Sands and I got a couple of dancers and we put on a show and I would then advertise it, advertise, I'd go tell people they could book us. And that's how I got into really doing the commercial part, as well as entrepreneurship. And the, my first job I was in junior high school and--no I was in High School of Performing Arts and I was, I was, 'cause I started that around fifteen and I was studying tap, I was gonna be a tap dancer. And they said no--I always had this look and I've always loved clothing. And I would buy my clothes, I would dress, I would do, and then I said--they said, "You know, you're very classy," you know, and eve- Tom Nip was the name of the old vaudevillian who taught me tap dance. He'd say, "Kid, you got style," you know, that kind of stuff and that's how I learned to do things. From that is--I said, "Well okay, I wanna do something with this," and I said, "Well maybe I'll go to Broadway or go to Hollywood," you know, that kind of thing. And I just fell in love with the arts, and particularly dance. But all the teachers kept saying to me, "You've got talent, but you're--you're very elegant, you're very classy," and I said okay. and I--was really tap dance and I didn't have any formal training like ballet and modern, but I studied with some of the great dance artists today, Bob Joffrey [Robert Joffrey] was at the school, Alwin Nikolais, and I would go and take classes with them and that is where my whole horizon began to open up, 'cause I was finding another world other than where I came from. It was--I always liked to dress and I used to go visit my cousins, my mother's [Willie Hearns Mitchell] sister's children in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which I thought was insane, 'cause every day at five o'clock they'd go take a shower and change their clothes, you know, very Philadelphia. I said, "Oh it feels silly these kids getting dressed in the afternoon to go back." And that's how I became much broader and got a totally different perception of the world. And while I was there, there was a teacher, she's a pianist, Betty Walberg, and she ended up being Barbra Streisand's personal coach. And I wanted to go to college, 'cause that was my ambition to go to college and I won a scholarship to Bennington College [Bennington, Vermont], which was an all-girls school, I was the first male to win a scholarship and go there. And I got one also to go to the School of American Ballet [New York, New York], which was the official school of New York City Ballet. So all this--during this like fourteen to eighteen, my brain and my--my awareness of things got opened, more opened and so I said okay. They--I got a scholarship to the School of American Ballet and I was like seventeen going on eighteen. And then I decided what I should do, if I wanted to be a performer I should get the technique. And I went to my first ballet and I fell madly in love with it, which was New York City Ballet. And I said, "Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], if you wanna go on to this, you gotta get something to make yourself better. What could you do that would make you so good that people would hire you regardless of your skin color." And I said, "You can do jazz, you can do tap," sort of faking all of that, but I said, "If I got the classical ballet training that would make me unique." Story_ID: 578428 Speaker 1: And part of what happened at the high school was that you would go to auditions, you know, placement and that's where I really ran into prejudice because there were very few black dancers in different shows. And I remember seeing Roland Petit's company [Ballets de Paris de Roland Petit] and he had two black dancers. I said, "I'm gonna get in that company," and so I'm going ahead, but I went to Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. And I danced with everybody that wanted a male dancer and things like that. Mort- Morton Feldman, you know, great Morton Feldman, he was just starting at the time and he did a lot of the music for us. And Shirley Broughton was the name of the teacher and so she started a small company with myself, there were five of us and Morton would do the music. But by this time my mind was really opened up because I began to see and do things I knew nothing about. Speaker 2: So now what about Neps- Nanette Charisse? Speaker 1: Yes, she was one of my teachers at-- Speaker 2: At the school? Speaker 1: --at Performing Arts. Good, you're very good, you know. And she kept saying, "You know Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], you should be a ballet dancer." I'd say, "Ah ballet, I'm not really interested." They say, "Ah you should." And that's where I met Nanette Charisse. Bob Joffrey [Robert Joffrey] was there and so I fa- and--while you were in high school you would go to auditions and that's when I really ran into prejudice or racism, that there just weren't any black dancers in these shows. Story_ID: 578429 Speaker 1: 'Four Saints in Three Acts' [Virgil Thomson], remember the play--okay. They were doing that and I didn't go to--I was with one of my friends in the school for--as an audition. And I was sitting out in the lobby waiting. And this woman came by, Ethel Linder Reiner, she says, "Oh you'd make a beautiful agent, come in," and I got the job. And that's how I got in 'Four Saints in Three Acts.' [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson, my- myself, and Bob [ph.], Bob something, Deb- [HistoryMaker] Billie Allen, myself--there were six dancers and what's his name, William Dollar did the choreography. And that's when I made the decision if I was gonna be in this field I should get the classical ballet training and that what's would make me so good. So that happened around about, high school was fifteen-- Speaker 2: Four--I had age fifteen, but age, but year 1949 [sic.]. Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So 1949-- Speaker 1: And that's when I got my first job in 'Four Saints in Three Acts.' And Leontyne Price was in the chorus. And I remember the situation where they had like pyramids and you would sit accordingly, sopranos, altos, men. And the most exciting thing was not the rehearsal, but was the breaks. When you had a five-minute break they would all improvise and I thought, was fantastic. And I was the youngest, and I got my first job going to Paris [France]. And everyone wanted to take care of me because I was the youngest. Speaker 2: Well you're eighteen I think, at that point, seventeen, eighteen (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah. Speaker 2: I mean you, you were that and then, that is--that's pretty huge, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean to have that experience (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And when I--when I graduated from the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], they used the fact that I got the Broadway show, that was my senior project. Speaker 2: So that was--I think it was--you know who, we interviewed Louis Johnson and he was talking about that production 'cause he was in the production. And, and he talks about Billie Allen and Helen Taitt and-- Speaker 1: Helen Taitt, that's right. Speaker 2: Okay, and Virgil Thomson--Thomas (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Virgil Thomson, oh. Speaker 2: And Gertrude Stein. Speaker 1: "Oh, I want the pretty one." I said, "Oh Lord, this one (laughter)." And, but that's how, my first j- job was to take me to Paris. Speaker 2: So but this was your first time out of the country? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So that's like opening up a totally new world? Speaker 1: It was. And you know, we went to Paris and actually we found a couple of pictures in Paris sitting there. You know, you could see I was this young kid going ah. But I've always been, I was an entrepreneur from the very, very beginning. I was like, now we gotta make some money 'cause I gotta take somebody home and I gotta do this and da-da-da-da-da. So we put together like a little group that we'd go out and try to raise money and we'd go to the churches and things like that. Speaker 2: This is in Paris you did that? Speaker 1: No, this was in New York City [New York, New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In New York. Right. To go--right, to go and do things. Speaker 1: --to get money to go to different things. And that's where I knew Leona Laviscount, absolutely gorgeous. Story_ID: 578430 Speaker 1: Because ballet is really the province, in some respects it's more the province of the wealthy. I mean it's dictated by a very European taste. Modern has more, you know, acceptability. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I was wondering, because when I was, you know, preparing and I was looking at you know everyone coming through and you were--you had studied also with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham? Speaker 2: Yes, now Mr. Sho- okay, Mary Hinkson, the fabulous Mary Hinkson, she saw me, she said, "Where are you studying, why don't you come down to Katherine Dunham's school [Katherine Dunham School of Dance and Theater, New York, New York] and there's a wonderful teacher they call Shook [Karel Shook]." And I said, "Oh sure," 'cause everybody went to Katherine Dunham's school on 43rd Street. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even, even people that--there were white and black going, that's right? Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, mostly Caucasian. What's his, oh God a lot of--and she's on 43rd Street around the corner, but Katherine Dunham's company [Negro Dance Troupe; Katherine Dunham Company] was always traveling the world and things like that and I thought it was fascinating. And I felt that the one thing that was lacking with me was the fact I didn't have the classical technique. So that's when I made up my mind I'm gonna study with Mr. Shook, I'm gonna do this. I also went to the New Dance Group and that's where I danced with Donnie McKayle's [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle] company. I worked with Sophie Maslow, Bill Bales [William Bales], I worked with Natanya Neuman. This is the very early days and Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] was the place to get into. And so I ca- and I began to realize I didn't have the technical skills of the other dancers that I saw in the school. And I said, well--and they made you go out in your senior year for auditions and that's when I really ran into racism. Speaker 1: Because people did not wanna cast you no matter-- Story_ID: 578431 Speaker 1: How did you know that you had talent, you know? Speaker 2: Oh, people always said, you know, I was a good social dancer and I--something in my mind I remember and it was the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas] and Bojangles [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson], I saw all that from Hollywood and that's what I wanted to do. So I would go and I would dance on the corner of where we lived, 143rd Street and there was a bar called Lucky's [New York, New York]. And then I would dance and people would give me money and things like that. And my father [Arthur Mitchell, Sr.] caught me and beat me to death. He said, "Are you crazy," I said well. But also due to the fact that we were the superintendents for 536 and 534 143rd Street, they--they're still there and that's ho- when I began to see things in a different way. I began to be--I also began to be making money. I always liked to make money. And there was a--not a bordello, but there was an apartment where this pimp had like four or five women work out of. And they said, "Oh Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] would you go to the store for us, would you go get this, get that." And then I'd go and I'd sit on the floor and listen to them talk. It was amazing, 'cause that's where I got this knowledge about people and what they were doing and how they would talk about the Johns and what they--you know, I just--I was absorbing everything. And I said, "Well you know, you need something that is gonna make you really separate other than your skin color." And Eddie Villella [Edward Villella] was there [at High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], Suzanne Pleshette the actress and it was really phenomenal going to school there. Story_ID: 578432 Speaker 1: But as I said, I began to go to auditions and I wouldn't be taken. And you know, 'Show of Shows' ['Your Show of Shows'] was on, Sid Caesar and Imogene Coca, and th- I would go and they said, "Well very good." Bambi Linn and her husband, Rod Alexander held an audition and I went. And afterwards he said to me, "That was the most phenomenal audition I saw, I've seen in New York City [New York, New York]." He said, "But I can't take you because they will not let me hire a black kid." Speaker 2: You know, so I thought also that Rod Alexander said that to you? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Is that the same person? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): But you, you ended up working with him later. Speaker 2: Well what happened was that he said, "We can't put you in the show." Then he was choreographing the musical 'Archy and Mehitabel' and [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt was doing the lead. And-- Speaker 1: I--I think that's 'Shinbone Alley.' Speaker 2: 'Shinbone Alley' that's it, very good, very good, you did your homework. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, sorry. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so they, I was--a year or so after the audition I was home, the phone rings. It was Rod Alexander. He said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], I'm doing this show for 'Archy and Mehitabel,' 'Shinbone Alley,' and I want you to come and assist me." I said, "Sure." And that's when I first got introduced to Eartha Kitt. She had beautiful legs and feet, and I wanna be, (singing) "Eva," she could do that. And I think they needed somebody to work with her to appease her. So they put her in charge. Rod Alexander left the show and then I became the choreographer. Jacques d'Amboise and Allegra Kent were in the thing also, and Eddie Bracken. And so the show, it ran for a short period of time, but it closed. And that's when I said, "What am I gonna do, da-da." I said--I saw Roland Petit's company [Ballets de Paris de Roland Petit], I said, "Well you know, I'm gonna go to Europe 'cause there's a better chance for me to go there than being in America." And now in the meantime from having gone to do auditions at Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], I realize I was starting everything very late. I was eighteen years old and so I said, I've studied everything. I started studying singing, voice and diction, anything to make myself better to be able to compete. And I've had that little taste of going to Paris [France] with 'Four Saints in Three Acts' [Virgil Thomson]. And something in my mind connected that, "Arthur, you've got to catch up to what other people have been studying since they were five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten." Speaker 1: Well because that's very late. You start ballet very early. Speaker 2: At eighteen. And so I said okay, and so I was mani- I was really really--I think I've always had this maniacal drive to be better and to get what I freely didn't have. Story_ID: 578433 Speaker 1: What was it like to work with [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt at that point? Speaker 2: Well we formed--after the show ['Shinbone Alley'] closed, we formed a nightclub act together and we sang. And Kitty was really amazing. And she has a--she had a beautiful voice. This was all like ah-ah-ah-ah, you know, that was. And (laughter) she dro- oh she was maniacal. And we started trying to get gigs to perform. And she got George Wein from the-- Speaker 1: Oh George Wein, yeah. Speaker 2: The jazz-- Speaker 1: Right, The jazz, he did Newport Jazz Fest [Newport Jazz Festival]. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so Kitty and I got an engagement there. There were no dressing rooms, so you sat in the car and you would change your clothes. And that's where I saw Billie Holiday. Speaker 1: Oh at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the ja-- Speaker 1: Newport Jazz Festival. Speaker 2: Newport Jazz. And we were back stage and I said, "Oh that's Billie Holiday." And these guys were pushing the drug, drugs on her. And she said, "No, no, I'm clean, da-da-da-da." They said, "Come on." And she said--and you could see her physically, "Oh (gesture)," and that's when she started doing the drugs and she got--she couldn't perform in New York City [New York, New York]. But my whole thing was to be in the theater. Story_ID: 578434 Speaker 1: What would you say you learned from [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt? 'Cause at this point, this is before she gets--oh it's later, much later, that she can't perform in the United States, you know, she's a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Well the thin-- Speaker 1: But, what did you learn about from her? Speaker 2: That's why I was thinking what was it that I could do that would make me so good 'cause I wouldn't--I couldn't get any jobs. I said take the classical ballet. And that'll make you technically so good that people would use you. And that's why I wanted to get--go to School of American Ballet [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: So you receive a scholarship there? Speaker 2: I got a scholarship to the School of American Ballet and to Bennington College [Bennington, Vermont] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is nine--well which was interesting, that-- Speaker 2: Well I always wanted to go to college. You know, all poor kids they wanna go to college and get a good education. And so I said, "Well, if I take the classical training and did that with what I can do, I would be so good I can get jobs." Speaker 1: Well I found, I didn't know, so Bennington at that time was all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All-girls school. Speaker 1: --all-girl. And it-- Speaker 2: And I was the first male to win a scholarship there. Speaker 1: Which is, which is, it's interesting 'cause it's up in Vermont, right, (laughter)? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And (laughter) that's an interesting--and I, I've also read that it was, it was known for modern--I mean, modern dance, you know. So those two things, I don't--I mean I know Bennington is good for the arts, I mean, I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but it was mostly modern. And at the same time, by that time, I was also going to the New Dance Group and that's where I worked with Sophie Maslow, I danced with Donnie McKayle [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle]. I sold bonds for Israel, 'cause Israel was not even in existence at that time. And so all those things I kept getting the technique to make me better, because I knew I was starting late in comparison to other people, and that's from the auditions at Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. Then everybody saying, "Oh you're classic, you should do ballet." And I said, "Oh no, no, no, no, no." And so one thing led to the other and that's what I did. Story_ID: 578435 Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): It might be interesting to talk a little bit more about your time in High School for the Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] and how you decided to focus on ballet. Speaker 2: Well because they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): (Simultaneous) Because much of the push was to (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but part of when you went to P- PA, you have to go audition, that's part of the whole process. And that's when I would not get the job. And I knew I danced better than everybody else. And when I didn't get the job, I said, "Oh now wait a minute Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell]. They're not gonna hire you because you're black." So I said okay, that's when I saw the company with Roland Petit [Ballets de Paris de Roland Petit] and that's when I thought I'm gonna go to Europe and I'd have a better chance going there to work, and I was gonna audition for a Roland Petit. And actually, remember a couple of years ago this--this guy was homeless and they found him in the street and Arthur, Arthur Bell [ph.], I wore his costume. Let me go slow. New York City Ballet acquired 'Illuminations' [Frederick Ashton] this ballet. And in it was, there were two black guys that danced in it and I happened to wear the costume of one of the black guys. And now I've been to Paris [France] at the beginning and then I started to say, "I'm gonna have a nightclub act." Now, it--I, I'm jumbling this up but what had happened was that again, all of the things that I kept saying, "What can I do that would make me so good that they would hire me." And I did things on top of each thing. And it was Duke Ellington and he did a score, 'The Three Kings' [sic. 'Three Black Kings,' Duke Ellington]. And it was, now I have to be careful to say it right, 'The Three Kings,' one was King [Balthazar] something, one was Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and the other was Arthur Mitchell [sic. King Solomon]. And [HistoryMaker] Billie Allen, her husband [Luther Henderson], was the musician. And he's the one who said, "Arthur don't you remember they wrote that--he wrote that score with you in mind." I'm going well I don't know. But I'd been doing mostly modern dance. And I said, "Okay." It sounds like I'm rambling, but I'm trying to put it in sequence so it makes sense. Because I always did three or four things simultaneously. And from Performing Arts I got introduced to the New Dance Group and I danced with all the modern dance companies. That's where I danced with Donnie McKayle [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle], Sophie Maslow, Bill Bales [William Bales]. Speaker 1: Can you tell me how that group came together, do you know that? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: How the New Dance Group came together? How did it come together? Do you know or were they fully functioning when you came in to work with them? Speaker 2: Well from the New Dance Group, that's where I got to know everybody and I--and they always wanted male dancers, so they said, "Arthur you come, tada, tate, tada," and that's how I started studying with people in--in the dance world, but it wasn't ballet. And then I got introduced to ballet. And they were at City Center [New York City Center, New York, New York], New York City Ballet and we used to sneak in and go to the second balcony. That's where I ran into Anna Kisselgoff. And her mo- I met her mother and, "Oh you're that nice kid up there in the--I'm gonna send this sandwich for him, da--da--da--da--da." And that's where I saw New York City Ballet. And I said, "Um, that's what I wanna do." I really gravitated towards that. And that's also around the time when I got accep- I decided to go to the School of American Ballet [New York, New York] and take the ballet training. Story_ID: 578436 Speaker 1: Can you talk about Shook [Karel Shook]? Because I heard that he was, you know, he--you developed--I mean, he is the one who opened the school [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] with you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah he was phenomenal teacher. Speaker 1: But I'm told that he, I'm told that he was strict and tough? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. And he was born in the Midwest and I just read it in his book ['Elements of Classical Ballet Technique as Practiced in the School of the Dance Theatre of Harlem,' Karel Shook] the other night, and the Cornish School [Cornish School of Allied Arts; Cornish College of the Arts, Seattle, Washington]-- Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): He studied at the Cornish School. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he, and then he had a, a nightclub act doing East Indian dance like Jacob Fel- like-- Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Denishawn [Denishawn School of Dancing and Related Arts, Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): (Unclear). Speaker 2: With Jack Cole. Then he joined New York City Ballet for one year and Balanchine [George Balanchine] that's where he met Mr. Balanchine and stuff like that. Speaker 1: But this is after his time with Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham], that he joined (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. 'Cause-- Speaker 1: So he's with--so he's with Dunham and you meet him there-- Speaker 2: Right. And I would take classes with him. Speaker 1: Right, and a lot of people are coming into Dunham [Katherine Dunham School of Dance and Theater, New York, New York], it's a--it's a mixed group. Speaker 2: Oh God yes. I mean, it was the popular place to go because it was very popular and Miss Dun- they were traveling the world at that time. Speaker 1: They were traveling. They were traveling the world. You know what's interesting about, you know, that is the names that came through, you know, Dunham at that point and in time. Like you said because it's(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, oh God. Speaker 1: --international. And you know, 'cause [HistoryMaker] Glory Van Scott, she talks about being there, you know Karel Shook is there. So Karel Shook then moves over to New York City Ballet, right? American Bal--wait, was he-- Speaker 2: He--he was teaching there, but he had a nightclub act doing something like Jack Cole kind of thing. Then he--then Balanchine did, I wanna say, the 'Song of Norway' on Broadway and he was part of that. But again when I spoke to Freddie Franklin [Frederic Franklin] after he said, "Oh Karel was one of my students and I started teaching Karel to be a good ballet master to, to train." And I said, "Okay." So then he opened a school called the Harlem School of the Arts [sic. Studio of Dance Arts, New York, New York] on 46th [Street] and 8th Avenue. And every top black performer was studying there. And-- Speaker 1: Studying at? Speaker 2: At, at his school--Shook's school. Speaker 1: At Shook's school. Speaker 2: And but--as I was trying to explain to Gillian [Gillian Lipton], you didn't work fifty-two weeks; however, you did ten weeks here, five weeks there, that and I became like [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell because I had th- I was taking these classes. And Mary Hinkson was the one that said, "You know you should get over to the School of American Ballet [New York, New York]." Speaker 1: Right. So, so you went over to the school there and then this is the whole thing. Then you actually end up--don't you end up living with, with Shook? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay and mar--so it's Shook and Mary Hinkson and [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson at least over on 23rd Street (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, the--the, there's a bui- it was right here on 23rd Street and it was a floor each, it was like-- Speaker 1: Four stories. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: It was a four-story building. Speaker 2: And it was an artist building. There was a loft I shared with Mr. Shook. Mary Hinkson was across and they had a thing. David Wood from the Graham Company [Martha Graham Dance Company] they were downstairs. Louis Johnson, it was--it's like, it was an arts complex, you know. And that's how we knew each other. David Wood would help and stuff like that. He was with Martha Graham, and that's how I also got introduced to Mary Hinkson. Speaker 1: Mary Hinkson. Speaker 2: And Matt Turney, and they were the two black dancers that were with Martha Graham. Speaker 1: So what does Shook say, because Shook recognized your talent and he actually said come and live with me. Speaker 2: Well the thing is he was the one studio you could go where he was training black dancers, even at Katherine Dunham. Now, Frances Taylor of Katherine Dunham, phenomenal, beautiful body, feet, legs and she studied in Chicago [Illinois] with--I can't, their name, I'll get the name. Dance on pointe. She had everything. And we all liked her because she was fantastic. And so I said, "Oh it's that ballet training that's making her so good." And that's where I started to break things down. Now let me say again, you--I've worked a couple of weeks with Donnie McKayle [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle], I would dance with Natanya Neuman, I would work with Shirley Broughton. Wherever you can get work you would do it. And by this time, I'd gone to the School of American Ballet and when I got there, the only people of color was Chita Rivera and Louis Johnson. And I--I was just fascinated with the technique of it. I then went to City Center [New York City Center, New York, New York] and I saw it. And I said, "I'm gonna be a ballet dancer." I mean I became maniacal about it. Story_ID: 578437 Speaker 1: Balanchine [George Balanchine], he, the American Ballet Theatre [sic. School of American Ballet, New York, New York], now when was it started, it was started in-- Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): In the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: In the '30s [1930s]. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: By this time, but Balanchine is--was, he was, was he born 1904 or was it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the thing is, Balanchine in the early days, it was Ballet Society, Ballet--there was a black girl there that was really wonderful. She and Tanaquil [Tanaquil Le Clercq] were the best. And they would go to Europe with someone and they went to Europe and Giacometti [Alberto Giacometti] the sculptor used Tanny and Betty Nichols as examples of what he was doing. And so it was, let me put it this, it was so mixed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Gillian [Gillian Lipton], hold on one second, hold on. You're looking concerned. Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Oh no, I'm not looking concerned. Speaker 1: You're not? Okay. Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): I--I don't know where you wanna pause for my--chiming in, but-- Speaker 1: I do want you-- Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): He wants to make sure you have his whole like-- Speaker 1: Well the thing is, things were so different in that time then they are now. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean, you know, if you did ballet you were special. But I know I had a nightclub act and I remember--what is it called? But I was considered, what's the word, how do you say it, fancy. I was, you know-- Speaker 2: Classy, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was ballet. And while I was at Miss Dunham's [Katherine Dunham School of Dance and Theater, New York, New York], they came back to America. They said, "Oh Miss Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] is coming, Miss Dunham is coming." They said, "Well Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] why don't you audition for Miss Dunham." So I--and I waited and I waited and I waited. Being me, I said now this is stupid. She may be famous and wonderful, I don't have to do this. So she came and we talked. I said no I can't work with this lady. Speaker 2: Now why did you say that? I heard something about that, but-- Speaker 1: Yeah, she was--she always was a diva. And it just didn't appeal to me, the Dunham technique and I said, "Um that's not for me." And that's when I said I'm gonna stick to the modern, but mostly the ballet. And William Dollar is the one that did the choreography for 'Four Saints in Four Acts' [sic. 'Four Saints in Three Acts,' Virgil Thomson]. So at that time, I was starting at the School of American Ballet [New York, New York], but I used to go to Ballet Theatre [American Ballet Theatre] and do classes. See the, the arts world was so much smaller than it is today. You would go wherever there was a good teacher, Mr. Schwezoff [Igor Schwezoff], and all those things and that is--by this time I was a born bred ballet dancer. Because there were not that many bla- black people studying ballet. "Oh, he's gonna be a ballet dancer." I said, "Well that's what I'm gonna be." And I auditioned for anything. I--'Goldilocks' ['Goldilocks and the Three Bears'], I went to the audition for 'Goldilocks,' I said because maybe they'll see me and they'll give me a job. Story_ID: 578438 Speaker 1: I did nightclub and that's when I had my little group, Diana Sands, what's his name, there were-- Speaker 2: There were three, you mentioned Diana Sands. Speaker 1: Diana Sands and what's her name, what's her, she had a nightclub and jazz act. I--they did a television special on her. But anyway I'm rambling here, but that's what I saw all that, but that's not for me. And I started at SAB [School of American Ballet, New York, New York] and that's when I made up my mind, I'd seen Roland Petit, I said, "I'm gonna go to Europe and get a job, 'cause they're not gonna take a--me as a black man in America." And the--I just, this bug hit me, ballet, ballet, ballet. And I was dancing with Donnie McKayle's [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle] company. That's where I learned to sew. See things were so different at that time, I could sew, you took care of the costumes. You did everything. And at Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], I became aware of all these things. So I studied with Alwin Nikolais, I went to Bob Joffrey's [Robert Joffrey], 'cause the dance--the arts world and the dance world was much smaller and so consequently, everybody knew everybody else where they were going and what they were going to do. And so all this is in a very short three, four year period. I was going to school, I was working, I was dancing with Donnie, I was doing Broadway shows. They, Guy Lombardo's 'Arabian Nights' came into being. And I went to the audition and I got the job. It was a cast of a thousand, I was the only black person in the cast. And there's a fabulous photograph, a two-page photograph in, I think it's the Daily News [New York Daily News] and they all--everybody was in this. In the middle was this one little black guy, that was me (laughter). And it was Lauritz Melchior and Mia Slavenska (gesture), I can even do the choreography now. And I thought it was fascinating. And they said, "Oh that's the guy that's studying ballet." That's 'cause I was starting to go to the School of American Ballet at that time. And it was such a small knit and you danced wherever you can get a job to dance. So that's why I was dancing with different people. And it sounds like it was another--not another career, but, because that was the job that was there. And Joe Nash [Joe V. Nash] was in the company, myself, I learned how to sew. All those things were going--'cause it was overlapping. Story_ID: 578439 Speaker 1: Tell me about people saying about your, your body type? Do, did your--did people say that you, Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], had the body type to be a ballet dancer? Speaker 2: Well that, even when I went into high school they kept say, "Hey kid you got," this Tom Nip, "Hey kid, you've got class," they can, you know. Speaker 1: But class is different than body type. 'Cause when you're talking about ballet often you do talk-- Speaker 2: Well the thing is, I was always lean, long and also the wa- I carried myself more classically than any other way. Speaker 1: So things like the technique, was the technique easy for you? Speaker 2: Yeah, and see that I was also taking private lessons with Mr. Shook [Karel Shook]. Then I studied with Donnie [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle], Alwin Nikolais and then Bob Joffrey [Robert Joffrey] was coming up at that time with his company. So the--and we all knew each other and worked with each other. It's not--today it didn't matter--let me put it this way. At that time, you had to be a good dancer that does everything. It was like you were modern dancer, ballet dancer, da-da-da-da-da-da. And so I said all right. So then Mr., when Mr. Shook opened his studio [Studio of Dance Arts, New York, New York] on 46th [Street] and 8th [Avenue], I was teaching there and that's when Billy Wilson was there. I'd say most of the leading black dancers, jazz, African, tap, all went to that studio. And-- Speaker 1: Mr. Shook's studio? Speaker 2: Huh, Mr. Shook's studio. Speaker 1: Mr. Shook's studio. Speaker 2: And Louis Horst used to play piano there. This is all, it--it, let me say it this way. It's all different because it-- Speaker 1: Well it's a small community. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It's a small community. But, but, I guess what I'm trying to understand is, when, what are you learning about the technique. You know, I mean, you know, there the-- Speaker 2: Well, I loved to turn. You see, it--it's the technique of classical ballet. And my mind the way it thinks, it's--the science of it appealed to me. And Alvin Ailey said, "Oh yeah, we'd go by Mr. Shook's and Arthur would be in the corner. He'd do a thousand tendu each way (laughter)." You know, everyone used to laugh at me 'cause they kept saying, "Why is he studying ballet. There will never be a black man in classical ballet until 2000 and something." Now this was in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s]. And I was goi- I was always going against type. And modern dance was fine and I liked that, but I wanted the ballet 'cause I thought it had the strongest technical base. And I had started at the School of American Ballet [New York, New York] and I began to see what was going on and I saw Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Johnson] and Chita [Chita Rivera]. Chita was fabulous. And I said, "Oh I wanna dance like that, I wanna do this," you know. And I liked, I did multiple pirouettes, the toe shoes and lifting, all those things I began studying while at the School of American Ballet. Basically I only studied there three years. And John B- I danced in John Butler's company, which was the American- New American Ballet [sic. American Dance Theatre] and I went to Europe with them. 'Cause at that time I said, you know, they'll never take a black man in the ballet here. So if I get this job to go to Europe I will stay in Europe and audition for Roland Petit. Story_ID: 578440 Speaker 1: Karel Shook, he really at some point hires, now when does he hire you as a dance instructor? Is it during the time that, are you doing--you've become so--you know, 'cause people see things in people. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Does he become--what does he become to you is what I'm saying (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, well he, he was a phenom- a mentor. He, he was like an old- older--how can, what's the words I wanna use. He was from his background and his training, he was always teaching. And there weren't many blacks in classical ballet. So Tommy John [ph.], all those--everybody would go and take class with him, and so did I. But he would give me private lessons. And I said okay Mr. Shook and by this time, I had left home. I was like eighteen, nineteen. And I said, "Well I'm gonna be a ballet dancer," and I said--and everyone teased me, 'cause they said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], why are you studying ballet. They will never take a black person in classical ballet." I said, "Well maybe I'll be the first." And it was very hard because everyone made fun of me. And they'd said, "Where's Arthur going?" Ballet class. I'd take two, three classes a day. And I was always working to improve and I knew I had started late doing ballet, so I had to catch up. And so I was always and I--that's when I also studied voice and diction. I studied music, I studied acting. [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards was one of my te- I went to Lloyd Richards. I just felt I had to gat- get everything 'cause I was starting so late. Story_ID: 578441 Speaker 1: What about 'House of Flowers' [Harold Arlen and Truman Capote]? A lot of people ended up being in 'House of Flowers.' Speaker 2: Yes, and the thing is-- Speaker 1: A lot. Speaker 2: --the first choreographer was Mr. Balanchine [George Balanchine] for 'House of Flowers.' I said, "Well I'm gonna audition with George Balanchine, you know, the great Balan-." They couldn't have cared less (laughter). And Pearl Bailey was funny. She said, "Now George honey, what are all these little weaving in and out--I want some steps (laughter)." And I said, "But that's Mr. Balanchine," 'cause I was still in the school [School of American Ballet, New York, New York]. And [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder just come from Trinidad and they all came to Mr. Shook's [Karel Shook] studio [Studio of Dance Arts, New York, New York] 'cause it was like a haven for everyone to come and study there. If they were doing anything other than ballet, they would go to the New Dance Group. Doe- does that? And the New Dance Group at that time was all in the same vicinity at 46th Street, wherever it was. Speaker 1: So, so that--I just think 'cause a lot of people are in 'House of Flowers.' I don't know, I hear that among the--so you had [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade and I think she and Geoff-- Speaker 2: Well they came after Mr. Balanchine left. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And they said, "We are going to get a new choreographer." They really forced Mr. Balanchine out. And--which I thought was deplorable. I said, "That's George Balanchine and da-da-da." Couldn't care less-- Story_ID: 578442 Speaker 1: There were nightclub and Broadway, and at that time I also had a nightclub act. And that's when I ran into strippers and things like that and (laughter). Speaker 2: So where were you performing your nightclub act? Speaker 1: Wherever you can get--any, anywhere you can get a job. And it was on 52nd Street between Broadway and 7th Avenue. There was, one of the famous nightclubs were there. Now you must, what I always did, I was always putting things together to make money, so we had a group. That's where Diana Sands, Claude Thompson, myself, we had a pianist. And I was like the impresario, we're gonna book ourselves and get some money. We gonna go this, we go to that, da-de-da-da-da. And then from there eventually Mr. Shook [Karel Shook] shut his studio [Studio of Dance Arts, New York, New York] and he went to June Taylor's, and that's where, I went there also. And that's where I ran into--, "And away we go," what's his name? Speaker 2: Oh, um--wait-- Speaker 1: Jackie Gleason. Speaker 2: Jackie Gleason. Speaker 1: They did a ballet called 'Tawny' and I auditioned, and I got the job. He said, "You're gonna be a cop." I said, "What are the steps?" He said, "No, you go outside and watch a cop how he swings the billy," that was my first lesson in acting. I said, "Oh." So I saw a, and then I had danced and Donnie McKayle [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle] doing 'Games' where I played the cop. So I said this is good. So I went and I just was acquiring things at that time, techniques I should say. But modern dance was okay. Donnie's company [Donald McKayle and Dancers] I liked very much. There was Moondog [Louis Thomas Hardin] was a very avant garde man, he used to sit on the street corner and he'd make the instruments and play. Donnie even did a ballet to his music. So it was like, "Oh have you heard so-and-so is doing this, you want a job, have you heard--," everyone would say, "Da--da--da--da--da" (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Story_ID: 578443 Speaker 1: A lot of auditioning and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --finding out and people calling. That--that hasn't really changed still, still today-- Speaker 2: And it was really word of mouth. And I would go to the New Dance Group. Sophie Bales--I mean Sophie Maslow, Bill Bales [William Bales], Nancy Lang, Bob Joffrey [Robert Joffrey] was there doing ballet. So I saw all this and I would go watch and the epiphany came. One day I was in the studio at the school [School of American Ballet, New York, New York] and I was sitting and this girl, Felicia Weathers [ph.], she got up on pointe and she started bur- (gesture), I said, "Jesus, that shit is good." That really caught me and that's when I made up my mind I'm gonna be a ballet dancer. But they all said, "Well you'll get the technique and do this," which is fine, but it wasn't imbedded in me that I was gonna be a ballet dancer. I saw Roland Petit's company [Ballets de Paris de Roland Petit], I said, "He's got two black guys in that. I'm gonna join that company." So when John Butler was taking his company to Europe I auditioned and he gave me a job. And what's her--my partner was Bob Fosse's second wife [sic. first wife]. And we were--we would tour Europe in two Volkswagens, old buses. And there was no money and so Mary Ann [Mary Ann Niles] and I became roommates. And she's really a phenomenal woman, and we would room together and do shows for each other and stuff like that. And that--while I was over there, this was my third year with SAB [School of American Ballet], that's when I got the telegram from Lincoln Kirstein saying, "Arthur, George [George Balanchine] and I want you to join New York City Ballet, why don't you come back and join us." I said, "Oh," so I went to John, I said, "John, I have to leave the company." It was a small company, six, eight dancers. I said, "But I'm getting an opportunity to go to School of American Ballet or New York City Ballet." Speaker 1: New York City Ballet. Speaker 2: And he said I di- so I, I have the original telegram also. I said, "Okay, that's what I'm gonna do." Story_ID: 578444 Speaker 1: You becoming part of New York City Ballet and then you became a permanent member, that's like Misty Copeland. I mean it's the same. Speaker 2: Yeah, well oh God it was really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it was even big--it was big. Speaker 2: Well this was just before I joined. And so I said, "Okay I'm gonna leave." 'Cause I've been at the School of American Ballet [New York, New York] studying and that was the home of New York City Ballet. And I would see the people dancing and the technique and stuff like that. I said, "Well that's what I wanna do." And so I said, "I'm gonna take that job." And I was making ninety dollars a week, which is a lot of money which I gave to my family and stuff like that, and my mom [Willie Hearns Mitchell]. Now I should say that after my father [Arthur Mitchell, Sr.] left, where were we- my mother got a job working in 21 [21 Club, New York, New York], she was like a coat check girl. And every night I would go and meet her and take her home. And it's just--how can I say this, I've always been possessed about, I never did anything in-- Speaker 1: Small measures. Speaker 2: Small mea- measures. And it was also during the early days of Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York], what was called then, I always studied religion. And my mother's church [Convent Avenue Baptist Church, New York, New York] was around the corner. So I said um. And I said um. So I started studying religions. And I said it's all a farce and stuff like that. But and so I started deciding to mov- to see what would be the best, the Protestant, the Baptist, the Catholic, and like that, but I said but you know it's--how should I say this, it's subterfuge- I've got, controlling, it controls you, the church and I said to my- I said, "Mom, I'm giving you money and you're giving to that preacher," that I said, "No, no, no, no. I'm not giving you anymore." She said, "Well Junior, we gotta do that." I said, "Look," and by this time, by the time I was eighteen I was really taking care of my family. And everyone made fun of me, they laugh: "Oh he's gonna be a ballet dancer," I don't know. I said, "Well, I'm gonna do it because that's what I want to do." And it was something that was very new in the black community. And I'd heard about Josephine Baker and I went to her show at--on 50th Street and 7th Avenue, and she was fabulous. Costumes and we just all just thought it was fantastic, 'cause it was opening up another world to us that we had never known. I never started to do a company. I thought what I'd like--I've always like to teach and I wanted to teach ballet to young black kids, 'cause that was changing my life so I wanted to make sure they had the technique to do it. Story_ID: 578445 Speaker 1: Can we talk about your time at New York City Ballet? Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And working with Balanchine, because [George Balanchine]-- Speaker 2: Well the (laughter)-- Speaker 1: What? Speaker 2: When you join a company, the, the small roles and things like that went to the latest dancer and Todd Bolender did a ballet called 'Souvenirs' and they wanted me to be the elevator operator and close the door. I said, "Now let's get, I, no, no, no, no, no, I will get in and close the door, but I'm not wearing white gloves." I, I've always been like, "No, no, no," and I've always fought for what I thought was right. And I started by da- I did 'Western Symphony' [George Balanchine]. Jacques [Jacques d'Amboise] was doing the movie 'Seven Brides for Seven Brothers' and he was in Hollywood doing the movie so I made my debut doing the fourth movement of 'Western Symphony' with Balanchine's wife at that time, Tanaquil Le Clercq. And it was historic. I mean, and I said to Mr. Ba- I said, "Now Mr. B," or Mr. Bal- not Mr. B, "Mr. Balanchine, I don't want any publicity, take me in the company and I will get everything I got due to my talent and hard work, not that I was gonna be black." So he said, "Oh, black man," I said, "Not a black guy breaks the bonds going to ballet and stuff like that," and that's one of the things I said to Mr. Balanchine, "If you put me in the company, just let me get it on my hard work not because of the black da-da-da-da-da." And I said, "Don't tell anybody that I'm in the company," there was no publicity that, Negro breaks barriers or like that. And I remember dancing opening night and there's this bald-headed guy sitting and when I came out he just shot up in his seat, he said, "Oh my God they got a nigger in the company." And I, and I always danced, when I star- for my mother [Willie Hearns Mitchell], my people and stuff like that. And I said, "Okay. I'm gonna be the best I can," and by the end of the evening, I got a standing ovation. And To- what's his name, John, no, John Martin from The New York Times he said oh, the--there's a terrible article that he wrote, he said the--there was something that, the way he phrased it, the novelty of the we- the novelty of the company, they've got a black guy. He said, "But ballet is not--is alien to the physiology, the psychological thing that, it's just not part of their makeup." I said, "Well I'll prove him wrong." And--and I would do little gigs, I mean I would do little thin- anybody that needed a dancer, I would go dance with them, but it was mostly modern dance. And the company, I had been at the school [School of American Ballet, New York, New York], I was eighteen, now this I was around twenty-one now. See there's so much pressed in all this, it's not like it was ten years at-- Speaker 1: Right, right. That's right. Speaker 2: --that I was the first to do it. I said fine, I like that, but I want to be a ballet dancer and I want them to treat me right. Story_ID: 578446 Speaker 1: You're telling me-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Got it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, that Shook [Karel Shook] and Balanchine [George Balanchine] don't particular get along? Speaker 2: Well, they, I didn't think--they got along as far as I know, it's just that Mr. Balanchine, I don't know what he thought of Karel, but he, Karel studied a lot with, he just died, Englishman-- Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Freddie. Speaker 2: Freddie Franklin [Frederic Franklin]. There're pictures of them all at the beach and Freddie said, "Oh yes, Karel was my student." Now Freddie is very tied to Balanchine because he knew Balanchine back in the '30s [1930s]. Anything that you can say, Freddie danced. He phenomenal, and he started in England and he was a chorus boy. But he has a photographic mind and music. He, he can tell you exactly what he did, he says, "You know I danced with Josephine Baker and Mistinguett [Jeanne Florentine Bourgeois] in Paris [France]." And he can get up and sing the music and do the steps. I knew Freddie-- Speaker 1: This is Freddie? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Freddie knew Karel. See it's--it's again like this here and it was. The Ballet Russes [Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo] was the company and I had met, by that time, Raven Wilkinson, she-- Speaker 1: A ballet company? Speaker 2: Yes, and she had gotten with the Ballet Russes and I knew of her and she knew of me, that I would go up to Ballet Theatre [American Ballet Theatre] and take class with Mr. Dollar [William Dollar]. And that was around the time they started the all-black ballet company and da-da-da-da-da. Speaker 1: Who started the all-black ballet company (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Aubrey Hitchens. Speaker 1: And who is Aubrey Hitchens? Speaker 2: He was a dancer that came. Mr. Shook's book ['Elements of Classical Ballet Technique as Practiced in the School of the Dance Theatre of Harlem,' Karel Shook], he explains all of this very well. Speaker 1: Okay so Aubrey Hitchens starts an all-black ballet company and what-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and Mr. Von- Von Groven or Gross [ph.], something like that, and he wanted to do an all-male black ballet group and it didn't work. Speaker 1: And these periods of time are when? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What period of time are we talking about? Speaker 2: This was all in the '40s [1940s]. And see like when I did 'Four Saints in Three Acts' [Virgil Thomson] that was the end of the '40s [1940s]. I mean it goes way back and we all became friends and then I would dance in Don- in Louis' [HistoryMaker Louis Johnson] ballets, ballad. And, how can I say this, everyone said, "Why is he studying ballet, it'll never happen 'til sometime in 2000 or something like that," I said, "Well fine. I like it, that's what I'm going to do." And so I got that reputation and then Mr. Shook was teaching everybody. And we would all go to the studio and take classes and Karel would say, "Okay everyone come to my house we gonna have food," you know, I'd say, "Ah." I'm not for that community. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: But Miss Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham]-- Speaker 1: Wait a minute, what do you say I'm not for that community? Speaker 2: No I mean feeding everybody, you know, it was like the hangout place and I don't, I never hung out. Speaker 1: So you were not really social in that way? Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah--okay. Speaker 2: And even the movie stars, Raymond St. Jacques, I mean everybody was taking dance. And by this time I was getting a little reputation and then getting with Donnie McKayle's [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle] company, Sophie Maslow, Bill [William Bales], Nancy Lang, these were teachers at Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] and you know, and that's where you get to know everybody (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 578447 Speaker 1: Tell me how being with Balanchine [George Balanchine], with the company [New York City Ballet], can you tell me what that environment was like when you came in there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I, I've, I've always--I was very lucky to get along with everybody and even though I may not have been technically proficient as a lot of, I had, I could perform. Speaker 1: Well see, that's what I'm saying. So Balanchine was big on technique, right? And-- Speaker 2: Yeah. But he liked me. Well can we--let me backtrack a minute. It was Lincoln Kirstein that liked me. And the first time--I got a scholarship for the School of American Ballet [New York, New York], but that was given to me through Lincoln Kirstein, I hadn't known Balanchine. So I said okay. And I knew--I knew Chita [Chita Rivera] and I knew Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Johnson], and they were fabulous dancer and I said, "Well that's what I wanna do." And-- Speaker 1: Now how long were they there when you were there? Speaker 2: Oh, a couple of years. Speaker 1: So they were--so there were three of you for a couple of years? Speaker 2: The three of us. Speaker 1: Okay, for a couple years. So what are the dynamics in the, in the company? Like I mean--first of all how many people are in the company? Speaker 2: There were about, at that time, the company's like fifty. It wasn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty, okay. So, three out of fifty that's not--that's not bad. Speaker 2: And the school, everyone liked me at the school 'cause I could be very charming, I was good looking and I carried myself, and I worked like a demon. I mean I just twenty-four hours a day, and I'd go--I'd say, "Mr. Shook [Karel Shook], I wanna take a private lesson today." I'd--he said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] what are you doing," he said, "you're gonna break your legs, you gotta." I said, "I've gotta get the technique." Then Alvin [Alvin Ailey] and all--everybody made fun of me. And then I got into 'House of Flowers' [Harold Arlen and Truman Capote] and was the same cast of characters basically going from one job to the other. And I--they got Balanchine out and that's when they brought in Herbert Ross. Speaker 1: Wait, they got Balanchine out of? Speaker 2: Out of 'House of Flowers.' Speaker 1: Right, so out of--right, because they, when you say they I don't know who it was, but I remember--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Saint Subber was the producer, but they all were frightened of Pearl Bailey. I loved Pearl, but she's something boy. Speaker 1: So she, she was like, "He just doesn't have enough soul," Basically. Speaker 2: Yes, she said, she said, "Ah George," she, they had a meeting. "George, all that little turning in and turning, no, I want some steps." That's just like Pearl, you know. She didn't like women around 'cause she was married to the drummer and the first day of rehearsal she called the whole company together and she said, "All right now I'm explaining something to all you. You see that pretty man in the, in the orche- that's my husband and you women stay away from him." Oh yeah. She didn't treat the girls, she liked the guys. We'd go in the dressing room and laugh and talk, and stuff like that. But--and then Geoffrey [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Holder] was there doing, being Geoffrey and playing the drums and all like that, then he brought in Al- he brought in Alvin Ailey and [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade to be leading dancers. And there were a lot of us that were in the company who were upset 'cause we felt that he's bringing these people from California and, and Alvin, he always had a big book. I said, "Do you read what's in that book (laughter)?" You've gotta understand, I was always the father, I always told people what to do, how to act, how to dress, what to say. And I could do modern dance but that wasn't my goal, I wanted the ballet tr- training (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. So, so-- Story_ID: 578448 Speaker 1: You get what you want. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean, essentially. And you get invited, there are three of them there, but you end up staying; the other's don't, right? And, and the question I have is, what is this environment you're coming into? Because--right. Speaker 2: Well, okay let me put it this way, I had already been to Paris [France] in 'Four Saints in Three Acts' [Virgil Thomson]. And I saw the classical singers, Betty Allen, Leontyne Price, (unclear). They were fabu- and they were trained. So I said, "I'm gonna get with them." And by this time, I said, "I'm gonna study acting, I'm gonna study singing, I'm gonna dance," every-- Speaker 1: No but when you join the company now, when you join, New York City Ballet, when you're invited to join by this telegram, that sort of, that's your dream and that somewhat seals your fate, in a way. I mean, I mean, I'm not saying from the very time of entering because there's three of you there, but what are they telling you about their experience (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the thing is it really, it wasn't Balanchine [George Balanchine] that disc- it was Lincoln Kirstein. Speaker 1: Oh no, I'm so sorry. Lincoln, okay. So Lincoln Kir- so he discovers you? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, he brings you in? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, there're three of you there? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): No, three are at the school [School of American Ballet, New York, New York]. In the company-- Speaker 2: Oh they're in the school, see Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): He's the only one. Speaker 2: --that's what I thought. You know, I'm getting confused (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me go slow. In the school-- Speaker 2: Right. I'm get-- Speaker 1: --it was myself, [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson and Chita [Chita Rivera]. Speaker 2: And Chita, right, right. Speaker 1: But you know who taught there was-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: What's her name, she ended up becoming the ballerina at the Met [Metropolitan Opera]. Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Carmen's aunt. Speaker 1: I should've bro- huh? Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade's aunt. Speaker 1: Yeah, Carmen De Lavallade's aunt [sic. cousin, Janet Collins], and she's from California. But she used to teach. But you know, I, now it was, I think everybody was so busy struggling and the good dancers would go on tour with the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo or they would get in a show or they would dance with little small groups. It, it, I have to say this, the whole perception of the arts was totally different at that time then it is now (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I--no, I understand that but I wanna go to the company. And this is the thing, so you get invited into this company-- Speaker 1: Right and what happened was a lot of people were very upset about this black guy coming in dancing in the company. And there was a delegation that went to Mr. Balanchine and said, "We don't want my daughter to dance with the black guy," he says, "Then take the black guy out. Take the co- your company--take your daughter out of the company 'cause Mitchell's [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] gonna stay here." And he did something that was really phenomenal. We did 'Nutcracker' ['The Nutcracker,' Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] and I did coffee, hot chocolate or coffee. And Mr. Balanchine re-choreographed 'Nutcracker' and he did it like 'Sleeping Beauty' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] and each head of the (unclear) did a little bit with the Sugar Plum Fairy. And I won her hand, in a sense. And Mr. Balanchine, well he said, "You know, I hope Governor Faubus [Orval Faubus] is watching." Speaker 2: Well he, he was wanting to be timely, you know, with, with your hire, but your--there're a couple things like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know it sounds-- Speaker 2: Does anyone--does anyone befriend you in the company? Speaker 1: No, I had no problems with anybody 'cause Maria Tallchief, she said, "Arthur follow Balanchine, listen to everything he says, da-da-da, he's the man da-de-da-da-da." Speaker 2: Now was she married to him at that point when you--? Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was--this was right after they had been married and then they broke up. And Maria wanted to be the prima go- the old Ballet Russes--she wanted to dance with Nureyev [Rudolf Nureyev] and he was fabulous, Erik Bruhn. I'd never seen anyone like Erik Bruhn. I just thought technique, and phenomenal. And I was going to Ballet Theatre [American Ballet Theatre] to take classes with Bill--with Bill Dollar [William Dollar] and with, his name will come to me. But I was like--everybod- it was on 57th Street, they had studios on 57, I remember going there. And it was like Lupe Serrano, all those g- they were there. Story_ID: 578449 Speaker 1: What were the requirements of, of being a member of the [New York City Ballet]-- Speaker 2: Well that--you have to audition, and if they like you then you'll get a job (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know, no, so you--but no, wait a minute. I thought you, so you auditioned and then got sent a telegram? Speaker 2: No, I got into 'House of Flowers' [Harold Arlen and Truman Capote]. Speaker 1: No, we're past 'House of Flowers.' Speaker 2: No, because William Dollar used to teach at Ballet Theatre [American Ballet Theatre]. Speaker 1: I see, okay. Speaker 2: And that's where I went to take class with William Dollar 'cause he had been one of the leading dancers with Balanchine [George Balanchine], Ballet Society or one of those things like that. And Aleksandra Danilova came to watch rehearsal one day, she said, "One day, we're gonna have a chocolate bonbon in the ballet." And, now you misunder- see it's hard to say, I was just, that's what I'm gonna do and no one's gonna stop me. Speaker 1: Okay so, how are the other male dancers, are you, are you received differently from the male dancers than the female dancers or is it not-- Speaker 2: Well I was unique 'cause there weren't that many black dancers--male dancers and by that time, the people in nightclub or the Broadway set, "Oh that's [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell," you know what I mean. And like when we got into 'House of Flowers' I would get before the show, do class and warm up. They'd say, "What is over there, he's crazy little Negro over there doing." I said, "I've gotta do this, I've gotta get my technique together and da--da--da," you know, that's how I was (simultaneous). Story_ID: 578450 Speaker 1: Did Balanchine [George Balanchine] or, oh gosh-- Speaker 2: Lincoln [Lincoln Kirstein]? Speaker 1: Or Lincoln, did they have different technique, like are you having to learn, what are you having to change about the technique? 'Cause technique is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. It's, the thing that fascinated Balanchine with me is I was very fast. I could learn very fast. And twelve-tone is my kind of music. I would tear and I'd get all the rhythms from tapping, I could do all that. And the first time, I went to the School of American Ballet [New York, New York] and Lincoln was there. I said, "Ah Lincoln Kirstein's here, Lincoln, you know, Lincoln that knows," and he was watching class on the top of the steps. I said, "Oh Mr. Bal- Mr. Kirstein, thank you very much, I understand you gave me a scholarship." He said, "You are a Negro." I said, "Yes." He said, "And for you to get into the company you have to be the equivalent of a first dancer not just corps of ballet." I said, "Well you know Mr. Kirstein, let me tell you something, I am from Harlem [New York, New York] and you don't frighten me." 'Cause I was always very ready to fight. And I said, "You're on. I will study to become a very good dancer and get into New York City Ballet." Now I didn't know there was any tension between Mr. Balanchine and Karel [Karel Shook]. Something happened when Karel joined New York City Ballet, he was there only a year. I never knew what happened and so it, it was, I don't know what happened. He was very good friends with Freddie Franklin [Frederic Franklin] and, and I thought Freddie was wonderful, and all that. But, it was from another era, another time and stuff like that. And I was very aware of the fact, I said, "I love ballet, I'm gonna do it and I'm gonna get the technique of the bal- the ballet technique." And Lincoln had more of a visibility than everybody. He was crazy and every six months they would cart him off and put him into an asylum, da-da-da-da-da. And so, it was, pianist, Betty Walberg who was working, at that time, beginning with, what's her name, Barbra Streisand. And Betty said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], you've gotta get the technique and study and stuff like that." So I said, "Okay," and I said, "But you know Betty, I don't think I'll get a chance in America, I'm gonna go to Europe. I'm gonna join John Butler's American Dance Theatre and go to Europe, while over there, I will audition for Roland Petit." And, and that's just how I felt. Now amongst all of this, I had injuries like, you know, my knee would go, I'd have operations on my knee and I knew that I was working like crazy to aco- to accomplish this che- technique. But I was very new at it, not someone who had been dancing for twen- ten years, twenty years. And in the modern dance things I was very good. Story_ID: 578451 Speaker 1: Kirstein [Lincoln Kirstein] makes that statement to you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That you're a Negro. You're working really hard. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And how long does it take for you to feel that you are mastering? Speaker 2: Oh I, no, I never thought I was mastering it at that time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, but you're-- Speaker 2: The thing is, is that because I was studying at SA, the School of American Ballet [New York, New York], when I went back I would teach what I was learning or I would discuss it with Mr. Shook [Karel Shook], even with Donnie McKayle's [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle] company. Speaker 1: I see, so you would discuss it, meaning that you would share it with what you were learning (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you know the tech- technical things like how do you do this, how do you do that, and you had adagio classes where you partner the girl. All those things that no one else had that training, I was getting it at SAB [School of American Ballet]. Speaker 1: So what would you think, like anyone, if you saw someone come through New York City Ballet, and I know SAB is training, but at New York City Ballet is there a, a certain technique that set that, that company apart? That's what (simultaneous)--right. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know the Ballet Russes [Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo] was the Ballet Russes. And they would go on tour on the bus and truck and they'd come back, they'd all be drinking. I'd say, "Well these people are crazy," I, but, it was learning all that I would take it back at Mr. Shook's studio [Studio of Dance Arts, New York, New York] and I would--I was teaching at the same time. And I said um, but I was always a good partner, 'cause I've got very long arms, so I could get the tall girls. And they treated me very well at the school. Madame Arouso [ph.] who was the school director, she knew Balanchine and Russia. They said, "Oh Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], we all are praying for you to get in the company [New York City Ballet]," I said, "So am I." And I was friends with Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Johnson], but I dance--he had a little pickup group that I dance with him. And I became more and more proficient in ballet, and that kept setting me apart from other modern dance people. Even when I was in Donnie McKayle's company, I, you know, Joe Nash [Joe V. Nash] was there and Joe was fabulous. He was, he worked in the court, [U.S.] Supreme Court and he'd take all the notes and stuff like that. I used to laugh at him. But I knew everybody basically from the New Dance Group. Story_ID: 578452 Speaker 1: I mean who was in there? Was, was it people like Allegra Kent, and--? Speaker 2: When I joined New York City Ballet then Allegra, Suzanne Farrell, myself and we all joined at the same time. Speaker 1: Okay, now you said Tanny [Tanaquil Le Clercq] was there, too, at the time, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Tanny, yes she was in the company. Speaker 1: Now how long, 'cause she's the one who got polio, right? Speaker 2: Yes. That was after I joined New York City Ballet, it was 1957, something like that. And-- Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Nineteen fifty-five [1955]. Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955]. Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Yeah. Speaker 2: Was it '55 [1955]? Well then I was on that tour but went to Europe and Tanny caught polio. Now I had danced with her in 'Western Symphony' [George Balanchine] doing Jacques [Jacques d'Amboise] role. Speaker 1: Well that's pretty devastating for that to happen. Speaker 2: It was hard. And her, my first performance joining New York City Ballet was like in November, something like that, and I did 'Western Symphony.' So I kept doing that with Tanny. The per- we were in Denmark and she said, "Oh Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell]," she says, "I don't know what," she said, "I'm so achy and I, I can't get my leg up and I can't da-da-da." And we just paid it no attention. We thought 'cause she was overworked with Jerry Robbins [Jerome Robbins] and everyone knew there was tension between Balanchine [George Balanchine] and Jerry Robbins. So her last performance was with me in 'Western Symphony.' And we left, and we were going from Denmark to Norway or something like that. They stopped the train, took everybody off the train and started inoculating us. That's when we realized that Tanny had polio. And Mr. B didn't come back with us, he stayed with Tanny in Denmark. And you know, the rumor mill was like, oh God, the company's gonna go under. Maria [Maria Tallchief] and I loved Melissa Mighty [ph.], I called her Mighty Millie [ph.], and watching Balanchine function was really fascinating 'cause everybody in Europe knew him. The impresarios, the people, and, and Mr. Balanchine he loved to cook and he would do these dinners for everyone. And most of the teachers at the SAB [School of American Ballet, New York, New York] or the school directors were all Russians. And so I, I said, "Oh," so I got more and more involved in the training of dance and understanding the background and the history of it. And so when they asked me to join, I said, "Oh fantastic I'm gonna go back 'cause that's my dream to join New York City Ballet." And now by this time, I had left 'House of Flowers' [Harold Arlen and Truman Capote]. [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder, [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade, and Alvin Ailey all were new. My first injury to my knees we did a ballet called "Slide Boy Slide" where we had to do knee slides. And Carmen De Lavallade came and she fell on top, I was in the knee, I was on my knees and she--and cracked my knees. And that's when I first started having injuries, you know, and I'd only been studying ballet for two years, three years. I was always very fast, I learned very fast, and I think from 'House of Flowers,' no, 'Four Saints in Three Acts' [Virgil Thomson] I realized the difference these trained singers had and were singing and going to be doing. And it was amazing like doing a five-minute break and things like that they would improvise and that fascinated me, they could get together and sing. I said that's, "I wanna get technique." And having to dance one of Jacques roles, the pirouettes and the, and so they all were doing ballets for me. Jacques did a bo- even Talley Beatty says, "You know, you keep working but you da-da-da-de-da-da." But I was always like an enigma, because I wanted to be a ballet dancer not a modern dancer. Speaker 1: Now when you--I want to-- Speaker 2: That's--but what you're asking and telling is very good because Gillian [Gillian Lipton] is--but everything was so overlapping it wasn't like there's one thing-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --and another. Story_ID: 578453 Speaker 1: I guess I was trying to understand. I mean, because you know, ballet is in a company, I think more ballet than modern, but I wouldn't necessarily say that because, how you get assigned roles and, and it, it's pretty backbiting. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: You know, and it's not, I would call necessarily collegial because there're people that are pets, you know, and they're the favorite ones and then Balanchine [George Balanchine], he, he had relations with his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but Mr. Balanchine, he, he had, you always knew who his favorite was, 'cause he was always into the next young person. Speaker 1: Right, right. And he liked the ladies, right, young? The principal--right. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, Dr. Hamilton [William G. Hamilton] said, he had his own harem right there and he had his pick of the harem to do whatever he wan- Mr. Balanchine, it was Mr. Balanchine. And he, he had met Josephine Baker in the '20s [1920s]. Now I didn't realize that jazz was so popular in Russia. When Mr. Balanchine came to the west, he went to, he wanted to see Josephine Baker and she was the thing in the Follies [Ziegfeld Follies]. And they say that Mr. Balanchine went to her place to meet with her and he knocked on the door. There was no answer. Knocked on the door. So finally he went around to the side and they had louver windows. The door opened and there was Josephine stark naked with only the cooking gloves. And he said, "Oh my God, Josephine." Even now--well he's dead now--even now he still talks about Josephine Baker as something special. Speaker 1: You mean even as he got, you know, older, you know, he's dead now right? Speaker 2: Well no. If you see 'Apollo' [George Balanchine] he did in 1929 [sic. 1928], a lot of that was done on Josephine Baker. And all the splits, she was famous for doing her splits and things like that. There's choreography that you, see he did in 1929, that's how Josephine was, her entrance getting to the Follies like that. So he used things all the time. But he was fascinated with Josephine Baker. Story_ID: 578454 Speaker 1: So this explains New York City Ballet, which is not, but it's, it's New York City Ballet and it grows to be very significant in the United States. There's, you know, everyone is comparing themselves to the Ballet Russes. But this, this explains then why he [George Balanchine], when someone calls you the N-word-- Speaker 2: And he had worked with the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas]. Speaker 1: Oh, so this explains then that he is pro-black, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then-- Speaker 1: I mean in a way before ti- like he's like-- Speaker 2: And then the next woman he kept was [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham in the '30s [1930s]. So now, I--it's not like it was ten year difference-- Speaker 1: No, 'cause that I remember he insured her legs in 'Cabin in the Sky,' I mean he was, he was in that production and cast her. Speaker 2: And Mr. Balanchine was married to his first wife who adored me. And I, you know, I would see her laughing, talk. She'd say, "Oh Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], would you take me out tonight." Now what I did was I would take the dancers out, like Tanny [Tanaquil Le Clercq], I said, "Mr. Balanchine, I wanna take Tanny out. Do you mind?" He'd say, "No." Speaker 1: Oh so you would ask permission? Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- Speaker 1: Because, can't compete with the boss (laughter) (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he and Maria [Maria Tallchief] was what-, "And you listen." She's tough, and she'd say, "And you listen to everything he says and da-da-da-de-da-da-da." I said okay. But you could see the difference between the ballerina he was interested or not interested. And then Allegra Kent was coming up around that time, and so I'd dance with all of them, but, because I was a novelty, it was a novelty to have me there. And-- Speaker 1: And, and audiences, it also maybe helped sales--I mean create, 'cause you got well re- you got well reviewed in 'Agon' [George Balanchine]. Speaker 2: Well I've always been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it was, and wasn't that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was always maniacal about clothing. And Mr. Balanchine says um. Now if you see early pictures of him he looks black, very debonair and really chic. And he said--I said, "I'll get you one Mr. Balanchine." See I was always, how can I say it? I wasn't intimidated, I was--'cause I was the man in my family; I took care of my sisters and brothers, my mother [Willie Hearns Mitchell]. So I was very much independent and, and a smart ass if you wanna put it that way. Speaker 1: So he, he liked that about you then? Speaker 2: Yes. He, he like--and also I learned very fast. Now my first rec- recollection of Mr. B, he was, we were doing a new ballet and I said, and he was--I said, "Oh no that, no, go on the right, no do the left," and I was gonna do. He said, "You know my dear, you're like those old women in a church that tell the priest what to do." That I'd been arou- oh sorry. I said, "Okay (gesture), I'm not gonna say anymore." But it was and I knew that Lincoln [Lincoln Kirstein] was for me and the staff, the dancers, everybody. And I dance with every ballerina there. A big impression was made by the Danish dancer, Erik Bruhn. I just thought he was phenomenal. And we would take class together and stuff like that. And I knew I didn't have the technical facility, but I said what I've got, he doesn't have. And I, I've never been--I like competition. And I've never been, I never let people put me down. And there were a couple of incidents, dancers, Jonathan Watts, he did something. I said, "Let me tell you something, I'm gonna lift your ass up and I'm gonna throw you out the window." We were on tour in Japan and now I was the only black in the company and we had to share dressing rooms, and William Weslow, Billy Weslow, God, foul-mouthed, and he's, "Everybody in this fucking company and da-da-da, and that's black and white." Now there was only one black person then and I was making up, and I didn't pay any attention, and then it dawned on me what he said (laughter). Bobby Lindgren [Robert Lindgren] who was my--shared the desk with me, he said it was like every black person rose up in you. I said, "I'm gonna kill him." He said it was like everyone who had been through slavery rose up--and I--and I went after him. And they pulled me and I said, "Well let me tell you something." Then they got Mr. Kirstein and Mr. Kirstein said, "He's crazy." I said, "Yes, but I'm gonna knock some sense into him. I said if I hear chocolate, brown, ecru base, I'm gonna kick your as- (laughter)." You see that's how I was. And I've never been afraid of people, and-- Speaker 1: Most of it, you had grown up--I don't wanna say in the streets, but you had grown up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah and I had been a hood, you know. Speaker 1: Right. You had, you had been-- Speaker 2: And they weren't gonna tell me what to do and how to do it. Story_ID: 578455 Speaker 1: But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can we go to 'Agon' [George Balanchine] though, because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay then, 'Agon' was done in '57 [1957]. Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957]. Speaker 1: And Mr.--Mr. Balanchine [George Balanchine] he had a trouble with his knee and he was limping like me. And so the opening male dance was because his leg was bother- he put it in the choreography. And I, I had a--I was attuned to twelve-tone, I loved twelve-tone and I could find rhythms and things that were, no one else could find. I think from the tap doing all the syncopations de-de-de. And so I would pick up. The one I had a lot of trouble with in the beginning was Jerry Robbins [Jerome Robbins]. And I ju- how can I put it this way, I never, I never let people intimidate me. Speaker 2: Okay, but I'm trying to figure out how he choreographs, so what is the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so what he did-- Speaker 2: In '57 [1957], this is before the modern day Civil Rights Movement, it's still early on-- Speaker 1: Betty Cage who was the company director called, she says, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], Mr. Balanchine wants you to come in before the company starts rehearsing. He wants to do something for you and Diana [Diana Adams]." I said, "Fine." And so we started two weeks before the company came back, and he was trying out different things. And Mr. Balanchine would try everything. And he--I was, I was working with Balanchine. Mr. Stravinsky [Igor Stravinsky] was living in California so Balanchine could only choreograph according to what music was being sent in. And I would do it, and then he said, "Okay." I said, "Now Mr. Balanchine, I don't want anything special, you treat me like everybody else and I don't want, you know, Negro breaks barrier da-da-da-da-da-da-da." And so we started on the pas de deux and he said, "This is the hardest thing I've ever done in my life because it must be perfect, it can't be a mistake." And he was utilizing me and my skin color against Diana's pale skin. And it, and also when the four men--because I was a tap dancer I can understand the syncopation and odd counts, and so everybody would, "Ask Arthur, ask Arthur, ask Arthur." And when Mr. Stravinsky came, fi- he said, "George, there's our Apollo," and I knew when he said that I would never dance Apollo. Because Mr. Stravinsky was to Mr. Balanchine like what Mr. Balanchine was to me. And they would get together and talk in Russian and da-da-da. Mr. Stravinsky said, "Hm, Arthur come." (Gesture) And they, he made a lot about me. And I think what it is, is that it wasn't so much the steps, but I could do things and you could see the music, more so than anybody else and he liked the way I moved. And I was just reading something and Lincoln [Lincoln Kirstein] said when we went to Russia in '62 [1962] it was the feline, serpentine things that Arthur had in 'Agon' that really was big success. Now you must remember, the Russians had not seen a black man doing anything classically. So, (gesture) it was just things that I danced well. Story_ID: 578456 Speaker 1: Do you remember opening night of dancing 'Agon' [George Balanchine], can you take us back to that night? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, everyone was, "Oh Jesus Christ this music and there's no rhythm and there's no bit," you know, it was (unclear). I said, "Well just keep it alive and keep the rhythm and stuff like that." And we felt that--we didn't know what 'Agon' was gonna be 'cause we only had the piano score. Speaker 1: Oh. 'Cause it's coming in pieces? Speaker 2: Yes in pieces. But Mr. Str- Stravinsky [Igor Stravinsky] finally came to the West Coast and he said, "George [George Balanchine]" (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To the East Coast. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: To the East Coast. Speaker 2: Yes. And I'd never seen anyone criticize Mr. Balanchine before obviously. He said, "No, nyet George." Then they'd go into this Russian dialogue. And it was the end of the first pas de trois, there was a note at the end and Balanchine said okay and he choreographed, they did, (gesture) da-da-da-da-da-da, six, seven, eight. He said, "George no, you've got to do a movement on each beat." And I said, "Oh my God that man's criticizing Mr. Balanchine." They were just really great friends and he was amazing. And he, how can I say it. He, you wanted to see the music, not hear the music. And so he felt that I was encompassing it. Even now dancers dance it, they said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell]," some of them are the best partners, they said, "but that 'Agon' how?" I said, "Well that's--." Balanchine said it took two weeks to do this pas de deux, he said it's the hardest thing I've ever done. Because everything has to be perfect and he used my skin color against her and this, and it was amazing because we didn't know what the audience was gonna say and how it would be accepted. And finally we did the debut, it was fabulous. And I said you know, this is like a computer, children will like this 'cause they like that--and that's what happened. 'Agon' became a hit with the children. And by this time, I got to know everybody in the company [New York City Ballet] and I'd dance with everybody, every ballerina because I had long arms, I was fairly tall and I dance with everyone. And Maria [Maria Tallchief] had left and gone, left and then she came back. She w- and she went with Ballet Russes [Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo] and she danced with Nureyev [Rudolf Nureyev] and the guy from Denmark, and she came back and she was trying, how can I, she thought she felt that she had lost face with Balanchine. And he always wanted the next one coming up, next one coming up, next. And Diana [Diana Adams], beautiful dancer, but she was, she just thought she was never a Balanchine dancer. But he kept putting Diana and Tanny [Tanaquil Le Clercq] very much together. I worked with Andre Gillespie [ph.] and Jacques d'Amboise and we would have competitions, how many pirouettes can you do, how--that kind of thing. And by this time I had also been in contact with Mary Hinkson and I think Mary is one of the most phenomenal dancers God has ever brought on this earth. And she had beautiful feet and legs, and I was always trying to get Mas- Mr. Balanchine to hire other minority dancers. He did a lot of jazz quartet, he got them. Diana and Melissa Hayden was, and John Jones was dancing with Jerry Robbins [Jerome Robbins], he brought John in. And so it was all, it was always something else going on top of something else. And I knew by this time that I was in favor. (Singing) "Good luck Mr. Flying man when you-da-da-da." And I always got the role of the captain da-da-da, you know, and that New York City Ballet was not dancing like it's dancing now. So we had twenty weeks and then City Center [New York City Center, New York, New York] would do musicals and I would dance in the musci- musicals and that's how I got to be Bobby Short's understudy. Speaker 1: So it--it was twenty weeks as opposed to what now? Speaker 2: It's what? Speaker 1: What is it now? Speaker 2: Oh now, they're fifty, almost a fifty-two week contract. But at that time twenty weeks was a lot of work. And, and you know, you must understand that by this time I was getting much more acute in what I'm doing and I was going to see other companies. I was getting more enmeshed in the art form. Story_ID: 578457 Speaker 1: So let me ask you about the press attention to 'Agon' [George Balanchine], I mean and the fact is especially with that role, you reached your dream. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: I mean, you know, you have wanted to be--that no one could say you're in the most important company [New York City Ballet] and you're playing, you know in a ballet-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that's been--I mean it's been created for you. And you also learn--I don't know if you learned, you probably learned before this about partnering, but there's a certain more that you learn about partnering with that one. So can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Well it was, because it was so unusual what he was doing and the thing that ba- was fascinating with Bal [George Balanchine], he would see what you did well and he would incorporate that in what you're doing. And like when he did the da-da-the opening of the ballet with the guys, I said, "It's just skip, it's like a hip walk." And I said, "No that's a this and that's--." Jerry Robbins [Jerome Robbins], I said, "What are you do- it's the old fashioned boogie, da-da-da-da." They didn't know what I was talking about. I said that step derives from the boogie. So I would always bring that into play and then I would talk to Mr. B about Diana [Diana Adams] and with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, and then the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas]. So and he worked with them an awful lot going back in the '20s [1920s] and the '30s [1930s]. And so, and I said I, I wanted to learn the lead in 'Concerto Barocco' [George Balanchine]. And I said well it's very jazzy and they said, Mr. Balanchine went to a nightclub and Hazel Scott was there and she started playing, and she transposed something classical into jazzy, and that was the beginning of 'Concerto Barocco.' And I, I'm very outgoing, I'm very friendly and I said, "Oh Mr. B how do you do this," and I was learning technique. What is the difference between this and that, and da-de-da-da-da. And so that's where I start really fine guessing what the technique was about and what you could do. And it was--'cause I was always very inquisitive. Story_ID: 578458 Speaker 1: You said that you got injured and I think--now that has changed today. I mean companies actually have doctors on staff and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: And back then, I mean it was so--it was technique you could hurt your--you know, you just pushed the pain and-- Speaker 2: You, yeah, yeah. And no one want to give up anything because you had a role and you worked to give that role up. And Dr. William Hamilton [William G. Hamilton] was the doctor of note at that time. And I went to Dr. Hamilton and I was always pushing my body beyond what it could do at that time. And so it was. And by this time, Alvin [Alvin Ailey] was in favor, he was the favorite guy. Didn't bother me, I see he doesn't have any technique, and I've said I've got more technique than him. And so I would--I was getting the recognition and after 'Agon' [George Balanchine], I got a tremendous kind of visibility and everybody knew who I was. Then Violette Verdy and I started doing guesting together, dancing together, then I went to Europe with her. And her mother [Jeanne Chateaureynaud] liked me and stuff like that. I learned early on, get to know the mothers. If you know the mother, the daughters will be fine. And the fact that I was black was accepted by everyone. John Martin, the owner was snide ass, said something in the paper [The New York Times]. And he said something like, black people are not qualified to do ballet because psychologically and essence wise they can't relate to it. Oh geez what are you talking about. And Zachary from the, Zachary Solov from the Met [Metropolitan Opera Ballet] was his partner and that's when I heard about Carmen's [HistoryMaker Carmen De Lavallade] niece, cousin. Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Janet Collins. Speaker 2: Janet Collins, I was just gonna, and I would go to the school [School of American Ballet, New York, New York] and I'd see this black woman working and she worked on pointe and did things like that. And she didn't have the easiest body for ballet, but she incorporated an awful lot of that. And now Balanchine [George Balanchine] had broken up with Maria [Maria Tallchief] and he then, and then took, Vera Zorina came in and they went to Hollywood. Then it was Tanaquil [Tanaquil Le Clercq]. Speaker 1: Tanny, right, Tanny? Speaker 2: And one day I went to class and all of his wives were standing at the bar in chronological order. Speaker 1: He, he was somewhat of a trip sort of-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, he, yeah. And then he had Allegra Kent, but Allegra couldn't take the pressure and so then they were looking for somebody else and then they developed Suzanne, Suzanne Farrell. Now Patty McBride [Patricia McBride], Suzanne Farrell, we all joined at the same time. So we were, you know, we were the youngest members in the company [New York City Ballet]. We were friendly and things like that. So I got a chance to dance with, Pat Wilde [Patricia Wilde], Melissa Hayden, all those people, I was dancing with everyone because I was a good partner. And then I would try to talk to Mr. Balanchine about technique. I would ask him why do you do this, why do you this, da-da. And anyone that he felt he was teaching he was very much behind. Speaker 1: So, and, well give me an example. Why do you do this? Wha- what would be on of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, like passe, there's a step which is passe. He says, "No that's retire 'cause passe means to pass." And these are things that very--these are subtleties most people don't understand. What is this and that, and passe means to pass. I'd just say, "Mr. B I don't understand that the," and any time you wanted to talk about things, he would spend time with you. And he loved clothing. And I said, Bernard, Bernard Johnson was making all my clothes. He says jus-, "I'll have one made for you Mr. Balanchine." I mean we, it was different my working with him and talking then a dancer trying to get a role. And he and he loved food. And I took some of my mother's [Willie Hearns Mitchell] cooking and he just loved, pork chops and collard greens, everything. And it was a very good atmosphere for me. Story_ID: 578459 Speaker 1: Do you remember when you traveled to, to the, to Russia? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [1962], right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two [1962]. Um-hm. And so that was when you say that, like you said that you were an anomaly and that got a little tiring. Speaker 2: I was a what? Speaker 1: Anomaly. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, because you know, you're--that, that's foreign, that is really foreign to the Russians at that time? Speaker 2: Well the thing is, I always knew there was some tension between Balanchine [George Balanchine] and Karel [Karel Shook], but I never found out what it was. Speaker 1: So did you find out then? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: You never did? Speaker 2: I never did. Speaker 1: Okay, but, but this is the thing, so what does Karel think when you go? Speaker 2: Well he felt it was very good that I was getting the training and going to ba- and they always tease--oh nonstory ballets and that--like he and Freddie [Frederic Franklin] used to tease because there was no story to it. You were op- inanimate objects and things like that. And I was going with a young lady by the name, she was, she had been a ballerina with the Royal Danish [Royal Danish Ballet]. And Mr. B--it was very funny 'cause I was very popular and I always saying, "I wanna take this girl out, take this girl out," and I told her now if you go out with me, you can't wear flat shoes, you gotta get high heels. I don't go with girls with flat shoes. And they would laugh. And so it was, Hannah Marie Ron [ph.] was her name, and she would've been a principle with her Dutch, with the-- Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Royal Danish. Speaker 2: The Royal Danish. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she and I started going together and my mother [Willie Hearns Mitchell] loved her. She had beautiful legs. And we'd go to the Zanzibar, we'd go dancing and she really had a gorgeous body. And, but Balanchine says, "My dear, don't get married." I said, "No." He said, "No, no, no, no that's a good idea." And there was a Niema Zweli [ph.], she was the first Israeli ballerina, she joins the company [New York City Ballet]. And he called her Noxzema (laughter). Well you see I understood Mr. Balanchine's humor. And when he would teach he would say things da-da-de-da-da-da-da-da. And everybody, he'd named the dancer--oh she's like a pig, she's like a horse, she's like--and Gloria Govrin he said she was like a Clyde- Clydesdale horse (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Horse. Story_ID: 578460 Speaker 1: I lived dance for, morning, noon and night. And I had been teaching at Mr. Shook's [Karel Shook] place [Studio of Dance Arts, New York, New York]. And then I started doing a little teaching on my own. And that's when I realized I had a good mind to learn and teach and break it down. And basically, a strong factor in Balanchine's [George Balanchine] choreography is jazz. He says, "My dear, my dear, Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], Arthur come, show them how to do that." 'Cause he w- he had gotten all that from Josephine Baker, Nicholas [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas]--he wanted, you know, the hip. 'Concerto Barocco' [George Balanchine], I said. And that I picked up on and I would put that in things I was dancing. And so consequently he liked and 'cause he wanted, he says, "Jazz, jazz." He says, "Arthur, show them what I mean." And I could interpret and do things and from nightclub and Broadway, all the--I really could do that. And so he, he utilized that and he would say, oh he said, "No, don't get married." He said, "Noxzema." I said, "Who's Noxzema?" "Your girlfriend, Noxzema." He called her Noxzema (laughter). Niema [Niema Zweli (ph.)]. He said, "You know Miss Noxzema, what's your name (laughter)?" And he knew I liked her but he was, he said, "Don't get married, don't get married, you're too young, da-da-da." I said, "Fine." And I then had lived on my own. And first when I left home I moved down to 23rd Street and shared the loft--loft with Mr. Shook. Then I went and got my own apartment on--near Linc- Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] didn't exist at that time. But Isadora Duncan and what's the other one that did the notch dance? Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Ruth St. Denis. Speaker 1: Ruth St. Denis. I said that's, and she's going on tour look at her (laughter). And she, she was so--she would just sit there and do the thing. Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): In your building? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): They lived in your building? Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Ruth St. Denis lived in your building? Speaker 1: No, she was at the same hotel I was staying at. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: And she--but now Isadora Duncan lived on my block. Speaker 2: I see, you mean your block where? Speaker 1: Seventy--152nd Street where Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] was (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh she, oh, okay. You mean when you were growing up? Or when the-- Speaker 1: No, this is after when I started Dance Theatre. Speaker 2: Dance Theatre. Story_ID: 578461 Speaker 1: So let's go to the role of Puck? Speaker 2: The role of what? Speaker 1: Puck. Speaker 2: Oh, that was a big disappointment because I thought I should do the king of the night, Oberon. It just seemed natural that I would do that and Eddie Villella [Edward Villella] would do Puck 'cause he was short. Balanchine [George Balanchine] switched it around. He says, "Oh my dear, Eddie you do Oberon, Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], Arthur I want you to do Puck," and I was very upset. I said oh Jesus. Now, all this time, Balanchine would say, "Arthur come, show them what I mean. Arthur show the--," you know, he'd say. And by this time I was dressing and I'd have things made for him and stuff like that. And it was and he knew I was hungry, I was always trying to find the science of something. And we would talk, we'd talk about religion, we would talk about society, just about everything and he appreciated that 'cause it wasn't tal- what role am I gonna get, you know. And so, he started 'Midsummer Night's Dream' ['A Midsummer Night's Dream,' George Balanchine] and I, I was like, "He's giving Eddie all those v- what am I gonna do." He said, "You know my dear," (laughter) he, everyone loved Mr. Balanchine. He said, "You know my dear, I want, you're like a spirit that's coming out of the forest," and he designed the set, the trunk of the tree that I would hide behind which was my skin tone and then I would appear. And so--and Madame Karinska [Barbara Karinska] had made costumes for me. And my niece did the little attendant in 'Midsummer Night's Dream.' So, I said, "What's going on here, I'm not getting anything to do." Balanchine says, "No, no, no, you're spirit." And he never did any choreo- he said, "You know my dear, I go have cigarette break, you--the next forty bars you take care of." He would--choreograph (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what do you mean, that's how he choreographed? Speaker 2: (Nods head) And you know, you don't only-- Speaker 1: And you were about to say something? Speaker 2: Well I was gonna say Tan- Allegra Kent and I danced a lot with Allegra, 'cause we all were new. Patty McBride [Patricia McBride], Allegra Kent, Suzanne Farrell. And so we all were coming up together. And he'd say, "Oh Arthur, my dear, show what I mean. Do it jazzy," well they didn't know, what, you know. And I would show them and say that like even in four temperaments (gesture), I could do all those things you see. And you'd get a ballet dancer, they can't do that naturally. And Todd Bolender just said, "All I know if we rollover, say Arthur what's the count, sixty-nine, okay good (laughter)." 'Cause I was that way. Speaker 1: But, but when you said--were you about to say he didn't choreograph or he did it in a fluid kind of way? Speaker 2: Yeah he said, "Oh you know my dear, I have cigarette break, Arthur you--the next phrase is you, do something." Speaker 1: And then he would come back and approve it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So he was collaborative, sort of. But he took--okay. So, but how were the dances being documented in that way? You know, this will be further--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know, because he used to make fun. He says, "No my dear you've got to do it," this labanotation, he said, "ah English, very English no, no (laughter)." Speaker 1: So he wouldn't do it that way? Speaker 2: No, no, no. He would have the people memorize what he wants and then the dancers would say, "Arthur how do--." Mr. B say, "How do you wanna do that? How do you." I'd say it's this, "You thrust the hip forward and you go back and this is a do-si-do," you know, I would put it into contemporary terms. Story_ID: 578462 Speaker 1: Then Suzanne [Suzanne Farrell] hit. And Jacques [Jacques d'Amboise] was the first one to become enamored. Then Balanchine [George Balanchine] really got very involved with her. Tanny [Tanaquil Le Clercq] had polio, and it just so happens Balanchine and Tanny lived on the cor- down the corner from me, and Suzanne was around the block from me. And you could see that he was frustrated 'cause he had stopped. He had stayed in Europe for a year to work on Tanny. And then I, there was a--I don't know what it's called now, a fish store on 77th Street and Broadway, we'd go in there and eat. And Tanny would be there. And I said, "Tanny, I want you to come up to Harlem [New York, New York] and teach my dancers." She said, "I can't I--I'm in a wheelchair." I said, "But you've got a mind." She said, "Oh I don't, let me think about this." So she came back and she said, "Okay I'll try it." And she was a fab- Lyd- Virginia Johnson and Lydia Abarca, two first ballerinas were her babies. And at that time, Tanny wouldn't--she wouldn't go to the ballet, she wouldn't go see anything, any dancing. And she didn't, she didn't wanna see other women and dancers. So I said, "Okay," I would go to the hospital. And I said, "Now Tanny--." Speaker 2: Now this is later though, right, this is (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is fifty--'55 [1955]. Speaker 2: Oh '55 [1955], she didn't wanna go to, and why was that? Speaker 1: Well because she caught polio and she stayed in Europe. Speaker 2: Oh I see, so that--that-- Speaker 1: And, and then things got very dicey between her and Jerry Robbins [Jerome Robbins]. And Mr. Balanchine was determined to make her walk again. And that is a lot--he incorporated a lot of that in 'Agon' [George Balanchine], pas de deux. That's why it's--I'd tell her about it, I said, "No, no, let me do it." It's like I would show her how to do it. And he just got more and more frustrated when he realized that she wouldn't be walking, she wouldn't walk again. Then he blamed it on Jerry and you know. Speaker 2: So it became (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--but Tanny, I said, "Tanny come up and teach." So she spoke to Mr. Balanchine and he said, "Okay I'll tell you what to do, I'll give you the exercises and combinations and things that you must teach up at Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York]." But she'd get in that wheelchair and zoom around. She was wonderful. And what you call it studied with her, a--Carol [Carol Crawford Smith]. And she said, "You know one day, my first year to get toe shoes," she said, "Tanny went with us to Capezio [Capezio Ballet Makers, Inc.] and--to get the right shoes." And they were very impressed that she, a great ballerina who had polio, was going out to buy shoes with them. And then something happened and I don't know quite what happened was that, I do know what happened. There was a fight between Mr. Shook [Karel Shook] and Tanny. Because she was doing what Balanchine wanted her to do and he said, "No that's no very good and da-da-da-da." And I just saw, I just found all this out recent, I didn't know it. I said, "What happened?" But it just wasn't working and then Tanny got upset and decided to leave. I said, "You can't go Tanny, I mean you, you're bringing all the Balanchine technique, da-da-da-da-da." She said, "Well it starts higher up." I said, "What're you talking about?" "You," I said, "It didn't come from me," that was something that happened with Mr. Shook and Tanny, 'cause she was taking over the school and stuff like--and she wanted the balancheck- Balanchine technique. Story_ID: 578463 Speaker 1: And now you must understand the, the gossip was very strange. "Oh George [George Balanchine] you're an inanimate object." It was like, you know, the old Ballet Russes you were this, you did--you know, interpret And Balanchine, "No, (unclear) one like stories. I don't, just do the movement." It's just tension there. And he was always looking for new things to put in and he, and I think he was fascinated with me because he knew what it was being the first in the situation. 'Cause English was not his native language, he says, "You know, my dear, I want sixteen Nubian girls." I said, "Mr. B don't use that word, 'cause it mean--it's a--," well that. But English was his second language and if you go to Egypt it's Nubia and Egypt, so that was natural for him to say that. And [HistoryMaker] Glory Van Scott, he wanted Glory Van Scott to join New York City Ballet. Tanny [Tanaquil Le Clercq] and I took her out to dinner. See, "Do you know that Balanchine really--." "I'm not putting my feet in those shoes, da-da-da-da-da." Speaker 2: Glory Van Scott? Speaker 1: Glory Van Scott. And I said oh my gosh. And he didn't particularly care for Alvin Ailey. Speaker 2: He didn't? Speaker 1: He, he's not a story type choreographer and he said, "No, no." And Rebecca Hartley [ph.], he said, "Careful we're in her building, they've got ears in the wall listing," very Russian. That's very. "They're listening to everything or they're taking everything." And we would do tel- we would do something and some of the parents would complain, he say then take your daughter out of the company. And we did the 'Show of Shows' ['Your Show of Shows'], we did all the television specials and they didn't know I was black until I got in the studio. "George, come here a moment." They'd say, "We can't have that--." He said, "If Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] doesn't dance, no one dances." Speaker 2: Which is really wonderful. Speaker 1: And Stravinsky [Igor Stravinsky] really liked my dancing. He said, "George, you see the music when he dances." And I, by the time we started, this was the '60s [1960s], I stopped dancing. I, you know, I was doing Dance Theatre [American Dance Theatre] and I became a success with that, and he said, "Oh, oh now you big star." I said, "No, Mr. Balanchine, I am the student coming back to the master teacher to learn some more things to do." Story_ID: 578464 Speaker 1: I wasn't in the company yet. So what happened, Carol [Carol Crawford Smith] who had been a student of mine working with Tanaquil [Tanaquil Le Clercq], she said, "You need to get the, the medal of, the peace medal." Speaker 2: The Medal of Freedom [Presidential Medal of Freedom]. Speaker 1: The Medal of Freedom and you need to get it before Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] leaves the White House [Washington, D.C.]. And their children studied with one of my dancers in Chicago [Illinois], [HistoryMaker] Homer Bryant. Speaker 2: Oh sure. Speaker 1: And so, Reggie [ph.] spoke to Miss Garrett [ph.] and they did a whole thing, and they said, "We know Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] needs to get this before--" Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: "--the president leaves." So I don't know whether I'm getting it or not. Speaker 2: I'm hoping it happens. Speaker 1: 'Cause I've gotten everything else (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: I said then-- Speaker 2: Because you've got the-- Speaker 1: --there're no more wars, I've got everything they could think of. Speaker 2: I mean you've got--I think of the Kennedy Center, I don't know, I mean. Speaker 1: So, as a matter of fact, a week or so ago I called Re- I said, "Reggie am I getting this award or am I not." I said, "Now I don't want a last minute." Now I got the Kennedy Center Honors-- Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 578465 Speaker 1: Alvin Ailey started his company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] and then you're st- you're with, you're with-- Speaker 2: New York City Ballet (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) New York City Ballet. Speaker 2: But see I knew Alvin from 'House of Flowers' [Harold Arlen and Truman Capote]. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. But how do you, now you, what is the American Negro Dance Company? Speaker 2: Oh tha- tha- you know, it's, it's-- Speaker 1: It's the precursor. Speaker 2: Yes. But they were like four black companies that got started. [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham had one with sixteen black girls with Ballet Theatre [American Ballet Theatre] and that folded. Then there was the, and I'm getting, it's all in shi- ca- all in Mr. Shook's [Karel Shook] book ['Elements of Classical Ballet Technique as Practiced in the School of the Dance Theatre of Harlem,' Karel Shook] and he's got it all chronological. Speaker 1: But, but this is the thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): (Simultaneous) You're talking about the, the company he started, there was a festival in Senegal [First World Festival of Black Arts, Dakar, Senegal]. Speaker 1: He, he start, the one--I'm talking about the one, right, that's right. And this is--I know that George Faison [HistoryMaker George W. Faison] in his interview talked about joining the company, your company in 19-- Speaker 2: Well see now, when--now this was years ago before Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: This is 196-- Speaker 2: I used to teach at Jones-Haywood [Jones-Haywood Dance School, Washington, D.C.] and I had twenty-one young boys, and George Faison was one of my dancers. Hinton Battle, George, I had twenty-one boys and every--on Monday I would go down on my free day and I would teach them. And I worked with [HistoryMaker] Doris Jones and Claire Haywood in Washington. So we all knew each other and I got special treatment due to the fact that I was a ballet dancer for New York City Ballet. Then when Balanchine [George Balanchine] did the thing, he got that big grant from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], he was gonna do ballet in America, he was going around. Doris Jones and Claire Haywood were a part of that. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. So because George says, "I've never seen black dancers so well trained or the level of professionalism in my life." That's what he said about you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Well this is--and I-- Speaker 1: He said there was Claude, Claude Thompson, Paula Kelly, the best (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah Tuck [ph.], now Claude and I went to the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] together. And he was so dramatic, dark glasses and you know the (gesture). I said, "But you can't see it's in the dark," but Claude. Because again, you must understand everything was so like layers. Speaker 1: Layered, right, right. Speaker 2: And again, and I was the special one because I did ballet. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Okay. Speaker 2: Hinton Battle, his sister was fabulous and they all came from Doris Jones and Claire Haywood. And I would go down on our free day which was a Monday and I would teach. And there's a letter I've got that will just tear your heart out, that they got frustrated with it, Jones and Claire, and they said, "We're tired of this and people our treating us like no class citizens, da-da-da-da-da. And you tell Lincoln Kirstein he can kiss my," you know that kind of stuff. And we don't like the Balanchine techn- I said, "We'll he's the father of it all and stuff like that." And we were very good friends. I always stayed at their house. Sandra Fortune [HistoryMaker Sandra Fortune-Green] came out of that. And she, and Sylvester [Sylvester Campbell] danced together. Now Sylvester was another one that studied with Mr. Shook. Billy Wilson, Sylvester cam- it was the place to go for all the black ballet dancers. And then all the Broadway people, and the Hollywood people and that's when I said, "Um not for me." And they asked me to come out for a screen test. And I said, "Okay," so I--and they were drinking, I said, "No I don't drink," I said "no, unh-uh, unh-uh, unh-uh." I said, "I'll tell you what fellas, when you make up your mind on what you're gonna do call me and I'll come back." 'Cause you're sitting by the pool and (gesture) yeah, it didn't fit with me. Story_ID: 578466 Speaker 1: In 1968, you, you perform with Suzanne Farrell and is it Mes- mes (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A Western, in, 'Slaughter on Tenth Avenue' [George Balanchine]. Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): No, no. Speaker 2: No this is a, this is a dance, a ballet. Speaker 1: It's what? Speaker 2: The Mesta-- Speaker 1: Oh, 'Mephistopheles and Pithoprakta' [sic. 'Metastaseis and Pithoprakta,' George Balanchine]. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: Yes. Oh Balanchine [George Balanchine] loved to put me with his favorite at that time, and he liked me with no clothes on. I said, "Mr. B why I'd don't get any, I need some clothes." He said, "No my dear no, go." And then, but he did the other ballet that they found. Gloria Govrin went, and they put me back and I was in the advanced corps. I said, "Mr. B, why are you putting Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] back." He said, "'Cause one day he's gonna be a great director and I want him to remember everything." Speaker 2: So that's--so you're doing--but this is the whole thing is that you do--you do that, you also--I think you have the project with, in Brazil the same year (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was another. What had happened, the United States government, the USIA [United States Information Agency] said, "Oh Arthur, we want you go to Brazil and form the first national Brazilian ballet company [National Ballet Company of Brazil]." This was sixty--'66 [1966], sixty--something like that. And I went down. And I said well because we think, you know I said 'cause you're black you can go do--well you know, Brazil's got its own racial problems. And they didn't wanna take corrections from me. I said, "Let me tell you something, I will throw your ass out." See that's--I like a fight. I said, "Oh no, no, no, no, no." Oh I've--I said, "Then go to the beach and get you're suntan but don't come to my rehearsal." They had never ever had anyone come and talk about developing the culture that was Bra- they wanted to be French. And I said, unh-uh. So I started the first national Brazilian ballet company. And one of the dancers was married to one of the richest men in South America. Paulo Ferraz [ph.] and he gave me, gave us everything. And he said, "Oh, start a symphony, we'll start an acting company," and that was all with Paulo's money 'cause he had--they had so much money. And they had never encountered a black man that was doing classical ballet. I kept saying, "Guys, why don't you do something about your own culture." Well, we'll take an idea of an African ritual and put it on pointe and we called it 'Rhythmetron' [Arthur Mitchell]. And I got, I got, his name was Marlos Nobre, and he--even today he's (gesture), and he's good friends with Tania Leon. He, so he, the rhythms were so complicated they could not get trained musicians to play it. So we would go into the (unclear) and have them improvise and we tape, then we--and that's how we put the score together. And so, well by this time I'd been un-enamored with America. So the president of Brazil said, "We wanna build an--the Castro Alves in Bahia [Brazil]." So they asked me would I help. Well I said, "You'd have to pay me." They say, "Oh no, no, no, you're under contract to the state department [U.S. Department of State] and when you're that, you can't do something," I said, "It's no problem they are not doing anything for me in America anyway. So I'm not gonna do it." So, the state department says, "Arthur you gotta do this." "What do you mean I gotta do it?" "Well because America," and I said "Let me tell you something guys, you're getting on my nerves. You're not doing anything for me and my people." I was only like me and my people and da-da-da. And they said okay, and they changed the law and allowed me to be paid by the Brazilian government on top of my salary from the state department, and I built the Castro Alves. Then the president said, "We want you to do the opening." I said, "I don't dance for free." "Oh but I--." "Read my lips, if you want me to dance, you pay me." And I had gone down with myself, Suzanne Aimes [ph.] was the notator and the Mexican girl, she did the choreography, and she'd been a student at SAB [School of American Ballet, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Who's that? Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Gloria Contreras [Gloria Contreras Roeniger]. Speaker 2: Gloria Contreras. And so we went down and it was--the company was so successful there that they kept bringing me back every year. Story_ID: 578467 Speaker 1: And that's where you said you had to build it from scratch. But are you then experimenting with things that with some--would be integrated when you start DTH, the Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was putting, I was putting things on pointe that had not been done that way before. Speaker 1: To beats that had not been done before? Speaker 2: It's what? Speaker 1: To beats to, you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You said you were going to the, the what, (unclear) I don't know what--the--you? The favelas, that's what you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that, what had happened, of a ye- I told you I started studying religion then I got into the Candomble, then I got into the voodoo, all those things, the Santeria and dance there was very young. And we would go to all the islands and I wanted to see what was going on, and the drums would start and that. I said, "Now if we could put that on pointe it would be very special," and that's when 'Rhythmetron' [Arthur Mitchell] was done down there [Brazil]. And it's a made-up word of rhythm and meter. And Walter Terry, he said, "That's the best combination of African and classical ballet that anyone had ever done." And so the finale of it, done was very psychedelic, 'cause this was the '60s [1960s]. And it was, it became one of the main things for Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York]. Now Dance Theatre, we toured basically, 'Concerto Barocco' [George Balanchine], 'Le Corsaire' and 'Agon' [George Balanchine] then we would close with 'Rhythmetron.' And that's why I started, I said it's a classical company, it, it's founded and ground in classical ballet technique, but we're gonna do all styles, and that's why it's called Dance Theatre of Harlem, not Ballet Theatre of Harlem. And I said I want people when they come, I want to introduce other side--other kind of art forms, so we did an African ballet, a jazz ballet, a modern ballet, and I kept getting a repertoire that one style didn't look at and I would put it in. And so, we would have--I started doing choreography and I started doing southern Brazil, but I said you know, there's enough bad choreographers out there they don't need another one, 'cause I'm thinking Balanchine [George Balanchine], and if you're not as good as Balanchine don't do it. And, and that was one of the things why I started Dance Theatre because I said all this talent is up there but no one's doing anything with it (simultaneous). Story_ID: 578468 Speaker 1: Do you think it's also the times? You know, 'cause 1968 Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is assassinated. And you, are you, and you spend this time in Brazil. You also in 1968, are in Noel Coward's 'Sweet Potato' on Broadway? Speaker 2: Well that, that's again--because again you see--the company didn't work fifty-two weeks a year like now. You worked twenty years, maybe twenty-five-- Speaker 1: Twenty weeks. Speaker 2: --that was a lot of work, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And so af- after I did the thing with [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt, 'Archy and Mehitabel,' 'Shinbone Alley,' I was still bugged. And so they were doing a musical of-- Speaker 1: 'Sweet Potato.' Speaker 2: Noel Coward. Speaker 1: Noel Coward. Speaker 2: And they asked me to be in it. So I had the lead and I was singing and dan- Balanchine [George Balanchine] says, "I'm gonna come and see this (laughter)." And because I was always searching to do something new and different, and Balanchine came and saw and he says, "Um, it wasn't very good." I wasn't an opera singer, I wasn't a great dancer, and I can do the stuff that the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas] did, but he always wanted black dancers and he always wanted sixteen black girls. And he and [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham came up with the idea they wanted to do something on the quadroon balls in New Orleans [Louisiana]. And so Mr. B didn't do it and then when he died in '85 [1985] or something, Katherine Dunham came and spoke about it. And Miss Dunham's a trip. Well (laughter), because you know, she wouldn't pay the dancers, but they would cook a big pot of rice and beans and they go eat. I said, "Well I have to have my money." And so she was speaking about George and what they were--and she said, "And Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell]," and I'm sitting in the audience there and she said, "Arthur, will you help me." And I said (mumbling), "Oh Miss Dunham, I'm gonna kick her right--," (laughter). I said, "Yes Miss Dunham." (Laughter) And she said, "Will you take on the concept of doing the quadroon balls in New Orleans." And I said, "Yes," and I said, "Okay I would." So I--when I, the next time I was in New Orleans I went to the site where they had the quadroon balls and it then became a place for nuns then they closed it down. But it was, it was very orchestrated and, what's her name, Rice, Anne Rice was her name, the writer. She's done a book on Brazil that is phenomenal. It's the best understanding of the race relationships in New Orleans in the South and stuff like that that I've ever read, and it broke it down between the octoroon, the mulatto, the quadroon and th- you know. And she explained all that. I said that makes sense. And what happened was that the young planters would go and that's where every year they would take the prettiest of the girls to the quadroon ball and that's where the planter would choose his mistress and they all had houses along Rampart Street. And when they, when they, when he decided to become enamored with somebody he'd say, they'd say, "What am I gonna get out of it, what about my daughter. If you have any children they will go to Europe." You know, it was really, it was a form of high-class slavery in a sense that, but the mothers, the mothers would sit in the top and they would talk, da-da-da. And when the planter wanted to take, they would have a meeting and he would say, "This is what I'm gonna do for her, this is what I'm gonna give. I will give her a house. If we have any children, they will be trai- they will be raised and go to Europe in England or France." So all this research I did. And I kept saying I will do the quadroon balls, I never got a right to do it. But Miss Dunham said I should take it on because it's something Balanchine and she had talked about doing, and da-da. 'La Valse' [George Balanchine], which is famous for Tanny [Tanaquil Le Clercq]. Mr. Balanchine got the idea from Miss Dunham. You know, see it, it's I think what is hard for me to do, everything overlaps so and you were doing this, you were doing that and when New York City Ballet wasn't working, I would do Broadway or nightclub, and that's when all these things came about. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And I could, I would, standing on Broadway singing solo, oh Jesus. Story_ID: 578469 Speaker 1: I wanna talk about the beginning of Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York], you know because now you had dinner or in [HistoryMaker] Glory Van Scott's interview she talks about-- Speaker 2: That was right after 'House of Flowers' [Harold Arlen and Truman Capote], yes. Speaker 1: Well she says you had a dinner with Balanchine [George Balanchine] and she, you were at a dinner. Well she said she didn't wanna go, but you were saying well let's just go anyway. You both were supposed to be going-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to dinner, is that true? Speaker 2: Well Tanny [Tanaquil Le Clercq], I said, "Tanny, Mr. B loves Glory Van Scott," and I said, "he would train her and put her in the company [New York City Ballet]." She said, "Well, why don't we take her dinner?" And we went. And she, "Oh I'm not putting my feet in those shoes." And she was just so wedded to Miss Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham]. Now let me just put it this way also. At 'House of Flowers' it was a phenomenal musical but it closed and they wanted it to come back and open again, and the sets and the costumes were absolutely gorgeous. But it just never took off to the success that it was suppose--and Saint Subber was the prod- producer and what's his name, the writer, oh my dear. And he, (singing) "The house is made of flowers, the wall will da-da-da-da." And that's why I was being introduced all this sort of stuff from the islands. And it was, it was a fabulous musical, but they got rid of Mr. Balanchine, brought in Herbie Ross [Herbert Ross] and, and they--and, and what's his na- and Alvin [Alvin Ailey] was the thing at that moment, which I thought was silly as he can't do ballet. He's got a wonderful animal magnetism, da-da-da-da-, he would, you know, it didn't work. But that's where I was very aware of what was going on and not happening. Speaker 1: So what--when you tell Mr. Balanchine that you want to leave? Speaker 2: Yeah. Okay what had happened was, that Lincoln [Lincoln Kirstein] and--there's a wonderful book that, what's the guy I keep asking I wanna get to do a book for me? Well anyway he--I'll get his name. And in the book, he said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], no one has gone into New York City Ballet and progressed so fast as Arthur Mitchell." He was the fair-headed boy and Lincoln was--Lincoln was in love with me. And opening night in 'Agon' [George Balanchine] there was a party, (gesture) and he got high. He said, "I'm in love with Arthur Mitchell and he won't even look at me." I said, "Lincoln, I love you but there can't be incest in the family." And so everyone knew this 'cause Lincoln would go, go crazy. And so I said no, no, no, not for me. But he invited me to all of his soirees, to all of his little things at his house on 19th Street. And George Wolfe [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] bought the house. And I would go to those things, but Lincoln would get angry and throw people out. Well he said, "No, Arthur's all right." I said, "Well, yeah I understand, but nothing is gonna happen." And I always had this wall up about my sex. I said, "Unh-uh it's not gonna happen with me. You people get people you go to bed with then you throw them out, da-da." And I kept telling the young girls, "That's the--." "Well, he's gonna make me a star," I said, "Not in this life." Story_ID: 578470 Speaker 1: And when we did, what was the musical? Oh, gorgeous girls and what's his name, the--Francis Ford Coppola. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: He had a big-- Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): 'Cotton Club' ['The Cotton Club']. Speaker 1: A what? Speaker 2: 'Cotton Club' (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): (Simultaneous) 'Cotton Club.' Speaker 2: No he had a, a house--not a house but what they, like a traveling house, or traveling something. And they would invite the girls and screw them all that night. And I kept saying, "You're so stupid. They're getting what they want and you're getting nothing in return." Francis Ford Coppola, we'd be in a meeting like this and he would say, "Would you go tell Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], da-da-da-da-da." He didn't want to speak to me. And I said, "Well you go and tell him I said," that was this kind of thing you know, (laughter). And what's his name, Michael Smue [ph.] was very good friends with him. And I said this is terrible. These girls think he's going to make them into movie stars. They just want to screw them, and they'd have these parties that the girls would go to, they'd get drunk, it was a mess. So I said okay, but he didn't like me 'cause I--I've always had a feeling of who I am and whatever, and you're gonna respect me whether you like it or not. And so he didn't really like me. But when you see the movie, I was one of the ten choreographers that were there. And the, the-- Speaker 1: Now which movie is this? Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): 'The Cotton Club,' right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is 'The Cotton Club,' okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Cotton Club.' And I must say he spent a fortune making 'The Cotton Club' as close to the original. The swizzle sticks, da-da-da-da-da and da-da-da-da-da, da-da-da-da-da. And I just saw the way they took, treated everybody. And all these minority kids they thought they would be discovered, going to Hollywood, I said, not in this lifetime. And but he and I didn't get along very well. Speaker 1: You mean you and Francis Ford Coppola? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, but I--let's go to the start of Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) God that sounds--usually I'm very good, but today there's so much coming in I'm trying to get it all out. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 578471 Speaker 1: Let's go to the beginning of Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York]. So, who, how does this--do you go to--how, how do you co-- Speaker 2: How did it come about? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I never wanted to start it, I just wanted to get a school and give the young kids in Harlem [New York, New York] a chance to get the classical training. And I knew there was a lot of talent there, but I said now, okay. So I got my first grant from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] and we had to match the money with earned income and contributions. So out of that, I had to make a company that could sta- a group of dancers, we would go around to the schools, we've got--and get earned income. And we went everywhere. And Tania Leon, our musical director, she came from Cuba and she came one day to play class, and I said, "Oh I'm gonna hire you (unclear)." She said, "Oh." "I want you to conduct." She said, "I don't know." I said, "Just move your hand big, keep the rhythm and da-da-da-da." So she became our conductor. The animosity and, well you can say hatred was, people said that, "[HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell's crazy. He's starting a ballet company in Harlem. Black people can't do ballet. They got." And so I said well that's what we're going to do. And I asked Balanchine [George Balanchine] to give me his ballets because it's always said that if you dance Balanchine's ballets you will automatically get better. So we did 'Concerto Barocco' [George Balanchine], we did 'Agon' [George Balanchine], 'Four Temperaments' [George Balanchine], 'Allegro Brillante' [George Balanchine] and I have to honestly say a lot of those ballets we danced them better than everybody else. And it was a very beautiful company. And Balanchine says, "You know my dear, you know my dear, ten years he will have the most beautiful company in the world." And it was. Speaker 1: It was. So it was almost his dream though too, right, he had. This was the sixteen black--black females (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And he, he (laughter) he, he was, and we would talk about food, we would talk about clothing, we'd talk about the psyche and things like that, and he liked that 'cause no one I--we became like friends rather than my boss and his student. And he, and he knew that Lincoln [Lincoln Kirstein] liked me. I said, "Mr. Balanchine, I don't get involved with all that foolishness, that, that's silly." I said, "These people think they're gonna sleep their way to the top, it doesn't happen." And so they used to call me the man with the iron drawers. They said, "Nobody's gonna (laughter)." Because they say, "You know, Mitchell," and all the young designers, and such, they all wanted to work with me. And they made my clothes and then I would have things made for Mr. Balanchine. We'd do a ballet, he says, "No, no, no, no, costumes not right." Let me--I'd go home and bring clothes and those became the costumes for New York City Ballet. I mean I was enterprising, you know what I mean. And the Modern Jazz Quartet, Balanchine wanted to do a jazz ballet. Speaker 1: So, so he blessed you starting the school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yes, in a sense, I, how can I say it. He was carrying over all the attraction that he had with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham or Josephine Baker and he had worked with the Nicholas brothers [HistoryMaker Fayard Nicholas and Harold Nicholas], you know, they can romp, and I can't do that, but he always liked that fact. Like he said, "You know my dear, I do 'Slaughter on Tenth Av- Tenth Avenue' ['Slaughter on Tenth Avenue,' George Balanchine] who can tap." I'd say, "I can tap." "Not that kind of--." And he brought Ray Bolger in to coach me. And Ray Bolger said, "No, you know, it's just (gesture), it's no steps it's just an attitude." I said, "Okay fine." So that's what I did. Story_ID: 578472 Speaker 1: What is the life span of a ballet, of a ballet dancer (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually-- Speaker 1: And to what age-- Speaker 2: My repertoire I could've danced at fifty. Speaker 1: But that's-- Speaker 2: Because he, he's mak- the choreography was made on what I can do well. And he liked that snake kind of thing, that I can do this and pull it in, and I don't mind putting it in, but I can take his neoclassical ballets and add those things to it. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And it gave it an extra little flavor. Speaker 1: Okay, so you start with two dancers, right and thirty students. Who are your two dancers (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was Walter Raines and yeah, which, she mar-we, I had a tutor go on tour with us and she, Balanc- she got, Yanshi Stevenson [ph.] married our tutor and he's a Muslim, and they moved to Washington. They grow their own food, raise the children, their homes, da-da-da-da train and stuff like that. And then I wanted her to teach, but she said they, the religion would not let her show her legs and stuff like that. But, I made everybody in the--go to school, social skills. Lydia Abarca, that the gorgeous Lydia, whew, she said, "Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], is that what they call a walk-in closet?" No one knew anything, but I would take all these kids and I'd show them and I would dress them. Fix their teeth, buy their clothes, make them go to school to get their education and it was always a learning process for them and for me. And we really went around the wor- the company was one of the best companies America has ever produced. But the racism from the classicists, "Well he didn't come from Russia," he'd, I said, "Look, are you kidding. You--I can do what you can do, and you can't do what I can do." And-- Speaker 1: And so was that--so the racism was that from the very, very beginning? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Because, "How is this black man from Harlem [New York, New York] gonna be teaching ballet." And I have a eye, what I learned from Mr. Shook [Karel Shook] and Mr. Balanchine [George Balanchine]. And I would spend hours talking to Mr. Balanchine about technique. He said, "You know my dear, the feet, and this and then that." And even to the point where I stopped dancing, but I was taking the Balanchine technique and teaching, what I thought it was, and I was teaching it to everybody at DG, Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York]. And they were gorgeous. I dress, social skills, and we had it, they said, I say why are you get--they say, "Look who we got it from," being me. 'Cause I was very, always getting dressed and da-da-da-da-da. And I put that into the kids. And I said you're representing something much larger than yourself. And we'd be in and someone would say, "Ah, I wonder what they're doing in Harlem." I said, "The same thing that they did when you were there." This is what you're getting an opportunity to go around the world to see, do and stuff like that. And they really became my children. And I would talk to them, I'd meet their parents or their boyfriends and their girlfriends. I'd say, "Come here, who's that?" "Ah, I don't like him, get rid of him." Yeah, I know you couldn't have a girlfriend or boyfriend without passing them through me. Oh yeah. Speaker 1: So you--so you were a strict taskmaster? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, you know. Story_ID: 578473 Speaker 1: You go to Shook [Karel Shook] and you say I have this idea will you help me (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. He had--miss he had moved to Europe. He was with a Dutch National Ballet, Sonia Gaskell. And so when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got murdered, I con- I said, "Karel I'm starting a school in Harlem [New York, New York] and I want you to come and teach." And Karel said, "Oh my God, I'm stuck here in Europe," but I--we all felt we have to do something to honor this man. So he came back and he became co-director with me of Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: So you were saying also, so what is his role versus, so he's teaching? Speaker 2: Well, we both taught. Speaker 1: I know, but what is he teaching? He's teaching you said the-- Speaker 2: The classical technique, but he's using, he's using very much the traditional training from the Ballet Russes [Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo]. I was pushing it another step ahead using the Balanchine [George Balanchine] thing. And also, being a tap dancer, the rhythms and the accent, you see Balanchine loved that, and twelve-tone, I understand that something. But, there was a lot of animosities, said, "[HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell, when are you going to start a black ballet company in Harlem. I don't see it." I said, "Well that's what I did." And so it started and the company got to be more popular. But still in New York City [New York, New York], the major companies kept saying, "Oh no, nyet, no, no, no, no, no, no." And I think starting all the way back when I did that thing with Violette Verdy, and when I met Madame de Neliva [ph.] the word spread and she got--went back to England and was raving about this black guy teaching ballet. And so the English just opened their arms to me. And we went and we really had a phenomenal success. And so I, I said, "Wait a minute now, we're doing all these neoclassical things, but we're not doing the classics. I'm cheating these dancers because they're not dancing 'Swan Lake' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky], 'Nutcracker' ['The Nutcracker,' Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] or with 'Sleeping Beauty' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky]." So I said, "I'm gonna do it." So that was another reason why our repertoire was one way and then another way. Then I asked [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder and he did something. And so we had more, I think every African American choreographer I asked to do a ballet for Dance Theatre. Speaker 1: Which is nice. Now, do you choreograph 'Ode to Otis' [Arthur Mitchell], can you talk about that? Speaker 2: Well yeah, yeah, I'd be--I just felt after Balanchine what could I do. I said another bad ballet by another person da-da, but it's the strongest technical base to do things on and then doing the Balanchine ballets. I'm very good at fixing up other people's work. And I felt well, you know, we need a closing ballet, we need an opening ball, then I would choreograph something. And it had very popular success, but I didn't fool myself that I was a great ballet choreographer. And then Balanchine, "You know my dear, you need (laughter)--," and he would come and do rehearsals, orchestra scores. When Mr. Shook passed in 1985, I think it was, I said I've got someone to replace him. So I went to Freddie Franklin [Frederic Franklin] and I asked Freddie Franklin to come and be the associate artistic director. And so then aside from all the Balanchine technique, Freddie was teaching all the old Ballet Russes techniques. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: 'Scheherazade' [Michel Fokine] all those ballets. Story_ID: 578474 Speaker 1: When does the company start, if it starts as a school [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York], when does the company? Speaker 2: The, the, from the beginning, because we had to have earned income and unearned income to match the Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York] grant. So I took four danc- we'd go to public schools, we'd do little affairs, we went, the Orchestra da Camera in Long Island [New York], we went to, but they played live for us in the school system. Speaker 1: Okay, but what about--so, what about the performance debut at the Guggenheim [Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: The what? Speaker 1: The Guggenheim (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we made our debut there-- Speaker 1: Right, so-- Speaker 2: --in 1971. And it was hard because I loved the building and I said, I said, we've got to do a formal opening. So we did it at the Guggenheim. And the critics said, "How can [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell call this formal, there's no proscenium arch." I said, "Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] didn't have one either." And that--I talked to the people at the museum to let us do our season there. And I would tell--we'd, I'd set the orchestra or the people around then I would tell them to change their seats to get another perspective of what was going there. From our being there, it became a automatic thing to have the arts at the Guggenheim. But pri- I also did things at the Studio Muse- Studio Museum of Natural History [sic.] and it was always odd places because you couldn't get a theater. Speaker 1: And plus this was--it's a cost factor too, right? It's a cost factor, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you're working in--so, so tell me people's responses that night? Speaker 2: It was kind of fun. Lincoln [Lincoln Kirstein] was beside, crazy, "Ah these people, ah." I said, "Lincoln, cool it, they're fine." And, and I was very good majordomo like, you know, introducing, meeting and stuff like that. What had happened was that when I was teaching at the school, at the, no not, it was at the Church of the Master [New York, New York], it was down in the basement. And someone told Mrs. Gimbel [Alva B. Gimbel] about this young black guy that was doing everything in Harlem [New York, New York] in the arts. And then Lord Snowden [Antony Armstrong-Jones] came and they said, "Oh Arthur, there's a photographer that wants to come and shoot." I didn't know who he was 'cause we were in the basement of the Church of the Master. And so this guy came in, I said, "Look mister, don't bug me, don't get in the way, I don't like the cameras, da-da-da." And then I was rehearsing, I said, "English, slight limp, photograph," I said, "that's Lord Snowden." I didn't know who he was. And he said, "Don't worry about it, don't worry about it." He went back to Buckingham Palace [London, England] and was raving about this black guy that was doing things in Harlem in the classics. Story_ID: 578475 Speaker 1: But prior to that, I started going to Spoleto [Spoleto Festival dei Due Mondi, Spoleto, Italy]. And Luchino Visconti, Gian Carlo Menotti said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], Luchino Visconti is gonna do 'Salome' [Lester Horton] and I'd like you to do the dance of the seven br- December bride--seven veils ["Dance of the Seven Veils"]." So I said-- Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Now there were movies in between, Michael Cacoyannis. They all want me to be actors and I went, "Oh I don't wanna be an actor." And so they said, "Oh Michael is doing a movie, 'The Day the Fish Came Out,' he wants you to do the choreography." I said fine. And--let me backtrack. I started going to Spoleto with a small group of dancers and every year we went back and it became the (air quotes) talk of Europe. And then they said, oh Gian Carlo said, "I'm gonna do something," 'cause there's the opera house and then there was the (unclear) the small theater. He wrote a play for me in Italian, 'Il Pegno,' the sign. And it's a story of a young artist that went to Europe and he went to this church and he saw this grave and it gave him, brought him back the ideas about his, person that was died. While I was there, I got all kinds of offices, offices, offers to go to Paris [France] to join the op- the ballet company there, the acting company there, I said no. It's--I was again running in a whole other group of people. Gian Carlo decided he was gonna start an opera company in Harlem [New York, New York]. He said, "Arthur, there's an old opera house in Harlem and I wanna start a company there." I said fine. But he couldn't deal with the erraticism of it, the undisciplined and stuff like that. And we had a huge success in Italy. (Speaking Italian) "El deo de negro," there's the black god of Spoleto, that was me. 'Cause I always dressed, I was always very this and I'm be da-da-da-da-da. And we had a big success. Speaker 2: The company [Dance Theatre of Harlem] had a big success-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Is that correct? Speaker 1: And the company was much smaller than it is now, but it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now how, how, what size was it? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: What size was it? Speaker 1: Oh God, twenty, twenty-five dancers. And then I went back on my own and I would take one or two dancers with me. Akiko Kanda, a beautiful Japanese dancer, she was in Martha Graham's school and company [Martha Graham Dance Company], and I took her as my partner and I went back. But what happens is that that's when I re- really got to know other people in the arts then what dance. And Gian Carlo Menotti, Samuel Barber, these were all the people that I was associating with through Spoleto. And Tommy Schippers [Thomas Schippers], so--I was, it's a different group. And there was, three were a lot of very wealthy people, ladies that gave the money and Gian Carlo was the best. And I, I would meet them and talk and be charming and stuff like that. It was phenomenal because they didn't know black people and he has, Spoleto was up in the mountains where the Borgias had been. And we would go walking in the street, it was really in the mountains. "Ah," and they'd drop down, and say, "Oh Madonna Negra (gesture)," they would, you know, they were all religious. I said, "Get up off your knees what are you talking about da-da-da-da-da-da." But it was my town or my city, my thing. Then Michael Cacoyannis wanted to make me a movie star. I said, "I'm really not interested, I wanna be a dancer da-da-da-da-da." Hans Vedder Hansen [Hans Hansen] wrote a symphony for me. All these things were done and I was like, not for me, no, don't like it, don't like. I just--I want to be a dancer and that's what I'm gonna be. And I get all these other offers and I did one movie, 'The Day the Fish Came Out' with Michael Cacoyannis. And he said, "Okay Arthur, you could do a ballet using the kids out of the hostels." I'd never been encountered with so much drugs in my life, those kids--hashish and stuff like that. And I was very (claps hands), "You're ruining your life and you're," that kind of thing, and they said, "Oh Jesus get him outta here." (Laughter) But I was very um (gesture). Story_ID: 578476 Speaker 1: The Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] had to be a symbol, right? Speaker 2: Had to be what? Speaker 1: A symbol? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It had to be a symbol, so you were, you're trying to prove that you can bring ballet to the black community, and so the, so you are, so anyone who is training under you is held to very high standards? Speaker 2: Right. And also I didn't charge, you know, fifty cents, a dollar, you know, it was reas- like Carol [Carol Crawford Smith], she said, "How much, fifty cents a week, jeez," 'cause they had no money. But I said you could work at it, you can do it, da-da-de-da-da-da-da. And then we were going to Europe. We would get designers to do the clothes, that's where I met Mrs. or Miss, our costumer, Zelda Wynn [Zelda Wynn Valdes]. And Zelda was fabulous. She taught for HARYOU [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited, New York, New York], which was a act, HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York], and she was training young kids to sew. She had about two thousand kids. I said I want that wone- woman to head my wardrobe department. And I said let's give these kids a skill so they can get a job afterwards. And so that's how we started everything. Same thing with the tech crew. The gu- one guy came to fix the doorbell. I said, "Young man, you wanna be a lighting person, have you've--." "I don't know." I said, "Well join Dance Theatre, you'll go around the world, you'll see." So everybody was--it was taken from inside. In the meantime, I decided I would--I said, you know Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], the best thing you could do, go back and find out the source where it all came from. Go to Washington [D.C.] or go to New York State Council [New York State Council on the Arts] and find out who's making the laws and how you can influence them. And that's what I did. And I joined the state department [U.S. Department of State], I got a job there and I would go to these meetings and these people, ah-ya-ah. "No, we can't give this, we can't." I said, "Pardon me, have you ever done a bus and truck tour." "No." I said, "Then you don't know what you're talking about, shut up." I, I've always been feisty. And I served for seven years on the arts council. I did it in New York City [New York, New York] at the Department of Cultural Affairs and New York State. And so I always felt I wanted to go where they're making the laws, getting the right things and when I realized in Washington nine-tenths of those people had never been to a ballet or a sym- symphony. This is the congressmen. So I said okay, I wanna do something. I said where the Calder [Alexander Calder] sculpture is, I said I wanna take that home from the mus- from the museum and I will do lecture demonstrations for the congressmen. So they get used to seeing the arts. And that's where I came up with all these ideas about the arts ignite the mind, they give you the possibility to dream and to hope. I said and anyone that doesn't have the arts in their life is living in a desert. All these things came out and it was quite fascinating to everyone to see this black ballet company come. And an evening we'd have a [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder ballet, Balanchine [George Balanchine] ballet, Jerome Robbins. So I would mix it up and we did a lot of nooks and crannies everywhere. Story_ID: 578477 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder's ballet, wasn't that 'Dougla'? Speaker 2: He did 'Dougla.' Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And then he did 'Dougla' then he did, what's the one about the voodoo, and I can't think of it right now, but it'll come to me. Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): 'Bele'? Speaker 2: 'Banda.' Speaker 1: 'Banda,' okay. Speaker 2: 'Banda' he did. Then he did one like a defile dressing and stuff like that, you know. And Geoffrey (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--I'm sorry go on. Speaker 2: And Geoffrey, you know, being very theatrical, "Hello, sugar lover." I said oh you're theatrical. The only time in my entire life that I can think of where I lost my cool, 'House of Flowers' [Harold Arlen and Truman Capote], there was a voodoo ceremony and I was sitting next to this drum. And I don't know what pos- it just, I went off, and I jumped up and started dancing in the middle of the thing with Geoffrey. I said what's going on in my mind, and I, but that's what I did, because it was very hypnotic. And then I remember the stuff from Miss Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] and I'd do all the Dunham technique things. And then Frances Taylor was fantastic. And when Dunham went to Paris [France], they had a dance at the Paris Opera [Palais Garnier, Paris, France]. She was phenomenal. And so it was always this give and take, going over and under and things like that. Alvin [Alvin Ailey] was doing his thing and I was starting on my thing which was Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York]. And so those were the two companies that were really climbing up and I said well fine. But I kept saying I want Balanchine [George Balanchine]. Everything I did I said gotta bring Mr. Balanchine and Madame Karinska [Barbara Karinska] to do the costumes. And Balanchine gave me all of his ballets free, and Madame Karinska's costumes, he gave that all stuff to me for nothing. He said, "It's very important, my dear, that you have it right, right music and right costumes." We were doing 'Swan Lake' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] (laughter). He came in and he started running down the aisle, "It's terrible, terrible, the rhythm is too slow." I said oh Lord. So Freddie [Frederic Franklin] and I said, "Oh Lord don't let him have a heart attack." But he, he saw in me an offshoot of what they were doing at New York City Ballet. Speaker 1: So he thought what he had done that you could replicate? Speaker 2: Coming on to me, right. Speaker 1: With some of the things that had inspired him. Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know, I think our 'Concerto Barocco' [George Balanchine] is more like the original should be. And Lorenzo [ph.], he says, "You know, when Dance Theatre made its debut on Broadway and the curtain went up and there was eight black girls in white," he said, "it was phenomenal." And that's where everybody, the pimps would come, the prostitutes would come, I mean everybody would come because it was the talk of town. Speaker 1: Well because it was, it's two things. I mean you made ballet exotic, and you brought the black experience into ballet? Speaker 2: Yeah. And I'm a good salesman. You know, I can sell. Story_ID: 578478 Speaker 1: I hear what you're saying about, you know, you're using like from the group or the festival in Italy for Spoleto (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, Festival of Two Worlds [Spoleto Festival dei Due Mondi, Spoleto, Italy]. Speaker 1: Right. That that had its own set of context which allowed you to do your touring [with the Dance Theatre of Harlem]? Speaker 2: It opened doors up and we were booked from that, you know. We did more international touring than anybody else. Speaker 1: So how, how much was--so what was a season for you, that's what I'm wondering? Speaker 2: What was a? Speaker 1: What was a season for you? Like how--wh- what was touring season? Speaker 2: Oh wherever we could get work. It was like a year but they were under contract and then we would do lecture demonstrations and master classes, and we hit nooks and crannies in America that no one ever knew existed. But it was a small company and we were developing and growing. And I remember we finally bought our lights, our own lights, and it was a snow storm, but we were upstate in, and it was snowing outside. I said, "All right (claps hands), we're gonna form a chain gang and we're gonna get these lights out da-da-da-da-da-da," and that's how we got the lights out of the bus into the theaters. And we would, it became our lives. But they all had social skills, they knew where we were going and what we would do is I'd appoint a dancer to be in charge. "We're going to this country, I want you to find out what the social things of that," and they would come and explain it to the dancers. And I was a stickler that we would behave and act accordingly. And then when we went to Russia, oh Jesus. That was amazing. Because they were, wha- how can I say it? They, they had never seen a black man do anything classic. When New York City Ballet went, I had a success like you can't imagine. I mean really it was phenomenal. And it wasn't until the end of the tour that one of the guys that was in char- he said, "Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], we wanna speak to you. Why don't you stay in Russia?" I said, "You mean defect from America and come to Russia?" I said, "No, no." I said, "I'll tell you what, you want me to dance here, contact Betty Cage and make exchange and stuff." They said, "No, no, no, no." They would like, they would've loved the idea for me to defect and go to Russia. I said no. And we, and I'm very particular about everything, and they put the lights up and we did a show and the lights were not right. I went back, I said, "Let me tell you something comrade, you see that hammer and sickle, I'm gonna take it down and I'm gonna chop your head off if you--." They call me Mr. Professional. "Oh no, no Mitch--." I said, "I know you love me like that, nyet." And Chabukiani [Vakhtang Chabukiani], the great dancer, I thought he was phenomenal. So we got to, to Tbilisi [Georgia], which is Georgia, where Mr. Balanchine [George Balanchine] grew up. And I said Chabukiani, I wanna see Chabukiani. And they say oh, there was this old man with gray hair and he was all wrapped up, they said that's Chabukiani. And he's coming out of retirement to dance for you. And so I went and they put me in Khrushchev's [Nikita Khrushchev] box, and they would dance, he'd stop and look like, is that o-, I go (claps hands). You know, the, you, the success that I had is something you can't imagine (simultaneous). Story_ID: 578479 Speaker 1: What I'm trying to understand, so really in a matter of is it four, the first four or five years of the company [Dance Theatre of Harlem] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we did everything, yeah. Speaker 1: --you have--you experienced tremendous success? Speaker 2: And the thing is, again I, I was maniacal about behavior, how to dress, how to act, what to wear, what to say and so we would assign dancers to study these things and when we get to the company you can't do this, you can't do that, we're going to Italy, ladies you gotta have the kerchief on your head, you can't go bare-headed into the church. We learned all of the social mores everywhere we went. And people were fascinated, 'cause they had not seen a black ballet company. And it, it was, I said okay I wanted to go back. I went, I went in '62 [1962], then I went back again in eighty-something and to Russia. Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Eighty-eight [1988]. Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988]. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988]. Speaker 1: And it really started earlier than that, '86 [1986]. And I, I went and I said I wanna meet the right people and they said, "Well, we will bring this--oh only Moscow [Russia] and St. Petersburg [Russia] is important." I said, "I've gotta go to Georgia where Balanchine's [George Balanchine] from, that's my teacher, my mentor, da-da-da-da-da-da." And so they took me to the KGB, I met everybody. And finally I said, "You know gentlemen, I can't, I can't bring my company here unless I go to Tbilisi [Georgia] and Georgia." And they say oh. They're the Russian mafia, 'cause they have all the food. I said, "I don't care what they are." And so they changed the tour and we did a thing in Moscow--in--in Tbilisi. It was such a success, people were scaling the walls of the theater just to get in the dressing rooms and talk and things like that. It was amazing. And I had already been to Russia with New York City Ballet. "Mitchell, Mitchell--," you know what I'm saying. And the--they really were fascinated about black people doing ballet. Then I ran into a lot of people there that had excommunicated and moved there in the '20s [1920s]. And I went to see the Bolshoi [Bolshoi Ballet] that's, I said, "That's a black girl. Look at that body, da-da-da." And her parents had moved there in the '20s [1920s] and she--they sent her to the Bolshoi and she studied. Speaker 2: That's true because a lot of artists went over there. Langston Hughes I remember was over there trying to make it ov-- Speaker 1: In the twent- it was amazing. Story_ID: 578480 Speaker 1: But it was such a success that they made money hand over fist. It was amazing, 'cause it was like a nov- not a novelty, but it was just very unique to see a black ballet company (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, when you say they made money hand-- Speaker 1: The Russians. Speaker 2: The Russians. Speaker 1: I negotiated my own contract. They said, "Oh we're poor country." I said, "I'm even poorer." And they said, "We don't have," I said, "Well no, no, you want me to come." I said, "I know how we treat the Russians when they come to America." My contract was bacon and eggs, fresh bread, that, that was all part of the contract we had to have three meals a day, what it should be, how it should look, da-de-da-da-da. And me jus- don't start. And it was amazing because we went, New York City Ballet went in '62 [1962], and we were there like in October through November. And at that time, there wasn't the interactive between Russia and America like it--and we didn't know what was going, so once you left Moscow [Russia] that was it. So one night we went to bed in these hotels, which was, you got to the hotel and on each floor was a woman with a key, and she would open the door to let you into your room, but you were not allowed to go visit anybody else on another floor. And they said--the state department [U.S. Department of State] said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], tell the people that you were--don't discuss politics because the room is bugged." And they stole things like stockings and underwear, it was, it was a mess, but it was. And I never had a success like that in my life, and I was going with Hannah Marie [ph.] the Royal Danish [Royal Danish Ballet] dancer and we'd go. They said, "Mitchell and Desdemona." They wouldn't let me pay for anything. I go to stores and stuff like that and I--Thanksgiving happened and, why am I forgetting all these things. Anyway, but, the Fulbright, Mrs. Fulbright [Harriet Mayor Fulbright] was there and we became good fri- to this day we're very good friends because of that. And I said okay, we go to bed, the next morning we hear all this hullabaloo. We look out the windows, there were tanks and guns, and that's when, when we went the Cubans were sending the boats to America and the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] said if they come in our waters we're gonna bomb them. So we all felt that we were gonna be thrown in jail. And so I said, "Oh my God, well how are we gonna get out?" So they had plan one, two and three how we were gonna get out and escape. And so we, you had to eat in the same room, sit in the same place, you know it was just very rigid. And things were much tighter than they are now. But it was amazing and also I fell in love with learning. I said, "Okay, today we're going to Hermitage [State Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg, Russia], and I want the best interpreter to explain and things and that," and it was a lesson. You always had to learn. When we went on tour, I always go to the museums. I would go someplace historic and make the dancers attend and then write a report of what they said to me. 'Cause they were my kids, you know. And they were beautiful I must say, but it was a big step. So from '62 [1962] to '88 [1988] that's when the gov- they asked me to come back. And the Bolshoi [Bolshoi Ballet] had been here, and what's his name, Vinogradoff [ph.] and the director from the Bolshoi, he went back and would talk about Mitchell and what they were doing 'cause it was late, much more advanced then what they were seeing. And so he said, "I'd like to have a convocation set up between Arthur Mitchell and from Geo- Robert Joffrey and sit down and talk to all the Russian teachers, choreographers and stuff like that." And then I took Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem] and they really, really treated us very, very well. And Cafe La Moma [ph.], we would go and there was no food. I said Georgia is the heart--they call it the mafia of Russia. I know what you've got and I want it. So we'd have bacon and eggs, fresh orange juice, then we had salads, then we had steak, we had al- she said, "How did you get that food," I said, "It's part of the contract." And I went to the meeting with the KGB and stuff, they'd say, "Oh we poor country." I said, "I'm even poorer." They said, "Oh we have no money," I said, "Neither do I." I said, "But I know what you get when you come to the west, and I want the equivalent." So I worked out a contract, it's the first contract ever had with Russia, they paid 50 percent of the cost. And I said yeah. Story_ID: 578481 Speaker 1: I mean how many numbers were in the school and the company [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York], what we were just talking about? Speaker 2: Yeah, well I can get you all that 'cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No but, no but say it. Speaker 2: --and, and the records have all this. Speaker 1: Right, but, but you, you started with two-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --instructors-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and thirty students. And then you had then, you said that the company went (unclear)-- Speaker 2: At, at that time the company would be twelve, sixteen, because we were getting money from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] and that was like trial by fire. You had to, you wanna girl or a boy, what is she gonna dance, how much is it gonna cost, what is it gonna be. I mean it was so fine-tuned that I had, we had to prove everything that we were doing. And the guy that gave, that gave the ten million [dollars] to Da- to Balanchine [George Balanchine], but his assistant was, oh god I now th- and she put me through the ringer. It got to be a joke with us, they said okay here we go. How much are you gonna pay the dancers, what does a costume cost. When is the rehearsal, how many hours, everything had to be broken out to the penny. Speaker 1: As they do in foundations a lot of time. Speaker 2: And but the Ford Foundation at that time and I went to McNeil Lowry [W. McNeil Lowry], he was head. I said, "Mac, I would like a grant to start a company." He said, "Well why," he said, "look at this--my desk, all these proposals. What do, why do you think yours is gonna work." I said, "'Cause I'm in charge and I'm learning what I learned from Betty [Betty Cage] and from Balanchine." So that's, it all helped. And then you see I had Lincoln [Lincoln Kirstein] on my side and Balanchine on my side. The secret to my success to this day is because of that. Aside from me just going up, I said I fi- Balanchine would give me costumes, music, didn't char- nothing. Speaker 1: Well I mean I think that, that was the secret--that was part of the secret, but I think the work, the work that came out of that was very fine work, I mean as a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yeah, I, I would say maniacal. I was crazed and people used to, they said, "The guy doesn't eat, sleep," and I said, I said "No," I said, "Now Alvin [Alvin Ailey], I don't want any more barefoot dancing, I wanna see toe shoes or ballet slippers." I mean it was just mandatory. How to makeup, you had to fix your hair, you gotta wear a bun. I mean detailed and it was just a force of nature to drive it, you know, and I knew what we were doing was, had never been done before in that sense. And people laughed at me, I said well fine, we're gonna get it. And then once we started being successful it worked to our advantage. The Ford, the Ford Foundation, they would take our report and make it part of their board meetings (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Their annual report. Speaker 2: And I said, you know, they said, "Oh it's a group of black dancers." I said, "No, it's a group of dancers that happen to be black." I said, "They're dancers first." Oh, and there was great discussions with New York City Ballet, they said, "We don't like to, Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] doesn't want to be referred to as a black dancer, he's a man that happens to be black that is doing ballet." These are things I fought for all the time, the unions, the music and the dance unions. The music, everything. And I being the typical Aries, I like a fight. So it didn't bother me. And but I would talk to Balanchine and Lincoln about this and Betty Cage was the company manager. And I, once I said, "Betty, why is this so hard?" I said, "I'm just trying to help and give these kids something." She said, "Arthur, if doing good were easy, there'd be more people doing it." And I always remember that. Story_ID: 578482 Speaker 1: So Betty Cage, so she was the company manager (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was the company manager at New York City Ballet. Speaker 1: Okay, at New York City, okay. So, so but in your core group, that's what I'm wondering, it's you, it's, it's-- Speaker 2: Mr. Shook [Karel Shook]. Speaker 1: Shook and who is working with the company? Speaker 2: Me, I, I did everything. Speaker 1: Okay, how many, how many instructors do you have? Speaker 2: Oh in the school, we had maybe three, four te- you know, 'cause I had something for the children and something that was older. But I would watch everything and if it was right, blah, blah. And Gilly [Gillian Lipton] would say, she's, well the early days of Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] it was like being in the [U.S.] Army. You should see--read the reports, da-da-da-da, da-da-da-da, this is structured, da-da-da. Speaker 1: So you have all that documented? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: You have all that documented? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's wild. Speaker 2: Remember you said, she said, "It's amazing, it's like being in a camp or something." No, if you're gonna be here, this is what you gotta do or act like that and do this. I said, "And you must act accordingly." I said, "People, your boyfriend, your girl- I wanna meet them." I said, "I don't like that person, I don't think they're a good match, drop them." Speaker 1: But you were--you had, you had a lot on the line to prove? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You, you were, you had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was successful because of the name, the career with New York City Ballet. And it was like, oh God there's a black man doing ballet and Balanchine [George Balanchine] likes him, and Lincoln Kirstein likes him and da-da-da-da-da. So all that kept coming to me and, and I took it re- very seriously and I always said, "This is nothing to do with me, it's for my mother [Willie Hearns Mitchell], it's for my people." I said, "And you've gotta act accordingly--" Story_ID: 578483 Speaker 1: What was your mother [Willie Hearns Mitchell] saying all of this? Speaker 2: Well my (laughter), there's an interview with my mother. She says, "Well I wanted him to be a doctor or lawyer." I said, "Ma don't start." But, and Dancer Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] is on 152nd Street. I bought a building down the street for my mother. And so they'd come by and the people say, "Oh wait we've gotta help them. Would you like something to eat, or would you like a sandwich, or would you like--." I said, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah," you know, that kind of stuff. It was very much an ownership of what I was doing. And then we got more publicity, articles and things like that. There are like five television specials, everyone did something on us. '60 Minutes' that was really fantastic, and he followed us to Europe. What's his name, Ed Bradley? He, and you, you can get--it's really fabulous, because he said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell]," he said, "like how are you making this work, what is the?" I said, "You work around the clock." And I would show them what I would do and break it down, and we would go to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]. And I'd say, "Show me the social dance," (gesture). I, if you slow those arms down you're doing classical ballet arms. I always did that and re- showed how it may start with one thing and ends up with the other. And they had never, these are thousand schools had never seen a black girl on the pointes. "Ah, she's on her toes." I mean they just couldn't get over it. And the ki- everyone's just fascinated and to see a company of beautiful, beautiful people and, and what's his name, Ed Shoya [ph.] said, "Well that's one of the requisites of getting into dance in Harlem [New York, New York], you have to be beautiful." No, it's how you become beautiful when you believe in yourself. And the churches, I mean it was just everything. Story_ID: 578484 Speaker 1: In all the years, I only had one negative thing happen. Because we would have, we're have twenty weeks and we'd maybe be off three weeks or five weeks or two months. And the company wasn't in and Mr. Gonsalves [Richard Gonsalves], he called me one morning and said, "Oh Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], I don't wanna upset you, but they broke in the school." I said, "What, what'd, what did you say. I'll be right there," and I went up. It was a mess. There was no money and they obviously got a child, 'cause we have skylights. They broke in the skylight, lowered the child on a rope, he then went and opened all the doors for them to get in. And when I saw that, and there was no money, they defecated and things on the boa- wall and stuff. And I said, and there was a woman on the corner who used to sell little hot dogs, you know the hot dog stands. "Sweetie, you spread the word that Arthur Mitchell's gonna get them (laughter)." I said, "You tell them I'm gonna get them but I'm gonna put their asses under the ground." And she said we- well that's where I learned of all the different fences in Harlem [New York, New York] where they were taking goods and stuff. And it, it, and I'd be going into places ready to fight. They'd say, "Who's that, he's crazy." I say, "You're crazy upside your head, that's what it is." And what happened, I--we got the building and I asked to meet the gang, the gang leaders. And I said, "Come here young man. I'm gonna put you in charge of the building and I don't wanna seen any graffiti." It became his building and that's something I learned to deal with people that way. And it became their building and I challenged them all the time. Then the park, and it's adjacent to the building, is where they have their basketball tournaments. So the guys came, "Oh Mr. Mitchell, we need some money to get some awards." I said, "Give me a budget." They said, "What do you mean a budget?" I said, "You will get what it costs, where you're getting money, and da-da-da-da-da." And they then went to one of the shoe places and they got a grant. And it was amazing, because it became a joke that, here comes Mitchell with those ballet dancers. And the girls were gorgeous. And the community started galvanizing behind us. They said, "Oh they're from Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York], nothing's gonna happen." They would watch and look and see, and this break-in to the building almost broke my heart. I said oh Jesus. And I saw this little boy. I said come here. He said, "Where's my comp-," not computer, whatever he--they had promised him. I said, "Come here kid. Do you know da-da-da-da-da, and tell me." He said, "Well the guys asked me to come in and break the panic lock to open the door so they can get it," and they were there for a whole weekend and stuff. In the meantime, there was this guy that was on drugs. Now I always talk about drugs. I said, "Let me tell you something people. Your instrument is your body. If anyone tells you to stick a needle in your arm, you say I can't do that, that's my instrument, I can't hurt it." And I, I mean this was my three year olds I'm preaching. And it got so bad, teachers would call say, "Mr. Mitchell a mother called me, they wanna vaccinate their child and she wouldn't allow it. She said, 'Mr. Mitchell said that my body is my instrument,' (laughter)," and they wouldn't let them be vaccinated. And I had to tell, it was that kind of impact that I had on people. And so it was really, it was like my family. And I grew up there on 152nd [Street], 151st [Street], 143rd [Street], so that was all my era [area]. Speaker 2: It's your community. Speaker 1: Yeah. And the church and I said, "Mom [Willie Hearns Mitchell]," I said, "I'll not give you another dollar," 'cause she was with the, the preacher's wife or the reverend's wife, and they give all this. I said, "Ma if you, if you give them one nickel of the money that I'm giving you, I'm taking it all back." And but it was--we became an integral part of the community and the community was really very proud of us. Story_ID: 578485 Speaker 1: How did you get the property? Speaker 2: It star- we were in Church of the Master [New York, New York] and I said oh God we need space. And the people that were the worst, we, were those old ladies in the church. "Oh that's the devil dancing," and that kind of foolishness. I said, "I've got your devil," but, you know. And so someone brought Mrs. Gimbel [Alva B. Gimbel] up and she said, "What do you need." I said, "We need a home." And I said one thing that Balanchine [George Balanchine] taught me, he said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], get a home and no one can put you out, own it." So that's when I started fighting to get money to have the building. And we're 466 [466 West 152nd Street, New York, New York], we've been there almost for fifty years. And they say, "He's doing a lot for the community, he's trying to help the young people." I went to the police, I went to the fire, I went everywhere. And they said, "He works around the clock da-da-da-da-da." No vacations. Sharon Williams [Sharon Williams Duncan] grew up on the same block that I grew up on. And so they said, "Oh God he's, he's maniacal, he has no heart. He wasn't--," I said, "Yes I have a heart, but I'm not gonna do it right now. This is what I want, it's gotta be correct. The papers have to be right, the di-da-da-da." And one of the things that the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], "Well Arthur, you were so busy developing the artists why didn't you invent and build administrators." I said, "You go back to Harlem [New York, New York] forty, fifty years ago, people were afraid to come to Harlem." I'd get somebody, they said, "Oh no, I don't want my wife coming up there, she's gonna be this or that. They're going," I said, "Oh shit that's," I said, "you're more likely to be mugged on 42nd Street then you was up at Har- then you are in Harlem." But there was a pride in what we were doing. Oh they're dancing on their toes. And I, we went to every elementary school, junior high, ever, then I'd make the kids go to the theater. It was called Arts Exposure. And I always went to their school and did a lecture demonstration. Then we would bring them to Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] to see a master class, then they would come to the performances. So we're building a constituency at the same time. Speaker 1: So you built--you got the building in what year? Speaker 2: We, we got the building, it had to be almost at the very beginning, about '62 [1962]. And then the Ford was very proud of what we would do, we became the role model for everything that was going on and McNeil Lowry [W. McNeil Lowry] and so, it was amazing 'cause the Ford--we became the darling of the Ford Foundation. Story_ID: 578486 Speaker 1: So you said that the school [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] grew to even a thousand students? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then the company grew to-- Speaker 2: Well the company would go anywhere between twenty-four, thirty, thirty-six, forty. Then I kept adding on, adding on, adding on. They said, I said, "I wanna do bigger ballets, I wanna have group things." And [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder would do something, Billy Wilson would do something, [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson. I mean every major black choreographer, not major, every major, Garth Fagan did a ballet for us. He said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], I've never done," but I said, "Well I'll work with you on it," you know. And so we had a repertoire of works by every black choreographer you could think of. Speaker 1: So I wanna talk about some of the, like what are some of your favorite of the ballets, like, I love 'Firebird,' but (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, okay. What I was doing with the dancers were, we were doing contemporary things like that and one day I said, you know, "This is not right. 'Cause if this is gonna be a classical ballet company, they've gotta do the classics." So I said, "It's gotta be logical." So I said, "What if we flip 'Firebird' and placed it in a mythical island in the Caribbean it would make sense for us to dance it rather than have putting on white face." And that's how I--'Giselle,' 'Creole Giselle' it's the same thing. And we did a study, 'cause in, in the quadroon balls, I always studied education wise. And I said now there was a free black society in the south that owned slaves. And I said there was a Madam Berthe, their lead, the mother in 'Giselle.' And I built every character in the ballet on the life of a real live person. And she was a slave, freed herself and she raised money and bought her daughters. So following all that I would do, and I, they said well 'Giselle,' I said but you know the days they had rapiers and the sword fighting. I said and then the quadroon balls they would tr- they would raise as Europeans. And mulatto, quadroon, octoroons and all that different levels, I studied all that to find out what was going on. And so it made sense and logic to me to do it. I was gonna, I wasn't gonna do white face, but I would do those about, we did 'Swan Lake' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky]. I said, "There're black swans, you just don't see them but there are." And they were, "Ah this and that," I said oh. And then I was bringing Freddie Franklin [Frederic Franklin] in all the time to teach the old Ballet Russes [Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo] things. And then I'd get Nijinska daughter [Irina Nijinska] came up and did 'Les Noces' for us. We did things Ru- in Russian. Lincoln [Lincoln Kirstein] said, "Arthur how did you get them?" I said, "Just the way you get anybody to, they must memorize it and do it or I'll throw them out." I was very like that. And then Balanchine [George Balanchine] gave me all of his ballets, which we did and I didn't pay for, and costumes. Story_ID: 578487 Speaker 1: How could you identify, like who was gonna be your principal dancer? Speaker 2: Oh well, ye- ye- yes. I, I would see somebody, I'd say, "Um, you're very good but you can't do that. You have to do," I'd give everybody a chance. But, then the racism came in, "He only likes the light-skinned girls." I said, "What are you talking about the light-skinned girls?" And, I'm, I said, "Sweetheart you've got legs like a piano, no." I mean I was very, very frank and I didn't care. And the thing is you got it on merit and how well you danced. Virginia Johnson was the lightest dancer we ever had, and she went to Washington Ballet [The Washington Ballet] and she was the darkest person in Washington Ballet. And but Lydia came from 125th Street and her, lived in a three-room apartment, absolutely gorgeous. Feet, leg, I mean, and in the meantime-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I was grooming them. Huh? Speaker 1: Lydia's last name? Speaker 2: Lydia Abarca. And even now I go around the country, "Oh, hi Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] we miss you, we miss your voice, we miss you're sayings." Yeah, I was famous, your stories touch my heart, it's not gonna happen. And I said, "No, if you work hard you will get, if you don't, you're not getting anything." Speaker 1: And you were also saying that a lot of the Alvin Ailey dancers were--came out of training from-- Speaker 2: Sarita Allen, she started at Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York]. April Berry, she's at Dance Theatre. The other one that, all of their, boys and girls all came to Dance Theatre if they wanted to get technique, then then switched over to modern dance. Speaker 1: And what did you--what did you see in Virginia Johnson? Speaker 2: A, Virginia had more training than most of the kids I had because she had been at The Washington Ballet for a long period of time. And her concept of ballet was to be pretty. I said, "No, no, no sweetheart, you gotta dance with some balls." And she kept working and became one of the finest dramatic dancers of her time. And I alway- and my men, we were famous for my male dancers. And I would say, "Come here young man, take your hand and put it in your da- you see you got some balls, dance like a man. I don't care what your personal life is, that's the way it's gotta be." (Laughter) And the rumor was is Arthur Mitchell's gonna get truck drivers and make them into dancers. I said, "Yeah, but he's gotta do it the way it should be." And so the, we would have talks, we would meet, you know, it was always a development. I said, "You're doing something that's much larger than yourself. Now if you can't be part of the team, get out." And I'm very frank, hurt a lot of people's feelings, but that's the way it was. I even went, the police station where they incarcerated my father [Arthur Mitchell, Sr.], I went and I got the police and made them supernumeraries in the ballets as extras. I said, "You gotta see what this is all like. This is the kind of discipline and structure you'd like to have in the police department." And then David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] was al- we, David, they all were in my corner. Story_ID: 578488 Speaker 1: It was very good, and I don't have the sequence of all the television specials. Speaker 2: Well there was, you had 'Giselle' that was, I wonder if that, that was--you had 'Giselle' that was on NBC in 1987. Speaker 1: Yes. I, we asked-- Speaker 2: And I'd like to know how that went? Speaker 1: --what's his name, (laughter), he said, all the women said he drugged them and go to sleep with him. Speaker 2: Oh, Cosby [Bill Cosby]. Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Cosby. Speaker 2: He was, he was the MC [master of ceremonies]. He said ballet--what. I said, I have sweaters that he gave me. He said, "Why aren't you dressed," I be get--and he said, Gazelle, instead of Giselle, he didn't know. And so I thought it would be a very good marketing thing to have Bill Cosby introduce it on television. Speaker 1: How did--how did that project come into be? Speaker 2: How did what? Speaker 1: How did the, the NBC-- Speaker 2: Oh very well, that-- Speaker 1: No, no, how did it come into being? Speaker 2: Again, I was always trying to sell everything that we were doing and 'Giselle' was a big success. So I said well we can make a television thing of it. And the idea, it was built on the South and how I built it on the different things in the black society so it made sense. Well we did it in London [England], they said, "(unclear). What, what were they drinking?" I said, "Mint juleps." Because it wasn't wine or beer. And I would find something to make it fit in there. And we had a, we had a success in London like you couldn't imagine. Speaker 1: With 'Giselle'? Speaker 2: Yeah, with everything that we did--'cause we did a lot of Balanchine [George Balanchine]. Speaker 1: So--okay, so London was good for you, the Soviet Union was good for you- Speaker 2: And Germany. Speaker 1: Germany and-- Speaker 2: All of our television specials were done in Denmark 'cause it's a government, a state's subsidizing government size. So we go the Danish Mus- Orchestra [Royal Danish Orchestra] to play for us. So we had to do it as a trade off because they would pay us, but then we would go there and tape, we'd be there three weeks, four weeks, taping. And then they said, "Okay we gonna sell." I said, "Well no, I'm not gonna pay you, I need this, I need that." And so consequently, all of our, our television specials were done abroad. Not PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] or Channel 13 [WNET-TV, New York, New York], too expensive. And so I always, I'm a good negotiator (laughter), you know. And then, and by this time having done things in the, with the government, the National Endowment [National Endowment for the Arts], I knew where monies were, how to get it, you know, and match it. Speaker 1: So funding, especially in the '80s [1980s], funding is abundant? Speaker 2: Yeah, well no, that's when we were most popular. Speaker 1: Right, but it was, but there was an abundance of money, that we won't-- Speaker 2: Yes. And all these things were happening, equal rights and stuff like that. And they said, "You know, why don't we give it Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], 'cause he's not a militant, he's not gonna, you know, do this, he's not gonna do that." And I would be very like, "Nope, nope. I want this," and everything was paid for. I didn't, it we, no money was absconded with. I did--I was maniacal about the books and the records of how we spent it, and Marcia Thompson from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], "Oh boy," she said, "You went five dollars over." I said, "Marcia, take it out of my money." That I have I, I've been a millionaire over, but I always put my money back into Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York]. Buy their clothes, pay for their apartments, going to school and all those sort of things like that to help, to help, to help. And I had to practice what I preached. Story_ID: 578489 Speaker 1: How did that feel to have that level of success? Speaker 2: How did it feel what? Speaker 1: How did it feel to have that level of success? You know because it's one thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh it was why-- Speaker 1: I mean first of all, we think about, first of all, how there's no even possibility of a black dancer. So there're two things that you from the time really, you know, from the '40s [1940s], you know, fif- no '40s [1940s], '40s [1940s] to that's forty years, '80s [1980s], you know, where you have done two things in sequence that people said were impossible to do? Speaker 2: Right. And then also Cicely Tyson was on my board, Brock Peters was chairman of the board when, Lincoln Kirstein was the chairman of the board and Balanchine [George Balanchine]. Then Balanchine, the only board of directors he ever served on his entire life was Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York]. I, I think he knew what I was trying to do and I think being, coming from Russia and having to go through what he, to be, he knew he always wanted to help me and I said okay. And then Lincoln, and I would go talk and fundraise. And then when we went to the museum, I, I kept learning how to raise money. And people would say, "Ah, oh here come," you know, Bill Cosby does if he, like if he's doing a show and I came he'd say, "All right everybody close your pockets here comes [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell; he's trying to get the money." I said, "Bill that's not funny." He said, "Well that's what you do." And but I always showed the records, how we made money, what we did, where we were going and we were traveling around the world like crazy. Story_ID: 578490 Speaker 1: Tell me around the time that, what is changing with, you know, the pull back in government funding for the arts. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's does, that doesn't have--not, is that the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years, that's not the-- Speaker 2: Is what? Speaker 1: That's not the Reagan years, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh Reag- yes. They liked me very much and Nancy [Nancy Reagan] liked me and he liked me, show biz. And the--we went to Russia in '60 [1960]-- Speaker 1: Well '62 [1962] and then '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: --and they were there and they called me. The state department [U.S. Department of State] said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell]," Raisa Gorbacheva fell in love with the company and me. So she said, "Who's, where did you get that girl that's doing 'Firebird'?" I said, "She's one of my dancers." "But she danced like she's Russian." I said, "No, the essence is the same." And so she--they were fascinated and so then, the Reagans came to Russia and the state department called me and said, "Arthur, you've gotta escort those two ladies, 'cause there's a lot of tension between them." So I'd have one on this arm and one on that arm. I said, "Oh that's a beautiful dress and yourself is very nice," that kind--diplomat--good diplomat. Speaker 1: But, but what I'm say--so that's the 1988 performance at the Palace [Winter Palace, St. Petersburg, Russia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. And then going into the '90s [1990s] and by that time Joffrey [Robert Joffrey] left and it was just Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem] and then Alvin [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. Speaker 1: So Joffrey left and came to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Because of fund- can you talk about the funding issue as it related to-- Speaker 2: Well, the thing is, Ruth Page is from Chicago and she was very wealthy, even when she was dancing, she would pay for the ballet. So we did ballets and Ruth would come and underwrite them. But we had very, very good--we always had very good houses, I mean in terms of audiences. And we always did something, 'Dougla' of Geoffrey's [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Holder], they loved 'Dougla.' But I would put it on with a Balanchine [George Balanchine] ballet or I would do, I'd mix it up. And why it's called the Dance Theatre of Harlem, not Ballet Theatre of Harlem, I said no, this is a evening of theatrical dance, gra- grounded in the classical technique. And so in one evening, you'll get a little bi- if, if you only like tap dancing, you may get something. If you like modern, you'll like something. If you like ballet, you'll like something. So consequently the putting the programs together I worked on that all the time. And I'd pass it by Mr. Shook [Karel Shook] or Maria [Maria Tallchief]. We'd go to Chicago and Maria was-- Speaker 1: Tallchief, she was, she became a staple of her own? Speaker 2: Yes, and she said, "George, Arthur's doing it. His dance is--." All this kind of deal, competition. But Ruth Page gave us money. And we went to the Auditorium Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] and we would sell out 'cause I, we would market things in another way, nobody else would market. I would go to the churches, I'd got to the black community and the Caucasian community. So that you got all these different pieces coming together to make it happen. Speaker 1: So what was your budget at the highest level? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I, I've got the whole thing for forty years, fifty years. And I said, "I gotta learn how to do this." And what had happened was, when we didn't have enough money in the very beginning I took twenty-five thousand dollars of my own money and I put it in. I said, "Now let me show you how you can take twenty-five thousand and make it into a hundred million." And then we did everything in house. We made our costumes, 'cause was saw towing--sewing and tailoring. The tech crew was fantastic and they built things, a sound studio, a traveling sound studio. They did the recording. I mean, it was everyone working together and I got a lot of people, technical people from the North Carolina School of the Arts [University of North Carolina School of the Arts, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]. I mean I was trying to find ways to make it happen. Speaker 1: So, but what was the budget at the highest level? Speaker 2: Oh, god I don't have it memorized, but I have, I have it broken up for every year. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The earned income and the unearned income I always kept those two separate and we did a lot of educational things. We went, oh the public school system. We'd go everywhere. And ten o'clock in the morning, eight in the morning, twelve o'clock we would do, and I said, "This is gonna make you a better dancer, come on dancers here we go, da-da-da-da-da-da." And, and that's why I taught because I knew they were tired. If they had four shows over the weekend, I'd say, "We're gonna take it easy now, but save it later for the performance and do this." How to make up, what, so then I would divide things into small groups so that the different dancers and tech crew would also teach. We'd go someplace, I'd said, "Vernon [ph.] show them how to do the lights, show them how to build (unclear) with this." So it was always a give and take. And everything we did. I always did something for the community. And that became our support. Story_ID: 578491 Speaker 1: So things started to wane and then Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York], like the other ballet theaters, started having financial problems? Speaker 2: Right. Well the thing is, Mary Hinkson, she said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], I don't care if you have a ten billion dollar deficit, keep them dancing like they're dancing, it's worth it." And I didn't have a Lucia Chase, I didn't have a Lincoln Kirstein. I, those, their monies were going to their companies so we kept trying to find. Now Mrs. Gimbel [Alva B. Gimbel] was fabulous. And she gave me the money to buy the building on 152nd Street. Speaker 1: That was, she, was it ten million I think? Speaker 2: She gave me a hundred and nine thousand dollars to buy the building (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was--building, okay. Speaker 2: And, but then her son, her family tried to say she was crazy 'cause she was giving all the money to this black guy up in Harlem [New York, New York] that was doing tap dance (gesture). And she went on tour with us. Speaker 1: I see. So they interceded in her name? Speaker 2: Yeah, after that and so the money got pulled back and then her family and her daughters and the children, they had other ideas. And they said, "Oh he's a benevolent dictator, he don't--he won't listen to anybody there." 'Cause no one could tell me what I should do with my company. And I did with the New York State Council on the Arts, Department of Culture [New York City Department of Cultural Affairs] with the--they, when David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] became mayor, they offered me the job to be that, Department of Cultural Affairs. They said, "Arthur, David--they would like you to run the whole thing for the city." I said, "Um, how much you gonna pay me?" I said, "It's not enough money." I said but, you know, I--my focus has gotta be Dance Theatre and this school. Then we started our street fairs. Everything that we started, now everybody is doing. Open houses, Nureyev [Rudolf Nureyev] would come, I mean I'd have every- I had everybody come up, Margot Fonteyn came by. Then we were getting television things to do also. And so it gave us visibility, but it was always a thing to raise money. Speaker 1: So that's why I was wondering how much you were having to raise a year? Was it (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't have it committed to memory right now, but I can give you all that stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just wondering about that 'cause, I mean so, 'cause I mean with a large company like that it takes? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well the largest group of dancers I ever had was sixty-five or seventy. 'Cause I would carry a company, then I'd carry apprentices to learn as, you know, experience. Story_ID: 578492 Speaker 1: What were the requirements of the company members (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Whether I thought you were a good dancer and you worked hard. And also-- Speaker 1: No but time, I mean, rehearsal time? Speaker 2: Oh, they would have class every morning. They would do five to seven hours a day and then you would stay extra if I wasn't pleased. "Oh we're tired," I said, "So am I and I've gotta watch this, why are you crying, I've gotta look at it, just do it." I was a benevolent, I really was a benevolent dictator. And I insisted on that and I made them adhere to it. And I said, "Did you go party last night, you look tired. Now you're supposed to be a fresh young company, you look like a little old worn-out woman, no." I mean that's, and I could talk to them on a street level. You know, I, no punches, I said, "No. You wanna be here, this is what you have to do." And then what broke my heart is when the dancers went on strike. I kept saying, "What are you striking for, you're getting, making more money than everybody else." "Well we wanna be like the white companies. We want," I said, "Oh please." It was--it--I didn't think I would ever get up from that because it was very hard. Speaker 1: It was, it felt, it felt like betrayal, right? Speaker 2: But there, this was all televised. And the unions turned on me, I mean, and we were in the street on 152nd Street and it was cold and ah, you, "You're not feeding." I said, "You look cold, here go get a cup of coffee." (Laughter) I mean, I was, and people were stunned. And I said, "I don't understand what they are striking for." "Well they feel that you're still treating them like children, you're not listening to them." I said, "Look, your story has touched my heart and that's the way it is, if you can't do it, go. But where were they gonna go to," you know. And they were paid well, I thought. And then what I would do if there was a tour, I'd call the whole company and the tech crew and I'd say, "Look guys, we're only making fifty thousand dollars, but to pay you by union rates it's gonna cost me a hundred thousand dollars," and we'd work out something with them, and I'd say, "Okay, I can't give you a free day now, but at the end of the tour I'll give you a, another day or another week," and things like that. So I, I was always bartering. And I don't--because the dancers then started going to take class downtown [New York, New York], but don't tell me what New York City Ballet's making 'cause we don't have that kind of money. I don't have a Lincoln Kirstein. And I said I don't have a Rebekah Harkness. These wealthy people that are putting everything into the company [Dance Theatre of Harlem]. Mrs. Gimbel [Alva B. Gimbel] was very good to me and, but then her sons tried to declare her insane. She was giving all the money to the, the black guy up there doing tap in Harlem [New York, New York], and that's not true, a hundred and nine thousand dollars, kidding no. She would go on tour with us. Story_ID: 578493 Speaker 1: And then after that we got Judith Peabody and Miss Peabody was fantastic. And she'd come all made up with the jewels and the clothes and stuff like, but I loved Judy, she was (gesture). And she said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], you do everything." I said, "That's how it's getting done." I said, "I can't hire, I'll go do the lights, I'll do this, I'll fix the costumes." And they would go on tour with us and see what it was like. And they, they supported me and the company. And Judy brought the social aspect. See like I told Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] now, you need a social lady that all the ladies are gonna listen to her or listen to them. Kitty Carlisle Hart [Kitty Carlisle] was very much in my corner because I served on the New York State Council of the Arts. And then in Washington [D.C.] then Mrs. Reagan [Nancy Reagan]. I, I knew all the ladies and 'cause I said the best way to do it is get the ladies 'cause if they want it, it'll get done, 'cause the men were not interested in the arts. Speaker 2: That's a shame. Speaker 1: Hey-- Speaker 2: That, that day, that day sort of has left in some respects, you know, but, but the women a lot of times-- Speaker 1: But it, it's the woma- you know, the soc- like what they're spending now for models and who's gonna where what, it's ridiculous. But the ladies, they like it and you gotta say that's what you gotta have. And then there were other women that didn't like 'cause they wanted to be the Queen Bee and I said no, no, no, no, no. Judy, I love Judy da-da, and Judy was very good friends with Nureyev [Rudolph Nureyev], then she was very good friends with [HistoryMaker] Jessye Norman, and she gave these soirees at her house and that's where you met all these rich people. And they said, "Oh there's [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell," yeah. I said, "So." "Oh, you dress so well." I said, "I was a star before I became Dance Theatre of Harlem, and I was known for my clothing." We, we went to Spoleto [Spoleto Festival dei Due Mondi, Spoleto, Italy], I'd say, "Oh I want two dozen sweaters made, they," and they'd make them for nothing. And then Gian Carlo [Gian Carlo Menotti], he wanted to build an opera house in Harlem [New York, New York]. He said, "Your people don't want it." I said, "What do you mean they don't want it?" I said, "They've gotta be paid." And by that time, we slowly built our own orchestra. And so we got the minority musicians to play. And that I would go to the musicians' union. I said, "Well let me tell you something guys. How many people are giving black musicians a job? We are. So I want this," you know, you have to go in and bargain with them and I, and I can be a trip- a fierce bargainer when it comes to it. I said, "Look what you're getting out of this." And we used to have rehearsal with sixty musicians because to get into a symphony or a major orchestra you had to have that training. So they would come and be with our group for three years and they got into union. That was the other thing that we did, is I got all the unions to open the doors to hire black people. And I knew all of them, 'cause I knew their fathers from City Center [New York City Center, New York, New York] with Balanchine [George Balanchine]. "Hey Mitch, how ya doing?" I said, "Fine." He said oh, he put it, they said, "You're an honorary Irishman." They liked me and they saw how hard I worked. But they, I would, they would then talk at the union about giving me the opportunities and--I said, "All he's doing is moving a chair and we're paying him fifty thousand dollars, no." They say, "Oh yeah, give it to Mitch, yeah Mitch." Story_ID: 578494 Speaker 1: I mean this is really the precursor to, to the Harlem [New York, New York] today and to opportunities that would open up? Speaker 2: Nothing is happening, nothing is happening. And the thing is-- Speaker 1: Right, but Scott [Scott Stearns] is going (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I would get the churches, I'd get the social groups, all those. Charlie [ph.], Charlie, his wife, the Dolls [ph.], they call them the Dolls and they went every Christmas and gave out a turkey. I said give me the money, you know. And then the more European tour you could do the more impact it had here in America. Speaker 1: In America 'cause you got recognized abroad? So-- Speaker 2: And ju- so it was always a bartering, getting services and money or not money for service. And then like I said, I want people, Marian Anderson, I want Mar- I said they've got to know the great black people. So I spoke, I met Marian Anderson, I went to her house, we talked and I said, "You know Marian, I'm doing a new ballet and I'm taking the Bible, I'm re-writing it but I want you to do it." She said, oh God she's fabulous, the voice, the way she talked. And she would sing, she would talk. Leontyne [Leontyne Price], I mean I always had the classic artists working with us and they were very proud. Lena Horne, loved to dance. And they respected the fact of what I wanted was to be the best, but you had to work in order to get it. Speaker 1: Well all of them, the- their lives were just like that? Speaker 2: And you say but there's never the, they, I never took advantage of anybody and we started doing Harlem Homecoming. The first one, the co-hostesses were Leontyne Price and Lena Horne, they were the co-hostesses. And we, the lowest Victoria [Loew's Victoria Theater, New York New York] at 125th Street we covered re- three thousand seats with four pieces. There's pictures of this when she's all smothered in all these stuff. We'd go and we'd fix it up. Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York], they said, "We love your company [Dance Theatre of Harlem] come. Your people are nice and they're friendly and da-da-da-da-da-da." They all liked it very much. And then I always did something for children. And I said I want these kids to come into a theater and get the magic of what they're seeing. So we started doing open houses, open dress rehearsal 'cause they didn't have money to buy tickets, so I go- I worked it out with the unions to let them come to the dress rehearsal. Story_ID: 578495 Speaker 1: So you know you start getting significant honors, you know, I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I've gotten (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the top, top honors, I looked, I mean I'd just like to talk about two, one is the Kennedy Center [Kennedy Center Honors]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Which was 1993 and then followed by the MacArthur Genius Fellow Award [MacArthur Fellows Program]? Speaker 2: Okay, when I got that in 19- I was the youngest person ever to get the Kennedy Center Honors. And I said okay, and I told them, I said, "We're a ballet company, I've got to do something on pointe," so we did 'Concerto in F' of Gershwin [George Gershwin]. We, we set on pointe. Then we got nominated for Emmy's [Emmy Award] and because--and then Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] became our home even more so than in New York [New York], because it was on a regular basis. And then we started an educational program there which last year, after eighteen years, they closed it, you know. And but we'd bus the kids in, the kids would come-- Speaker 1: So were you working with George Stevens then? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, George Stevens, Jr., not the father. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, but they say, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] would you come this week to [U.S.] Congress, would you come and do this, da-da-da-da-da-da." I said, "But you've got to build your community and build your community and let them see." And so what we did is, always the dress rehearsals you'd see a thousand kids in there, two thousand kids, free--just, 'cause they'd never seen this kind of thing before. Story_ID: 578496 Speaker 1: So I wanna ask you, so you giv- you gave your blood, sweat and tears-- Speaker 2: I gave what? Speaker 1: Your blood, sweat and tears-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] and it was all for love of community-- Speaker 2: And, and the dancers, I really, really loved them. They were my kids and I would tell them how to dress, how to walk, talk, don't get this, don't party, you know, it was just everything. I said, "You are special," like Martha Graham says, her dancers are the angels of God. I said, "If you're gonna be a angel you better carry yourself accordingly." And then also we went to Europe and you know, it was nice, went to Japan, China. Everywhere we went it was very, very good. What happened was that we went to China in 1980 and this was before things were going on and so I invited the Chinese to come to the school 'cause they wanna, the wardrobe, how we made the cos- all that kind of stuff. And so I said okay. So I went and I taught some classes over there and that was 1980. Two thousand [2000] when they signed the cultural agreement with China, I go and they got, "Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], Mr. Joo [ph.], your student, I remember everything you taught me." 'Cause it was, they just weren't accustomed to that. And, and the, our repertoire was totally different than anybody else's repertoire. England was like our second home. It, the English just went bananas and the costumes would be on the plane and the plane would go, what's the English, the costumes were sent to another country. So I would go to the Royal Ballet, say, "Guys we're in trouble. You have to loan me costumes so we can do the performance." They said, "Here he comes again, he's begging for something this time." I said, "Well no, I'm just trying--." "We help you, you help me." And the West Indian community (gesture) they loved it. They said, "We never had anything like this and da-da-da-da." It was really amazing. And we, and then Margot Fonteyn adopted us. And she did a television series, 'The Magic of Dance.' The only American company in it was Dance Theatre of Harlem. And she would come by, she came by the school and worked with the kids and stuff like that. But it was always this thing to help and make it better. And then we brought a lot of English kids to America and they worked with Dance Theatre. And the English arts council [Arts Council England], we got the first grant from the English arts council that was ever given to a foreign company. They said he's doing more for our communities here. So the kids would come and study and they would dance. And going back to Madame de Neliva [ph.] years ago, I got to know all the primas. And they said, "Oh Arthur, it's so wonderful, da-da." So they would, they would talk and they would help. So we'd get money and I would make sure that they paid for everything. And now Alvin [Alvin Ailey] was coming up but he was doing modern dance. So I said no, this is ballet. But our repertoire was exciting, because Balanchine [George Balanchine] fell out with the English, so they hadn't been to England in fifteen years. So they said, "The one way we will find out what was going on in America, is if Dance Theatre come and show us what it should be." And I was very religious, I said were (gesture). And pep talks, I would tell the dancers, "Da-da-da-da-da-da. This is what we have to do and now there's only X amount of dollars. I can meet the union rule, but I can't do anything extra or if we have overtime, I'll do it on another day at another time and stuff like that." So it was just constantly sharing. Story_ID: 578497 Speaker 1: When the company started to have increasing financial problems, how did that affect you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we had a, we always would get deficits and it's what-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But when the deficit got to $2.5 million, that's when everyone turned and said, oh. I said, "What do you want me to do," I said, "that's what it costs." And I said, "If you want quality you've gotta pay for it." And so it caused a problem. Then there was a very, very, I'm not gonna call her name, wealthy lady, and she decided she didn't like me and so she started to do a, to get me out. And they asked me to leave Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] in 2010. No severance, no health pa- nothing. And I got so depre- I kept saying this is insane, this is my luck 'cause I thought my entire life would be spent at Dance Theatre of Harlem. So I said, "Um," so I said, "If you don't want me here I'll leave." And so now we're beginning to, they want me to come back, I said, "Why, you threw me out and now you want me to come back because the company is having problems." And the school has gone down. I said, "No." I said, "Every brick in that building is part of my DNA." And I was building a cultural corridor in Harlem [New York, New York], 152nd Street. And I said, "You know, the, every, there's everything in Harlem, but there's no cultural corridor, not on 125th Street." And so I was trying to do that. So we bought the two buildings across the street, we go--amazing. I would work with the city and I said, "Okay, what's the city price to get that building," and being a not-for-profit we could get it for that or we could get it for this. And Percy Sutton was very good to me. And he said, when he became the borough president he said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], what do you want?" I said, "We need a home." I said, "But I, I can't compete with wealthy landowners to buy," he said, "Okay." He made a statute that the property could only go to a not-for-profit organization for not-for-profit use. And that's how I got those buildings. Now they're gone, but that's it. Speaker 1: But you know I want, well you--they're, they're gone because of the financial problems where they had to be sold right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I, I'm a founder, I have to say just to inject, and I you know, the thing of having founders-- Speaker 2: Yes, well we just got rid of Eddie Villella [Edward Villella] from Miami City Ballet. They just got rid of another di- director that started something and the board says, "Oh we need young people, we need this, we need that." I said, "Well he's the founder." And even now, people can't underst- see no one knows the story of why I'm not at Dance Theatre. I never said a word. I wouldn't do any newspaper things and stuff like that. I said, then I asked Virginia [Virginia Johnson] would she take over. It's not for her. She was a lovely ballerina, but she's not a director. And the school giving scholarships and we brought a lot of kids from the islands, England and stuff like that. So we kept giving to other countries, see so I can get the bookings in the country. And we were representing America going around the world. Story_ID: 578498 Speaker 1: What do you want to see happen with the Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the thing it's very hard for me to think in those terms, but I, the arts as I said are, must be an integral part of people's lives. And I don't mean tap dance and African, we can do all that. And but the eclecticism of what our repertoire was very different because we had the Ballet Russes, we had Balanchine [George Balanchine], so the combination of those two things alone gave us a repertoire that no other company had. It's one of the best repertoires in the world. And the Russians couldn't believe it, they just say, "Oh, we wanna dance like that." I say, "Hey, eat your heart out." Speaker 1: But how, but it's the--but the creativity that formed that is what is the genius of it. It's the-- Speaker 2: I between--I'll be hon- I don't know if she has it. Speaker 1: No I'm saying, that's what you created? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right, that's what you created. So my question is what do you want your legacy to be? I--and I talking about-- Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think in those terms, I say it is what it is. I was the first black male dancer. Balanchine did roles for me. Lincoln [Lincoln Kirstein] did things for me, but it took me until this year that I'm getting over the hurt of what they did to me by putting me out. Speaker 1: I understand. Speaker 2: And now, they're all coming ba- could you come ba-, I said, "You must be out of your mind." I said, "Your, you have no board of directors, they have no money but a lot of mouth, get rid of them." I said, "You need some social people like a Judy Peabody [Judith Peabody] or Mrs. Gimbel [Alva B. Gimbel] or something like that, that can get money." And she goes once you have the social aspect, all the ladies and the other people will fall inside, fall- follow suit. Story_ID: 578499 Speaker 1: Most of my dancers, even now, have their degrees, 'cause I made them go to school. I said you gotta do something when you can't dance. Speaker 2: You've touched a lot of lives. Speaker 1: And so it's, and we can do our lecture demonstration in four or five different languages. We can do it in Russian, we can do it in Spanish, we can do it in English, and we would go to a community and do it in a foreign language. I mean they were my dancers, but I said, "No, no, you, you, we're going to Barcelona [Spain]. I want you to do the lecture demonstration in Spanish." They said, "No one has ever done that." They said, "You're the only company that comes here and respects us and do it the, the way we know it," okay. And Balanchine [George Balanchine], you know, having Balanchine and Lincoln Kirstein was the coup. And even now, I went to Russia three, three years ago, and why I went back, they still revere me. "Ah he worked with George Balanchine." And because see Balanchine left before the revolution so they don't know what he's been doing and how to do it, and they are still very fascinated by it, and that I worked with him on a one-to-one. You know, and when New York City Ballet went to Russia, the dancers said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] sit with Mr. Balanchine because he's very depressed, he's very upset. He likes you," and I said, "Fine." So we sat on the bus together and we'd talk. And it's yes, yes, yes. And when we got to the airport in Russia, he says, "Oh the, Russian is coming back and da-da-da-da." And he said, "Oh Mr. Balanchine aren't you glad to be back to your homeland of record." He says, "No I'm not Russian, I'm Georgian." I said, "Mr. Balanchine, we just got here, you can't (laughter)." He had to leave the tour that's how upset he was and go and then come back and join us. He said, "Oh Arthur you can't imagine what this was like." He said, "You see that house, Madame--that's her house and now they got twenty families in there." He doesn't like the Russians or the Bolsheviks. And but they love the company [Dance Theatre of Harlem] and they kept saying, but they have the technique, they have the line, they've got the--Lydia Abarca is one of the great ballerinas of all times. They still ask about her now, McCarva [ph.] she says, "Where, where's Lydia?" I said, "She's married, got three kids now." But she was fabulous. 'Firebird,' no one dances 'Firebird' like Stephanie Dabney. And, and it's, but it's very hard, I know what you're asking but it's, I'm talk--it sounds like I'm talking around, but when those kids, like 'Serenade' of Balanchine, when that curtain goes up and all those girls with the different cues in that blue, you go ah, it's so beautiful. I say eat your heart out. And so we everyone knew what we were doing and why we were doing it. I said you won't get rich being a dancer, but you will look back in history and you can say I helped make that happen, and that's how everyone understood everything. It's very practical, you know. And aside with all this, I'm very pr- the National Endowment [National Endowment for the Arts], I was on for seven years, and I'd go and they had this rich person and that, and they'd say, "Oh blah, blah, blah." I'd say, "Have you ever done a bus and truck tour?" "No, what's that?" I said, "Then shut up 'cause you don't know what you're talking about. You may have a few Levis, you may have some money, no." People were stunned, but also taken aback. And I worked with the Kennedys. I worked with the Reagans, I went with everybody, even the Bushes, even Bush, Jr. [President George Walker Bush] and the father [President George Herbert Walker Bush], I worked with all of them. But like, but they couldn't. They always wanted to know how did you know that? It's just common sense, two and two makes four, not ten. And they said, "Well how do you get these kids?" I said, "I'm teaching them how to sew. I'm teaching them the aspects of, to do lightening- lighting, giving them a skill." And so that, I mean, it was always developing from within. And there were some dancers that I got angry and I said, "Well look, leave, if you don't like it leave." And then Balanchine gave me all of his ballets for nothing, free. And Madame Karinska's [Barbara Karinska] costumes, I mean you're wearing a Karinska cos- do you know what that cost, and he gave. He said, "You know, my dear, I'm not gonna do that ballet anymore you can have the costumes." Speaker 2: You see, that showed his profound love for--and respect, both of them (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. He, he and his wives loved me, not loved me liked me. And Tamara Geva, "Oh Arthur, would you take me out," I, the press likes me. I said, "Fine." "Would you dance with me?" I said, "Yes I'll dance." I said, "Now my feet hurt, I'm going home and go to bed." I said, "Because you can, people can sit here and party and drink and fall down, I can't do that." Story_ID: 578500 Speaker 1: Well you say you're coming to terms with that, you know, which anyone, some people couldn't even come to terms in that period of time? Speaker 2: Come to terms with (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, with the hurt, you said with the hurt? Speaker 2: Yeah, it took me four years to get over it. Speaker 1: But I mean, some people could not even, they may, might not ever-- Speaker 2: And I'm very much a loner and I, I like myself. I said I don't mind being alone, I enjoy myself. And if someone doesn't like it, that's their problem. Speaker 1: But I want to ask you, aside, I mean I know you made a significant contribution to both the African American community, to the dance in- the dance community both internationally and to the world. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I want to know, just when you look at the Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] and its book of work, it's, it's dazzling. Speaker 2: It's amazing. Speaker 1: It's amazing and it's dazzling, and I just, maybe (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it's gone down since. Speaker 1: But, no but (laughter)-- Speaker 2: And they got the wrong people in charge. And like the boys. I said, "Let me tell you, young man come here. Patty [ph.], Maxine [ph.] and Laverne [ph.], you're three men, I don't care what you do in bed, on stage you dance like a man. And that's how it was, if you can't do it, don't come." Speaker 1: But--I know we have to change, okay this will be the last, this will be--but, okay. Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], we have to have an agreement (laughter). Speaker 2: We what? Speaker 1: We have to have an agreement. I--this is the, what you need to--Balanchine [George Balanchine] and-- Speaker 2: Kirstein [Lincoln Kirstein]. Speaker 1: --Kirstein, they were not, they were, they were very helpful to you in many, many ways, but they were not your artistry. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I've built everything on the Balanchine technique. Speaker 1: No, no, but I'm telling, but it's what you added to the Balanchine technique. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Okay. Speaker 1: And, and just let's hold on and I need you to talk about that because I don't mind, it's fine that you give them props, you know, I mean they were profoundly given the times, I mean there're two things. One your career within, that he wro- wrote the ballet ['Agon,' George Balanchine] specifically for you and also that he, because running a company is not that easy. Speaker 2: Well but you see, I was using New York City Ballet as the model. Speaker 1: I know, but I'm say- I'm trying to get to--okay, I'm trying to get to. First of all, okay, first of all when you look at Ballet Russes and the bo-- Speaker 2: And what? Speaker 1: The Bos- Boso-- Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Bolshoi [Bolshoi Ballet]? Speaker 1: Bolshoi. Speaker 2: Oh the Bolshoi, right. Speaker 1: A lot of times it was state, I mean government supported. There was--it was almost like serving in the military. So there's a different kind of thing, you're not saving lives, okay with that. Then in the regular ballet, I can't say there's a thing about saving lives, it's more the discipline, I mean the discipline and the artistry. You did discipline-- Speaker 2: You need to talk to Carol [Carol Crawford Smith], 'cause Carol said. Speaker 1: No I need to talk to you (laughter). Speaker 2: She said no one has done what you've done. Speaker 1: No, no, no, but I need you to talk about, let me just say. So you have the discipline and the artistry. You have creativity, you've brought in two, you've brought in--you almost, this is what I'm thinking. You brought--I mean because lot--[HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham is the founder of black dance in this country. Okay, so, but you took it-- Speaker 2: To another level. Speaker 1: --you took it to another level, but you're not articulating that in a way. Like there has been nothing in this interview that has talked about how you approached, you know, what, what would qualify even if you have other choreographers, what would qualify to be showcased within your repertoire? Speaker 2: Well because I built it on things that I liked and what I knew about (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But--bit can you tell me, can you articulate that? Speaker 2: Well the thing is, you know, they invited me out to Hollywood, I went out there. I said, "No guys this is not for me. I can't sit by a pool. Let me go back to New York [New York]." Speaker 1: No, no, we already went over that. I'm gonna be mean (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, but the thing is I'm very proud of who I am and what my people can do. Speaker 1: But--- Story_ID: 578501 Speaker 1: When you look at a Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] piece, signature piece, one what would qualify, you know, like what will qualify for that. Because otherwise you could say that, you know, there's no difference between you and Alvin Ailey or [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no there's a vast difference. Speaker 1: Well that's, okay. Speaker 2: A vast difference. Alvin Ailey is a modern dance. The company now is looking more balletic 'cause Robert Garland's taking people with ballet training. And-- Speaker 1: Now who were you looking at? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Which company you said? Speaker 2: Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. Speaker 1: Right, right. No, but I'm saying, what was special, you've got to tell me-- Speaker 2: Well, to see the people dancing Balanchine [George Balanchine], dancing the classics. Speaker 1: Am I, am I not asking it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): (Simultaneous) I think you're trying to ask him to define the character of his artistic direction. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): To give a description of what motivated your artistic direction (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Well because I was with New York City Ballet. It was one of the greatest companies in the world. Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): Well you didn't just do what Balanchine did-- Speaker 1: Otherwise you would've-- Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): --you added to it. Speaker 1: Right, and it's what you added to that was your distinct-- Speaker 2: Well see because I-- Speaker 1: Because you could've done that, you could've just taken and said I'm gonna move New York Ballet uptown and we're gonna be the same-- Speaker 2: No it was very important that I go back to the community where I was born and where I came from that they would help. That is, everything you see that I have written or I've been talked about, I wanna go back to my community and give those kids the opportunity. Speaker 1: No, but you not only gave them opportunity, you created a new art form within the aspect, and I'm trying to understand. Speaker 2: Right, right, okay. Speaker 1: What, what qualifies? Speaker 2: Well the thing is it's, it's not easy, but its saying either you hit the high C or you don't hit the high C. If you can't meet that standard, I don't want you. Speaker 1: But what was the high C? Speaker 2: Technique, repertoire, dancing what you have to dance, but of a certain level that is universal. Again, I kept using what Balanchine used, that's what I would do. Maria Tallchief, I use those dancers as my role models. Now I love Katherine Dunham and I love Josephine Baker, she was the queen. After she went to Europe and she said, "I'm embarrassed about the early days when I was used to do all the little things and stuff like that." But the woman was special. Story_ID: 578502 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, 'Firebird'-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How, how long did it take, is 'Firebird' your creation? Speaker 2: No, it's John Taras'. Speaker 1: It's John Tar- so when you were working with, I mean who gave the idea of-- Speaker 2: Well, oh John Taras came to me. He was ballet master for New York City Ballet. He said, "Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], I've got an id- I wanna do 'Firebird'." I said, "That's fabulous." I said, "We need something like that, but you know what John, let's take it and place it on a mythical island so black people can dance it." Speaker 1: So that's what I'm saying. Speaker 2: I said don't put it in Russia and I'm not gonna put any white face on. Do it that it makes sense for Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem] to do it. Speaker 1: So that is the point. So it wasn't, he didn't come with it fully? Speaker 2: No, he came with to, to do 'Firebird.' But I worked with him in New York City Ballet. It's like, he's the one that said, "Arthur, you know, 'Concerto Barocco' [George Balanchine]," I worked with Balanchine [George Balanchine] in the '30s [1930s], he heard Hazel Bry- yeah, Hazel Bryant play it and that gave him the idea to do it as a classical ballet. 'Giselle,' I kept saying, "You know, Mitchell, you're cheating these dancers, you're just doing contemporary things. Until they dance the classics, they will never be except- even now, you know." Speaker 1: But (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): (Simultaneous) It was not just the classics it was-- Speaker 1: But 'Giselle'-- Speaker 2: (GILLIAN LIPTON): --the classics transposed. Speaker 1: --you put in a whole, you put it in with a whole different story line? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, yeah, I, I put it, I put it in a situation that we, as black people could dance it but not put on white face. Speaker 1: Okay, but see what I'm trying to say to you (laughter), okay, we're gonna end soon. But what I'm trying to say to you is that what people are gonna be interested in-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: No, no, no. Listen to me, okay Mr. Mitchell (laughter). What people will, what people are gonna be interested in is how you did that. Like how you, what creative mind is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that's-- Speaker 1: You could've said, you could put it in a, I don't know, a bordello or you could put it on 140th Street. Where you, I mean, that is what people are gonna be interested in. Speaker 2: But I read. I mean I love to read, I know history. I go and see and I say that's good. But at the same time, what will make it better if we dance it. You've gotta meet that standard. Speaker 1: Okay, but what is your creative process? Speaker 2: There's no creative process. If we're gonna do 'Giselle'-- Speaker 1: No, wait a minute. Speaker 2: --you have to really work your butt off to do it correctly. Speaker 1: Mr. Mitchell. Speaker 2: And if it's not good, we're not gonna do it. Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Mitchell, what is your creative process, because, think about this. Speaker 2: Okay, you're, you're trying to find out what I would like to do? Speaker 1: No. I'm not, not what you--I'm trying to understand how you did what you did? Speaker 2: Because I was-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I'm like poss- it's like a crazy person. Speaker 1: I know, but when, when would you get your ideas, would they be late at night? Speaker 2: Oh okay, right now something I've talked about for years, is I would like to have a company that I get the best dancers from around the world and it's gonna be called Noah's Art. And I'm, I've been talking about this for years. And I said I want Chinese, I want black, I want white; but they will work together and tour the world and show that regardless of race, class, creed or color, it's the quality of what you do that's most important. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Noah's Art, not Ark, Noah's Art. And in that process, you will have the best of every race, class, creed or company, it can be ten dancers, it could be twenty dancers, twenty-five, but it represents everything and that they will do the best quality dancing that everyone can see it. And this is what, people get very fer- nervous when somebody else is coming in to do it. I said why, that's what we have, you have to keep up to that standard. We'd to to Ru- the Russia says, "We wanna dance like them," they point to some little black kid. I said, "Well what can I tell you." Speaker 1: That's my point. That's my point. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: That little black kid you created (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. Well, give him the skills in order to be successful. Speaker 1: No, no, no, but you created that? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And I loved ba- three, my bests are three year old. Story_ID: 578503 Speaker 1: But tell me which works you're most proud of? Speaker 2: I say 'Firebird,' I say 'Giselle' [sic. 'Creole Giselle']. 'Dougla' [Geoffrey Holder] I love 'Dougla.' 'Concerto in F,' I did. So each choreographer that I asked was adding something to the mix to make the company very unique. Speaker 1: So when you were working with the choreographer, how much back and forth did you do? Speaker 2: Oh well, if, I watch all rehearsals and I said, "You're going the wrong way, you're not helping the dance--you know, no, no, that's your idea, my idea is this." And I give them carte blanche to do what they have to do, but if I think it's going the wrong way, I won't do it. Speaker 1: So did you fallout with any of your choreographers? Speaker 2: Did I what? Speaker 1: Fallout with any of your choreographers? Speaker 2: No. Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder's not speaking to me, I don't know why. But the thing is is that, he wanted only black dancers to be in 'Dougla.' I said, "Geoffrey the world isn't that way, we've got white people." "Well they put body makeup on." I said, "We don't have time to do that Geoffrey, no." And I said, "I'm giving you an opportunity to do something you've never done before." "Well I wanted to wear a hundred-foot trail." I said, "No, we can't get around the stage, you're gonna step on it," and I studied root lighting with Gene Rosenthal [ph.]. I said, "Gene, what is the best color for me, da-da-da." I said, "Okay, Roscoe [ph.] something, something, something," I said, "don't put pink, it makes you look ashy." I, I learnt everything so when people saw Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem], they'd say, "God they look so beautiful," I said, "It's in the lighting," you know what I mean. And so there're basic things that you've gotta learn, the structure of what you're doing and what's good and what's bad. And but, and you must understand, the dancers they're as good, they love it as much as I do, even more. 'Cause they were told that they were special. Does that make sense? And you see there's a whole--there's a pride that you have to put in people that this is, you've gotta be the best of what's out there. And the only way you're gonna get it is by education and getting you're technique. And I said, "Now look, we're gonna do television. If they interview you and you give a dumb answer, I'm gonna embarrass you in front of the world. You've got to know." I said, "You're trying to be the best that you can," and even Martha [Martha Graham] goes, "How does he get all the boys?" 'Cause I said, "Wait a minute guys," I taught ballet class to drums (imitates playing drums), it's still tendu and fifth (imitates playing drums), what is done to, done to drums. So that there's a familiarity. But the el- the elegance is inherent to the man whether he or she are court here and Louie XIV's court or Watusi warrior. So I make a pride in what they see. I said the Maasai the way they jump, that's ballon in ballet, you just have to point your feet (laughter). You know, I'm very practical about everything. And it, and I said you--I said, "I may not be able to give you all the money in the world, but I'm giving you history. You're gonna go down in history for making a change." I know it sounds so simple, but that's what I believe. And finding people to, and there's the exoticism of it, you know, it's very exotic, but at the same time it must be a quality 'cause no one had ever seen it. We go to these schools, they said, "She's on her toes." They've never seen a girl dance on her toes. And if I can--I'll try to get things so you to show television where we'd go, where I would say what is the latest social dance. I'm gonna break it down to classical ballet step so they can relate to it. The monkey, the fruit and all those things. I said, "No, that's called step pas de chat, step pas de chat, it's a Fre- it's Russian ste- a balletic step." And I said, "That's the way I want it done." What it does to the people that are participating, it's a pride in themselves. And I mean I said, "We may not have all the money in the world or da-da-da," I said, "but what you've got, they want to get." And this is what happened with Josephine Baker when she was here in the nightclub da-da-da. But once she got to Europe and she realized what could--she became the queen and she's embarrassed to see the things she did, you know, the bananas, and this and da-da-da. And her, one of her sons had a restaurant on 125th Street. Speaker 1: Chez Josephine [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Chez Josephine. I said tell me, he said, "Oh my mother, she was life. But she said she loved the metro," which was Balanchine [George Balanchine]. And when Balanchine said to her, "I want you to dance on pointe," she said, "I don't like it, but I'll do it." And so she, he started training her to dance on pointe. And if you go to the restaurant or you go upstairs, there's pictures of Josephine on pointe. And I said, "Jean-Claude [Jean-Claude Baker], take one of those banana pictures down and show that one with the pointe shoes that she can do it." Speaker 1: That's right. That's right. Speaker 2: And I always made them relate to the best that we've got. Story_ID: 578504 Speaker 1: The 41st Eucharistic Congress [41st International Eucharistic Congress], the church said, "Oh Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], we want you to open up the Robin Hood Dell [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]." I said, "I want to do a Balanchine [George Balanchine]--a ballet about Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]." They said, "It would be stupid for us to do, to pay for something about another denomination." I said, "I understand," that's exactly what I did anyway (laughter). And I contacted him, I spoke to Coretta [Coretta Scott King] and I knew I would go down, I would see, this is what the man is about. And like the first thing we did, I had Leontyne Price and Lena Horne as the co-hostess, that never happened before, that mixture of two things. Then when I brought Mar- Miss Anderson [Marian Anderson] in, we did one program with Aretha Fra- [Aretha Franklin] and Aretha kept saying, "Who's that lady?" I said, "That's Marian Anderson. She's the mother of all of us." That, you know. And it's really an educational thing to everyone that they must ar- understand if they want to be the best they've got to do it. Even now, Aretha and I are very good friends, but I won't work with her. I said, "Aretha you don't, you don't wanna pay," and she studied with me. Aretha studied class, took class with me. I said, and she, "Oh yes I want tendu, jette, pas de bourree," I said, she said, "And the one man that knows how to do it and say it right is Arthur Mitchell, I want him to work with me." I say, "Hey Aretha how you doing sweetheart." She said, "Oh yeah," she said, "but you know Art." I said, "Aretha you don't like to spend money and I'm not doing it for nothing. I admire you, I think you're wonderful." It was so bad I had to go backstage and just get arm and arm and walk one--from one side of the room to the other and get the, keep them out of each other's hair. And talk about history and why it's wonderful. Speaker 2: You mean what was so bad, you're talking about between-- Speaker 1: Competition. Speaker 2: Oh okay. Speaker 1: And they-- Speaker 2: Competition with the dancers? Speaker 1: Competition with each other. You're talking with diva--hey yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Are you're talking about between Marian Anderson and Aretha Franklin? Speaker 1: Yeah, but I had to explain to Aretha Franklin who Marian Anderson was. Speaker 2: Which is a little frightening. Speaker 1: And so I said you know that's, and Miss Anderson had a voice and she would talk and I would just listen, I would write it down, I would talk. And I said, "You know people, you're lucky. You couldn't have gone through what Marian Anderson went, getting in the back of the train, not having the--you're getting everything." And they became, in their own right, stars in their community. And their parents and their schools and stuff all identified with that. And I would say, "Guys you wanna jump." I said, "I'm gonna teach you to out jump every basketball player that's out there with style and grace." They say, "Okay." So I, I try to find things that are practical and that they want and what they'd like. And I said, "You know, you tell at Harlem [New York, New York]," I said, "They're doing the same shit that you left. You're gonna take something back and show where it could be and what could be done." Story_ID: 578505 Speaker 1: What have you not said about the Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York] that you would like to say (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What I haven't said about the Dan-? I think Dance Theatre was like a mutant that it was so special people had not seen that. We did our rep- Agnes de Mille, [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder, Balanchine [George Balanchine], Ruth Page, I had works from each one of those choreographers but it was done for a reason. Glen Tetley, we did all the, I said, "I want a Tetley work." He said, "Well Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], your dancers are wonderful but when you put them in costume you don't, they, they, you don't see the movement coming through the costume." So I said, "Well let's take the costume off, put them in leotards and tights." And I said, "You are so beautiful, you don't even know how beautiful you are." I said, "You must act accordingly." Speaker 1: That's what you're saying to your dancers? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What you were saying to your dancers (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh yeah. I say that to everybody, musicians, dancers, whatever I work with, stage hands. I say, "Fellas, this is no bus and truck, you know shuffle," I said, "I'm not interested in doing 'Shuffle Along' or, ah (gesture), unh-uh. There's enough people doing that." Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: Well you asked me that earlier and I said (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I asked many things. Speaker 2: At this point, I would like to do Noah's Art. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I've been saying, how many years have I been saying that? Speaker 1: Okay but wait, can I ask another question. So when all is said and done-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What do you want your (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well hopefully one day there'll be a company, I'd like a company we ought to have dancers from every part of the world and their government will pay for them to be part of the company. Speaker 1: But what will you say, what do you wanna say about your body of work that you've done? Speaker 2: What about? Speaker 1: You're body of work. Speaker 2: Well see, I, I can't say what my body of work is, 'cause it hasn't been done yet. I'm still learning and, I'm still developing. You see the mind is a terrible thing, but I can keep growing and being. And I look at the best, and I say um, why didn't Nureyev [Rudolf Nureyev] come and wanna dance with me. Why did other dan- they wanna come here. Speaker 1: You, you call him Nureyev and I know him as Nureyev, you mean Nureyev? Speaker 2: Yeah, Rudy, yeah. Speaker 1: Rudy, (laughter). Speaker 2: I say, "Get out of here." "Oh I want to go to bed with you." I said, "Eat your heart out." Speaker 1: Oh you know, let me ask you that, okay (laughter). Speaker 2: You must understand these, you know many people, even now people say-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh are we at sixty minutes. Speaker 2: --"Oh Mr. Mitchell, I want to have a baby with you." I say, "What are you talking about?" You know people very frank and honest, and I say that's not me. I said, "No, no, no, no, no." You have to get the skill, you have to get the education and the social skills, that's what I'm brilliant at. Speaker 1: I know, but he asked you to have a baby and you wanted--you're talking about social skills? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. You should see my little three year olds, fabulous. I say, "All right (claps hands), come on ladies sit down," I say, "come here." Story_ID: 578506 Speaker 1: What about the part of the-- Speaker 2: The what? Speaker 1: --the commun- the part of the community that died of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], a lot, a lot of the dance community was left-- Speaker 2: Well, I you know, even the dance community they held Dance Theatre [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York] on a certain level. A lot of people were jealous 'cause they could not reach that level. And they say, "It's, it's ballet and we know nothing about ballet." I say, "It's the same thing if you did a Watsui or a Maasai." I said, "You know, you look at those African rituals, there is structure in that. They can't just jump out and do whatever they want to. You're talking about some bad B film from Hollywood. No, no, no, no, no." Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], so what have I not asked you? Speaker 2: Well I'm telling you now what I like and what I--what I'd like to see happen is Noah's Art. Speaker 1: So what you're telling me, is you are not finished yet? Speaker 2: Oh not, no, I may be eighty-two years old, but no I'm fine. I'm not--it's not finished. Speaker 1: Okay, but what about your archives? Speaker 2: The archives, they keep, she's [Gillian Lipton] driving me crazy. She says, "What year was that?" I said, "You've got the book, write it down." I am still arguing with Columbia University [New York, New York], one of the great educational institution. I said, "It's a living breathing archive. You're doing archives of people that are dead and I'm very much alive." Isn't that what I say? Speaker 1: (GILLIAN LIPTON): That's exactly what you say. Speaker 2: (Laughter) There's very little that change and like I said, I wanna--once we get the archives toget- I wanna give it to the libraries in Harlem [New York, New York] so all those kids will get a chance to see what life is like, what they could possibly do and what they can be. Speaker 1: And the artistry (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you know, I'll tell you another seg- it's Mr. Mitchell, "Yo Arthur," I said, "No did you roll over in bed this morning and see my face. It's Mr. Mitchell." I said, "I wouldn't call Mr. Shook [Karel Shook], Karel. I wouldn't call Balanchine [George Balanchine], George. It's Mr. Balanchine and it's a respect for each other in the art form. And I--that's what I do." It's, it's a respect for each other and what you're doing. And when the kids don't do it, I say, "Look, this is not the place for you. Now if you wanna go sleep, do," I said, "go do it, but you can't do that here." And I said, "But you've gotta act accordingly." Speaker 1: Okay, we're done. Speaker 2: And the da- and see we had it so that a senior dancer became the mother or the father of a new dancer and taught them what to do (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see, I see, 'cause-- Speaker 2: And I said-- Speaker 1: --'cause she would train them up. Speaker 2: --uh-huh, and I said, "No, if it's wrong I'm gonna curse you out, not them." Speaker 1: You know, but I'm--we're, we're done, but I want to tell you Mr. Mitchell, this, you need to listen to me, okay. You have-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: It's like, you know, it's like looking at a Monet [Claude Monet]. Speaker 2: Looking at a what? Speaker 1: A Monet. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). But, but people, I don't know if we brought Monet back what he would say about his art. But, but, you know what, but people are always interested. Speaker 2: Is that I studied this Russ- the salon in Paris [France]. And I decided I was gonna have it in New York [New York]. So, James Baldwin--I've had all the artists come and talk to me. Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no. I'm talking--I understand. You were the center of many universes, I understand that. But what I'm trying to tell you and I hope that in doing your archives--I'm lecturing to you just now, (laughter) okay which is not like (laughter)-- Speaker 2: No, I hear you. Speaker 1: --how you lecture someone, but anyway...