 Story_ID: 635467 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Paula Denice McClain [HistoryMaker Paula McClain], it's P-A-U-L-A, Denice is D-E-N-I-C-E, McClain is M-C, capital C, L-A-I-N. Speaker 1: All right, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: January 3rd, 1950, in Louisville, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a professor of political science. Speaker 1: Okay and you're also the director of the Center for Race and Politics? Speaker 2: Center for the Study (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Center for the Study of-- Speaker 2: --of Race Ethnicity and Politics in the Social Sciences [sic. Center for the Study of Race, Ethnicity and Gender in the Social Sciences] at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now before we go into--oh, what is today's date? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Today's date is February 22nd, I believe, yeah, the 22nd, 2012. Speaker 1: All right and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Durham, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In my house. Story_ID: 635468 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I guess no. I like so much. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Color? Purple. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Paris [France]. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't think so, I--my daughters [Kristine McClain-Jacobson Ragland and Jessica McClain-Jacobson] may disagree, but I don't think so. Story_ID: 635469 Speaker 1: All right, well I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side [Robert McClain, Sr.] but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Mabel Teresa Molock McClain [Mabel Molock McClain], and Mabel is M-A-B-E-L, and Teresa is T-E-R-E-S-A, Molock is M-O-L-O-C-K, McClain, M-C, capital C, L-A-I-N. Speaker 1: Okay. And now, is there a story behind the name? I've never heard the name Molock before. Speaker 2: Molock, my, my mother's father wrote this, this history. Molock is in the Bible and I'm not sure exactly where it comes from our family--well I guess I--well do, 'cause my, my grandfather had this history. They're from Berlin, Maryland and, at least I think that's where my grandfather was born, and Molock seemed to be around that area. The only other, besides my family, and this was serendipitous, Dianne Pinderhughes who's at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], we were talking and I just mentioned something about Molock and she said, "Well we've got Molocks in my family." And so, I think we both traced it back to this section of Maryland, but there are Molocks, yes. Speaker 1: Okay and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It's M-O-L-- Speaker 2: O-C-K (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) C-K. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Molock. Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and pl- place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born August 3rd, 1924, in Atlantic City, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: My great-grandfather [Francis Molock] on my, I guess would be my, my mother's paternal side was a minister in Maryland. My grandfather, Harrison Molock, graduated from what was then Delaware State College for the Colored [sic. State College for Colored Students, Dover, Delaware], which is now Delaware State [Delaware State University]. And he taught school for a while and he married my grandmother, Evelyn Rowley [Evelyn Rowley Molock], wo- she was actually his second wife, his first wife died, and so my Uncle Sonny [ph.] was his son from, from that marriage. And then I'm not sure what brought them to Atlantic City, New Jersey, but my grandfather basically became a businessman in Atlantic City, he owned a gas station, a taxi company and I think a little store, and I wanna say that the taxi company was the Lighthouse Cab Company and that light--but the Lighthouse Cab Company still exist in Atlantic City, so I don't know whether, you know, I'm misremembering the name of the cab company my, my grandfather had. But my grandmother, Evelyn, who was a twin, I think at one point taught school, but then I think basically she stayed home raising my mom and my Uncle Stanley [Stanley Molock], and my Uncle Sonny was a little older. But, so she had three kids, that she was raising, I don't know much about her side of the family, but my Grandfather Harrison had two sisters, Mabel [Mabel Molock] and Hattie [Hattie Molock], Hattie went to what was then Princess Anne Academy [Princess Anne, Maryland], which is now University of Maryland Eastern Shore, and my Aunt Mabel, I believe she went to college, I'm not sure exactly where my Aunt Mabel went to college. So my gran- on my mother's father's side, they all went to college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So my grandfather went, went to college on my mother's side. Speaker 1: So your mother was named after her gra- her aunt? Speaker 2: Her aunt. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: All right. So they're all college people, okay. Story_ID: 635470 Speaker 1: So did your mother [Mabel Molock McClain] talk about growing up in At- did, did she grow up in Atlanta--Atlantic City (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She grew up in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Did she-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --talk about what it was like? Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure I can, I can remember. I mean they, you know, relative to the times they were doing, doing quite well, they lived in a fairly spacious house for the time, in fact, I remember, 'cause we were in Atlantic City, I guess when my father [Robert McClain, Sr.] was in Korea, that they actually moved this house, first time I'd ever seen a house moved from one lot to another lot, a larger lot on Michigan Avenue in Atlantic City, and then they reconnected everything and put the foundation in. She went to Atlantic City High School [Atlantic City, New Jersey]. My grandfather [Harrison Molock] was Methodist and believed everything was basically a sin, you know, so my mom said that when she got to college, you know, she never learned how to ride a bike, she didn't know how to dance, you know, all these things so, that's why we were doing a lot when we were small because, you know, in, and in growing up, 'cause she didn't want us to get to college and not be able to do things. So, I think her life was pretty constrained in terms of the kinds of activities she was able to be involved in at Atlantic City High School. But, she seemed to have a relatively, not onerous childhood. I mean she never really talked about difficulties, her first experience with segregation, basically was when she went to college, and she went to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], and it was her first time in the South. Speaker 1: Did she have a story about what happened there? Speaker 2: Well, she met my dad-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but she started in '42 [1942], and she graduated in '46 [1946]. She seemed to really thrive and enjoy herself at Hampton, seen lots of pictures, she was always very stylish though, that's one, that's one thing my mom was always in style of fashion. She would go to New York [New York], when she lived in Atlantic City, she got older, she would go to New York and she would window shop with a sketchpad, and she'd sketch the latest styles and then she'd come back and she'd make them so that she would have, you know, what was, what was the current, the current style. So when I see some of the pictures of her when she was at Hampton, I mean she was always very stylish, in fact when we lived in Charlottesville [Virginia], a woman, Theresa [ph.], I can't remember her last name, but she was over at her house and she looked at a picture of my mother and she said, "I know that girl." They were at Hampton together and she even told me that she was always the most stylish girl on campus, that everybody just thought that she had all this money or whatever when in fact, what she was doing was looking and sewing and, and, you know, making herself stylish. Speaker 1: Okay. So she, she could actually style her own clothing? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That's, that's even (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did she major in at Hampton? Speaker 2: Science, she has a B.S., well she had a B.S., she--she's now passed, bachelor of science in home ec [home economics] and something else, but they didn't call it--whatever it was called, it was a bachelor of science, so she did a lot of these science classes but then she did the kind of home economy kinds of classes as well. My mom was always very, very creative. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then she did, was working on her master's [degree] at, at the University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona], which was some, some years later. But her first teaching job out of Hampton was a Talladega College in Talladega, Alabama, which she only lasted a year. I think that was like really too rural, too southern, too segregated. Speaker 1: Now did she continue to teach? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. She, in--a second, a second grade, second grade teacher. Story_ID: 635471 Speaker 1: Okay now I'm gonna go to your father's side of the family, can you give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His name is Robert Landis McClain, Sr. [Robert McClain, Sr.]. That's R-O-B-E-R-T, Landis, L-A-N-D-I-S, McClain, M-C, capital C, L-A-I-N, Sr., because my brother [Robert McClain, Jr.] is a junior. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My father's date of birth was Jan- was June 15th, 1915. Speaker 1: Okay and where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Columbia, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay, now where is Columbia? Speaker 2: It's close to Mount Pleasant [Tennessee] I think. That was my, my, my grandfather's family home. They moved to Louisville [Kentucky] I think when my father was six or seven, something like that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --or two or three. I mean he was very young when they left Columbia, Tennessee-- Speaker 1: Okay so he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and moved to-- Speaker 1: --grew up in Louis-- Speaker 2: He, he grew up in Louisville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now what do you know about his side of the family? How far back can you go with them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: One of my cousins, my Cousin Gladys [ph.] has actually done a kind of family tree back, and what she's been able to identify is that, in Tennessee, I guess it would be our great-great-great-grandfather who was white, who had a union with a black woman, Sarah [ph.], and then that was the origins of the McClains. And in our extended family there're several different spellings, I mean, we're all part of the same family, but for some reason the spellings have differed, I know more about my grandfather. My, my grandfather had--his name was Willie Robert [Willie McClain]. Oh gosh, I'm not sure how many brothers he had and a sister and he basically became the patriarch for this large extended family, and as his siblings would pass, my grandfather would assume responsibility for some of their children if they were still, still small. So that there's this large extended McClain family, many of us are cousins, but some of them were raised basically as brother and sister, 'cause my father has, had two sisters, and my father was the youngest. And then my grandfather married my grandmother, Julia [Julia Russell McClain], his wife died, and she had children. So there's this larger McClain/Russell, Russell family, step, stepbrothers and sisters, but they all considered themselves brothers and sisters. My grandfather, Willie Robert, was basically a labor organizer in Kentucky, he's--for the hod carriers union [International Hod Carriers' Building and Common Laborers' Union of America; Laborers' International Union of North America], and before he retired he was like the business manager, negotiator for whatever the hod carriers union is and he would fly back and forth to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. And finally, I think when he was eighty, my grandmother said, "Well you just have to, you know, have to stop." My, on my father's side, all of them went to college, my aunties, my Aunt Gladys [Gladys McClain] and my Aunt Cathleen [Catherine McClain] went to Kentucky State [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky], my father went to the segregated unit of the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky], which was called, Louisville Municipal College for, for Negroes [Louisville Municipal College for Negroes] at the time. And then my Aunt Cathleen got her master's [degree] in math from Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], and my Aunt Gladys ended up getting a master's at the University of Louisville when it was desegregated. And my father went after, after college, went into World War II [WWII], was drafted into the [U.S.] military. Speaker 1: Okay, did he serve overseas? Speaker 2: Yes, but overseas during Korea, not during World War II. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was stateside during World War II, but in Korea, during the Korean War. Speaker 1: Okay, so he stayed in the [U.S.] Army a long-- Speaker 2: He-- Speaker 1: --time? Speaker 2: He, got out after World War II, went to work in one of the labs at the Seagram's Distillery [Louisville, Kentucky], and then went back in. I think shortly after he and my mom [Mabel Molock McClain] got married, they got married in '49 [1949], late '48 [1948], early '49 [1949], and decided to make it a career. Speaker 1: Okay. And he went to Korea? Okay, that's interesting, yeah, 'cause he would have been, yeah, okay. All right so how long did he stay in? Speaker 2: Thirty years. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Thirty years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And did, did he--well what did he, what capacity did he serve in? Speaker 2: He ended up--he was the top enlisted rank. He was a sergeant major. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: E9. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Was post sergeant major just before he retired and was first sergeant of a infantry unit for a number of years. Story_ID: 635472 Speaker 1: Okay now wha- now what did he say about growing up in Louisville [Kentucky]? Did he have any stories? Speaker 2: Oh my father [Robert McClain, Sr.]. My father was a talker. And my father is, my father's side of the family is very, very, very, very fair, my father had, had blue eyes and, and at one point in his life kind of blondish hair. As he got older it got grayer and thinner, but he said that, that growing up in, in, in, in Louisville, he would kind of catch it from both sides, you know? Whites of course they were segregated, but he said he was always referred to as, you know, high yellow. But what was really significant is that--and my grandfather [Willie McClain] looked the very same, is that despite their phenotype, my grandfather instilled a great sense of racial pride in his kids, you know. And my grandfather, my grandfather had this saying that my father would tell us, that my grandfather would say that there's only really three things that you can give your kids: life which they had no choice in; advice which they could take or leave; and the third was an education, that you had a responsibility to give your kids an education. And so, along with this sense of responsibility for education was a sense of responsibility for being committed to, at that point the words would have been uplift, you know, uplifting the group. And so, despite, you know, the difficulties of being a light skinned black, my father and his siblings always have, you know, a great sense of racial pride. Speaker 1: Okay now, were they, was your grandfather or your father a member of any of the organizations of-- Speaker 2: My grandfather was a Mason. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, my father and my brother [Robert McClain, Jr.], my brother's in a fraternity but he said my, my father was something like eternal lamp [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, Inc.] or something whatever that means, he was never, he never went over whatever fraternity he was-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --he was pledging, my aunts [Gladys McClain and Catherine McClain] were Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], I think my aunts were Links [The Links, Incorporated], I mean I'm a Link but my--I'm trying to think of what other organizations, I know my gra- my grandfather was a Mason because when he, when he passed, there was the Masonic ceremony for him and he was buried in his apron. Speaker 1: Okay, but he was a union man [with the International Hod Carriers' Building and Common Laborers' Union of America; Laborers' International Union of North America]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and involved in--so that, that kind of put you in a political mix, so I, I just wondered if he was a member of any of the political organizations in the black community? Speaker 2: I don't know. My assumption is he probably was 'cause he was very active in, in Kentucky, well in Louisville, in Louisville, I mean the McClains were, were, I mean it was a large family but they were known for lots of different things and I, I run into people--although I, I didn't grow up in, in Louisville but--oh why can't I remember his name, he's a professor now [Houston A. Baker, Jr.], he used to be at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], he's now at Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee], I'm blanking, any--okay, I'll, I, I can't tell the story 'cause I can't remember his name. But he remembers getting his hair cut at McClain's Barbershop [ph.], which was one of my grandfather's brothers' shops. The name will come to me, then I'll get back to that story. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I can't--yeah. Story_ID: 635473 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met that they tell? Speaker 2: All I remember is my father [Robert McClain, Sr.] was stationed--'cause it was during world--you know, f- my mom [Mabel Molock McClain] started college in '42 [1942], and so my father was in the [U.S.] military 'cause it was World War II [WWII] and he was stationed at Fort Eustis, Virginia [Joint Base Langley-Eustis, Virginia]. And somehow, he made his way over to Hampton's campus, it was Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia] at the time, not Hampton University, and they met, they met there. But my mother was involved with someone else and I have no idea whether this name, but for some reason as a kid, this is the name that kind of stood in my, in my head, it was like Zanzuzamar [ph.] or something, he was from one of the Caribbean islands or something. And I remember that he did give her this very nice set of luggage that kind of ended up in--in, I'm not sure where that is now, but it was this big steamer trunk and, and, but he was concerned that she would be too dark for his family, 'cause my mother was very, was, was brown skinned, and I think that killed it for my mother, you know. And initially she didn't like my dad 'cause he was too light, you know, she, her, her family's basically brown skinned, my father's family is basically very white looking and I think she kind of wanted someone who was, you know, kind of really identifiably black, 'cause my mom used to tell me that one of her concerns was she didn't want anybody to ever think she was the maid with her own children, (laughter) you know, so she wanted--but they didn't marry until '49 [1949]. So there was a very long courtship period or whatever or they were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when-- Speaker 2: --involved in. Speaker 1: --did they meet then? Or, or what year did they meet? Speaker 2: She started college in '42 [1942], so I'm assuming at some time, '42 [1942], '43 [1943], 'cause she graduated in '46 [1946], and left the Hampton Roads [Virginia] area. Speaker 1: Okay. And he was, you know, I guess in the [U.S.] Army-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --stationed different places so they were apart-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for a long period of time. Speaker 2: For a very long period of time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, then she graduated and went to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]. Story_ID: 635474 Speaker 1: Houston Baker [Houston A. Baker, Jr.], that's the name. Speaker 2: Houston Baker? Speaker 1: Houston Baker, I couldn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the literary critic. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, who's from Louisville, Kentucky. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we didn't realize that until we were clearing out my folks' [Mabel Molock McClain and Robert McClain, Sr.] apartment, my sister [Dollye McClain] and I, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And I ran across my, my father's high school annual from Central Colored High School [Central High School] in Louisville, Kentucky and there was a--the pictures of the faculty and there was a Houston Baker [Houston A. Baker, Sr.] on the faculty who taught math and business. And I said, "Oh my gosh, is this--?" At that point I didn't know Houston Baker was from Louisville, Kentucky, and so when I got, he was at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], when I got back to Duke I called him, I said--he said, "Oh yeah, my, my father taught at, you know, and I'm from Louisville," and then I--he says, "Oh my gosh, Big Bill?" So he was really good friends with my cousin William [ph.] and he had gotten his hair cut at McClain's [McClain's Barbershop (ph.)], so we made these, these connections that I had, I, if I hadn't seen my father's high school annual, I never would have, you know, talked about that with Houston Baker, he's actually a junior, 'cause his father was a, a senior, but not senior at that point, it was just Houston Baker. Speaker 2: Okay that's somebody we need to interview at some point (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Houston Baker, right. Story_ID: 635475 Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So anyway my parents were separated, but they got married in '49 [1949], and-- Speaker 1: So what happened in '49 [1949], was he, did your father [Robert McClain, Sr.]--now that's the year he reenlisted right? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I--I'm almost certain that's the year he reenlisted, so that, somehow he went back to Louisville and was working in a lab at Seagram's [Seagram's Distillery]. Well, my father tells the story that also working in the lab at the same time he was, was the actor Victor Mature, but he wasn't an actor then-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --he was (laughter), jus- just another lab technician from Louisville, Kentucky. But then I'm not sure exactly how they reconnected but they got married. Speaker 1: Seagram's, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: With Victor Mature? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. He played Samson in the-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 1: --'Samson and Delilah,' right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, okay. So they got, they did get married and then your father like, so does he--are they separated again for a while? Speaker 2: 'Cause my father, I was born in Louisville, 'cause that's where they were, but then my father gets shipped to Korea and my mother [Mabel Molock McClain] and I go to Atlantic City [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Back to her home, which is where my sister [Dollye McClain] was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], she was born when my dad was in--he came home from Korea for her birth, but then he, he went back. And then after Korea [Korean War], he gets shipped out to reopen with seven other soldiers, this integrated group, to reopen Fort Huachuca [Arizona]. Fort Huachuca was an all-black post up through the end of World War II [WWII], it was the outpost for the 9th Cavalry [9th Cavalry Regiment], the Buffalo Soldiers-- Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) during-- Speaker 1: --Fort Huachuca is where? Where at? Speaker 2: Sierra Vista, it's basically close to the border of Mexico. Speaker 1: Sierra Vista. Speaker 2: Sierra Vista, Arizona-- Speaker 1: Arizona, okay. Speaker 2: --is the town that grew up outside of Fort Huachuca. When we went out there that there was this little town called Fry [Sierra Vista, Arizona], Fry, Arizona. And so my father gets shipped out there with seven, I think there were like three, four blacks, a Hawaiian, and a couple whites and there was no post housing. So when we finally arrived they have to live, everybody has to live in a small little border town called Douglas, Arizona. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But my mom, my sister and I take the train from Atlantic Cit- well, we get on the train in Philadelphia, go from Philadelphia to Chicago [Illinois], in Chicago we pick up the old Sunset Limited, which then kind of takes you through the Rockies [Rocky Mountains], we went into Los Angeles [California], and then switched trains, and at that time a train came straight in to Douglas, Arizona, which was this little, this real little border town. And, my mom never learned how to drive because she was always in the city, and we were in this little stucco house, I remember without a, a washing machine, my mother would have to wash on these, these boards? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: These, you know, scrub boards and each of the men would take turns driving, so we had this car and so my father had to drive maybe once every five weeks, six weeks, and so my mom finally said, I'm not sitting here and not learning how to drive, so she got someone, the minister's wife actually, to teach her how to drive, and she got her license so that we had, had some mobility. And then they built one row of on base housing, or two rows and so we moved from Sierra--from Douglas, Arizona on to, on base at Fort Huachuca and all of the men that got shipped out, they're basically, it's almost like they lost them, they never really rotated for about ten, twelve years. And my parents ended up buying a house in Sierra Vista and that was gonna be where they made their life, but then, circumstances intervened. Story_ID: 635476 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, we always ask this question, when you consider your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their, their gifts, their talents, their hobbies, their looks, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: That's difficult so--'cause I think I'm really a combination of both of my parents. In a way, my mom [Mabel Molock McClain] was incredibly creative, incredibly creative and she actually--I mean I remember things, she was creative and entrepreneurial. When my father [Robert McClain, Sr.] was in Korea and she was teaching school in Atlantic City [New Jersey], during the summer when they had this break, she had a concession stand on the beach in Atlantic City and the money she made from the concession stand she bought their first rental property, I mean my father always says that he learned his money sense from my mom, that she really knew--my father used to say she could take a nickel and squeeze it and open up and there'd be ten cents, you know. And so, and she had this cra- incredibly creative side, I mean, they in the early years of their marriage, I mean, she was teaching, we were in Arizona, my father was in the [U.S.] military, and I remember one year for Christmas, she kept collecting all of this newspaper and this cardboard that would come in my dad's shirts when it would come back from the cleaners and we couldn't figure out why all this stuff was just kind of building up. And so, before Christmas like after Thanksgiving, she had us sit down and with glue, we were taping all of this newspaper on these cardboards and then she found these big envelopes and she told us just to cut jagged shapes off of these newspapers on cardboard, but make sure that they would still fit in these envelopes. So after we did that she--these turned out to be their Christmas cards. And what she wrote was, "Money is scarce and times are hard, so let this be your Christmas card, the McClains." I mean, and then she decorated it. I mean, and so it was all of--I mean, she just did things, they would have a party each year and one year it was a hobo theme, and so we were collecting--every time we opened a can, you know, we had to wash it out and she'd sanitize it and these became the, the, the, the things that people ate out of, it was--and then she made these, we collected twigs and she'd put these little, little handkerchiefs with things and these were the party favors, she'd put things in there and people came dressed as hobos and things like that. I mean, so there was always for our birthday parties and, and we baked cookies and she had us, you know, kind of go around the neighborhood and we'd sell mistletoe and stuff. I mean, so there was always this very entrepreneurial spirit but she just, she just really worked, worked hard. And my dad worked really hard so I think I, I think in some ways I get my creativity in terms of my research from my mom and then from both of them, this kind of drive to be successful, this hard working thing. But, my mom died very suddenly in '65 [1965], so we were then raised by my dad. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were about fourteen? Speaker 2: Fifteen. Speaker 1: Fifteen? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 635477 Speaker 1: Can you give us, you, you, you told about the move out to Arizona so, I take it you moved, you've lived in more than one spot probably right? Speaker 2: Arizona-- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Well, Atlantic City [New Jersey] with my mom [Mabel Molock McClain], and then Arizona: Douglas and Sierra Vista. And then after my mom passed, well, really just before my mom passed, my father [Robert McClain, Sr.] finally got orders for Alaska and they had made the decision that my mom was gonna stay, my mom and the three of us were gonna stay in Arizona, my father was gonna do--because it was like, if he went by himself, it was for one period of time, if he took his family it was for a longer period of time. So they had decided that we were gonna stay, he was gonna go to Alaska and then he'd retire and they'd make their home in Sierra Vista, and my mother was then working on a master's [degree] at the University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona] and she would go summers and live in the dorm and we would go to Atlantic City or to Kentucky and, but then she passed suddenly and so everything was kind of up in the air. I mean, she was only forty. And so, my father's orders were cancelled, but then his orders were reissued again and so the four of us went to Alaska, so I did my high school in Anchorage [Alaska]-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at East Anchorage High School. Speaker 1: Well what happened to your mother? Well what, what-- Speaker 2: She-- Speaker 1: --how did she-- Speaker 2: --had an aortic aneurysm-- Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: --that just burst and now they can identify those things, you know, and repair them, but at that time they couldn't, you know? And so it's like she was here and then she was gone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So that was a--that was a big blow to the family, to just suddenly-- Speaker 2: It really was, it really was. Thank you. So the four of us ended up going to Anchorage, Alaska, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, I think you told us kind of in the past, but how, how many of you are there? I mean how many? Speaker 2: I have a brother and a sister. Speaker 1: A brother and a sister? Speaker 2: A brother and sister, my sister, Dollye [Dollye McClain], and my brother, Robert Jr. [Robert McClain, Jr.], and so I was fifteen, my sister was ten and my brother was eight when my mom died, you know, and so we all ended up going to Alaska. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This is a--so, Alaska, going to Alaska in itself seemed like a tough thing to do but, so how, how did you all manage, I mean too? Speaker 2: We actually managed quite well, Alaska was really quite different, but I had a great time in high school. I mean, I was always very active, I mean that's one of the things our mother got us involved in, so many activities whether it was Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] or lapidary, which was how to make jewelry out of rocks, or ballet, I mean just a whole host of things. So, when I got to East Anchorage High School, I just got involved in a lot of things, I was head majorette, I was president of the girls service society, I was on student council, my senior year I was the prom princess, I mean just all of these things, I was in the Alaska Junior Miss pageant [America's Junior Miss; Distinguished Young Women], so it turned out, I mean, it was actually, you know, a very positive experience. But it was a different trajectory for our lives than the ones my parents had planned, you know? Speaker 1: Well, I can image there's probably, I, I--now the household then consisted of you and your siblings and your father? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Up to that point? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And him being in the [U.S. military] service, I would think there would be a lot of pressure on you too, you know, with your children, I mean, with your siblings, I mean to provide like I guess the kind of guidance that your mother would have provided? Speaker 2: Yes, I--yeah, I think so, at least that's what my brother and sister say, you know? But we always had some one that cleaned the house-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --you know, even when my mom was alive because she worked. And so, we had, you know, someone to clean the house when we were in Alaska, my brother and sister and I would usually get the meals, the meals together. Holidays changed because my mom was really big on Christmas and Thanksgiving, but we would end up going to the mess hall for Thanksgiving dinner or Christmas, we never really cooked anymore at the house, so we kind of adjusted, you know? I mean there were lots of things that we missed, I think that's just one of the reasons why, for my girls [Kristina McClain-Jacobson Ragland and Jessica McClain-Jacobson], you know we have a big to do at Christmas, I mean the house is just decorated, Thanksgiving, all holidays, when they were small, the house would be decorated and, you know, so that they had the memories that I had that our mother gave us, yeah. Story_ID: 635478 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question, what were the--and, we're talking about multiple places here, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: When my mom [Mabel Molock McClain] was alive, Sunday dinners were, I mean she always cooked for all the meals, but Sunday dinners were where she would make like these yeast rolls, you know, and you could smell them in the house. She would make this, this, oh, I don't know whether it was a gumbo or stew but would have cracked crab and shrimp and over white rice, I mean, so there were just this big--. And my father [Robert McClain, Sr.], we had this ice cream, old crank ice cream maker, it wasn't old then, now it's, you know, everything's electric, but he would be out cranking, you know, ice cream and my mother would put fresh peaches and stuff in it. So, I mean, those were just, those were just great memories. In Alaska, I mean things were, were, were different so, winter sports, I mean my brother [Robert McClain, Jr.] and sister [Dollye McClain] really got into skiing and, and those kinds of things, I was kind of in my cute phase at the time and so, you know, those kinds of things I didn't take as, as much advantage of the skiing in, in, in Alaska, as I, as I should have. But one of the, the well there's lots of memories from Alaska but there is this period after when spring finally comes and it's called breakup, and what breakup is, is when all the snow finally starts to melt and you finally get to see the ground after all these months of snow. And the snow over the, over the winter gets, gets very ugly, 'cause it gets dirty, you know? And so breakup is one of those things you look forward to, because then you get to see the ground and all the dirty snow melts away, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's always ugly when the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it is-- Speaker 1: And some-- Speaker 2: --it is and when you have so much of it, for so long. And then summer in Anchorage [Alaska], I mean, where you end up with twenty hours of sunlight and then when the sun goes down, it doesn't really go down it just sinks and then it comes back up, we'd actually have black shades on your, on your house, so that during, during the summer you could pull 'em down and you can darken, darken the rooms. But during the winter it was the exact opposite, we'd get up, it would be--literally a night in Anchorage during the winter would be pitch black, then during the day it would still be dark but just kind of a lighter dark. And so you'd get up, you'd go to school in the dark, the sun would come up maybe about 11:30, when you're in school, but it would go down by 1:30, so it's like you go to school in the dark, you come home in the dark. Speaker 1: So the sun actually does come up for a, for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For--in Anchorage, now I'm not sure whether when you get farther north whether it comes up at all, but in Anchorage it would come up about 11:30, but it would go down about 1:30, you know, so you're, you're, so you just adjust, I mean all of your activities and, and everything would be so it became kind of normal as such. But I have great memories of high school, of high school, of East Anchorage High [East Anchorage High School, Anchorage, Alaska]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause I went to school with the same twenty-six kids, now we talk about as being AP [advanced placement] classes, but obviously it was some kind of tracking system, and there were three blacks among the twenty-six, I'm sure there were other pods of kids that were in like the, you know, the twenty-six, I mean different. But my twenty-six, we had all of our classes together except for band or physical education and that half credit we could take where I took typing or something where you work with these same, these same kids. And there were three blacks in this twenty-six, Alex Tatum, who also has a Ph.D., Marianne Sorel [ph.], and I have no idea what happened to Marianne, and myself. Story_ID: 635479 Speaker 1: I don't wanna break the flow but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --we, we usually go, go back and get grade school and everything so, maybe we can ba- backtrack-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and maybe you can tell, tell us where you started school and, you know, grade school, middle school and then we'll get you to--back to Alaska (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, I did my kindergarten year in Atlantic City [New Jersey], my first grade would have been at an elementary school in Douglas, Arizona. Speaker 1: And do you, you know the name of it? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't remember. My second grade in elementary would have been at, I think it was Colonel Young. Colonel Young was one of the first blacks to graduate from-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], 'cause Fort Huachuca [Arizona] had been an all-black post before, so all of the names and references and schools basically were named after the black-- Speaker 1: I'm glad you remembered that one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) blacks who had been part--hm? Speaker 1: I did not know there was a school ever named after Colonel Charles Young. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Colonel Young elementary school [Colonel Young School]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: On Fort Huachuca, and then I went to, I think it was Colonel Johnson middle school [Colonel Johnson School, Fort Huachuca, Arizona], but I'm not sure, I think Colonel Johnson was where my mom [Mabel Molock McClain] taught. Speaker 1: How do you spell Fort Huachuca? Speaker 2: It's H-U-A-C-H-U-C-A. Speaker 1: H-U-A-- Speaker 2: I think I remember that. It looks like (pronunciation) Huachuca or something like that. Speaker 1: Well, okay yeah. Speaker 2: But it's Huachuca. Speaker 1: And that, and that's a-- Speaker 2: It's now a Strategic Air Command, I mean it's a big-- Speaker 1: Yeah, now that's a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a big base. Speaker 1: --Apache name or something or? Speaker 2: Huachuca? Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause it's in, in--Cochise County [Arizona] is where--but, but the Apaches, the White Mountain Apaches are all throughout that area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the black troops were used as Indian [Native American] fighters. Speaker 1: And, and you're saying that even when your father [Robert McClain, Sr.] went out there they wo- the, there was a lot--it was still an all-black unit? Speaker 2: Well, they had shut it down. Speaker 1: Oh they shut it-- Speaker 2: They had shut it down, and literally these seven, these seven men went out there with someone having a key, if anybody could remember, to the padlock on the post or with bolt cutters to kind of cut this lock off to reopen this post, that they were reopening as an integrated post, 'cause it was closed down after World War II [WWII]. And these men were the, you know, were the front, the advance team to try and get this post reopened, you know? And like I said, some others kind of lost 'em out there because they all basically never rotated. Most of them retired (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They stayed in long and just retired from Fort Huachuca? Speaker 2: Yeah. Because McIver [Isiah McIver], it was McIver and Al Taylor [ph.], my dad, a Hawaiian guy, I can't remember his, his name, and a couple of white officers, I think and that was, that was it and they reopened that post, you know? And so, I, I think it was Colonel Johnson middle school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it--Colonel Johnson-- Speaker 2: --I think and then I went to East Anchorage High School in Anchorage, Alaska. Speaker 1: Okay so you did--you didn't start high school in--? Speaker 2: I did, I went to Buena Vista High School [sic. Buena High School] for ninth grade, for part of ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, Buena Vista was in Sierra Vista [Arizona], high school. Speaker 1: Okay, then you went to East Anchorage? Speaker 2: East Anchorage High School. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is at the beginning of Alaskan statehood, pretty much. Alaska-- Speaker 2: Alaska made state in '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: Fifty-nine, '59 [1959], right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you're out there in '61 [1961], '60 [1960], '61 [1961] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my mother died in '65 [1965], so it would have been-- Speaker 1: Oh, sixty-five [1965]-- Speaker 2: --sixty-six [1966]. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: You were fifteen. Okay. Story_ID: 635480 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so were there any teachers or special, you know, students or things that you remember from grade school or junior high school, you know, before you get to Alaska? Speaker 2: I think probably one of the most influ- influential persons in my life was my music teacher when I was in elementary and that's Archie Brown. I played the flute and he taught me how to play the flute. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember when I was in--he was a very nice, he was a very nice man. But there's one event where I won this big award, it was the John Philip Sousa Award and there's this big plaque in the junior high [Colonel Johnson School, Fort Huachuca, Arizona] and they list all the, all the winners. And I noticed my mom [Mabel Molock McClain] and dad [Robert McClain, Sr.] came to the ceremony and Mr. Brown is giving me this award and what I remember him saying is, "And she's a credit to her race." Now here I am a junior high school kid and somehow that just didn't seem right to me, but, you know, this was the highest band award that, that they gave, you know. Speaker 1: Now was Archie Brown black or? Speaker 2: No, Archie Brown was white. Speaker 1: White guy, okay. Speaker 2: Was white. Speaker 1: And he-- Speaker 2: And he was talking about what a wonderful flute player and everything I was and how and how I wou- you know, 'cause I was a drum majorette for the marching band and everything and was at the same--so, and then he says, "She's a credit to her race," and then at that same ceremony I get the American Legion good citizenship award [American Legion School Award], so I got these two awards at this spring assembly and I mean I really liked Mr. Brown, but even, you know, that-- Speaker 1: It's kind of the old timey concept? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. And in high school [East Anchorage High School, Anchorage, Alaska], Mrs. Baxter was our advanced English teacher, I mean we were in these advanced classes, and I graduated in high school in 1968, I still get a birthday card from Mrs. Baxter, I get a Christmas card from Mrs. Baxter, and Paul [Paul C. Jacobson] and I get an anniversary card from Mrs. Baxter. She has kept in touch with all of her advanced students, as many as she could. I mean, this--Mrs. Baxter taught me how to write, taught me to love literature and when I think back on it, even though she looked old, she had these glasses, she had very, very short hair, kind of a severe haircut, and these kind of cat eye glasses and she wore these crinolines, she had to be in her twenties when she was teaching us and we were--but she just seemed so much older because she's still, you know, I got an email from her, I guess a bunch of us got an email from her, she was having her hips replaced, and so--that she wouldn't be sending out, you know, the Christmas cards. But she, I mean, I will always be appreciative of all of the efforts she put in with her advanced students, you know? And all, you know, almost everybody in this class that I, you know, still maintained contact with has done really well, Howard Weaver won a Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize for Public Service] when he was editor of the Anchorage Daily News for--then he went on to Gannett [sic.], he's now retired. Ty Settles [ph.] is a lawyer, Craig Goodrich eventually became chief, fire chief in, in Anchorage [Alaska]. Sheila Selkregg who was my best friend, also has a Ph.D. and she teaches at the University of Alaska [University of Alaska Anchorage, Anchorage, Alaska], Alex [Alex Tatum] is still in Alaska. So it's like, all of these people, you know, in this--that became very successful people, that's because we had these, you know--and Mrs. Baxter was a main contributor, I think to that. And so, and Mr. Everly [James Everly], the band director, he was the uncle of the Everly Brothers, he was a terrific band director, I think he was an uncle or a cousin or something like that. But almost all of us that were in the same group of twenty-six, also played in the band, were active in student council, a part of various groups, and I think everybody ended up going to college out of that, out of that group. Story_ID: 635481 Speaker 1: You know, and Alaska is one of those places where people would think that there wouldn't be a lot of blacks, but there actually were, and are, because black soldiers were basically those, that labor that cut the ALCAN Highway [Alaska Highway], the Alaska/Canadian highway, that ended up in basically Yukon territory [Canada] and a lot of them went to Anchorage [Alaska], separated out from the [U.S.] military and stayed there. And also on that great, the various waves of the Great Migration of blacks from the South to the North, there was a small group that just kept going. One of the richest women in the state was a woman from Mississippi, her name was Zula Swanson, and she owned a lot of what became downtown Anchorage. And one of the things I remember is the '68 [1968] presidential election, I guess it was '67 [1967] at that time, when George Wallace was running and he opened up an office, it was, was it the American Party [American Independent Party]? Whatever he--ticket he was on, and his campaign opened up an office in Anchorage in a building that was on her land, and she told the owners of the building that they either move their building or got rid of Wallace in the building. And they ended up having to telling the campaign that they were gonna have to relocate someplace else. One of the top attorneys, Mahala Dickerson [Mahala Ashley Dickerson], Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] grad, had come up to Alaska either before or just after she graduated from Howard during World War II [WWII], and so there was this relatively large black community in Anchorage, so I was not the only--I mean I, there were three of us in the twenty- in the twenty-six, but there were far more blacks in my high school [East Anchorage High School, Anchorage, Alaska] 'cause my high school, my graduating class was 574-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --students, a number of whom were black. Speaker 2: What percentage are you thinking of that five hundred-- Speaker 1: You know, I'm not sure, I'm not sure. Speaker 2: Would it kind of mirror the U.S. population, maybe 10, 11 percent? Speaker 1: Probably, but you know, Alas- I mean Alaska's population is, is, is much smaller so that, to have a 10 percent black population out of five- maybe there were fifty-seven, sixty in my graduating class, maybe some military, but some local, you know, Alaskans. Story_ID: 635482 Speaker 1: Now when you were in school now, what did you--what were your aspirations career wise? Did you have any aspirations in school-- Speaker 2: You know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in terms of what you wanted to do? Speaker 2: --I did, I thought I wanted to be a lawyer but this, this is one of these, these interesting stories, they give you these kind of career test and when I did it in, in, in high school [East Anchorage High School, Anchorage, Alaska], this woman told me that I should be a rural nurse, I mean, you know, being in the bush and doing things in the bush in Alaska was big. And she said, "Well, you should be a rural nurse," and I'm saying, that is so far away from what I have any aspirations to do, you know? But luckily, I mean I had no--wasn't gonna listen to her, I thought I wanted to be a lawyer, you know? And, you know, various parts of both of families had been to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], so my, my grandmother on my father's side, my Grandmother Julia, who after my, my grandfather's [Willie McClain] other wife had died, he married Julia Jones Russell [Julia Russell McClain]. Her father had been born a slave, but graduated in Howard's fourth med school class [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and then he got to Kentucky by, he became a doctor at the Kentucky Home for the Colored Deaf and Dumb [sic. Kentucky Asylum for the Tuition of the Deaf and Dumb; Kentucky School for the Deaf] in Danville [Kentucky]. And so, Howard--although my, my grandmother went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Howard had always been part of, of the family discussion on my father's [Robert McClain, Sr.] side. And then on my mother's [Mabel Molock McClain] side, my mother's brother's, my Uncle Stanley [Stanley Molock] did his undergraduate at, which what was then Cheyney State [sic. Cheyney Training School for Teachers; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], but then went to dental school, got his dental degree from Howard [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.], you know? So there had been this Howard on, on, on both sides of the family so that my brother [Robert McClain, Jr.], sister [Dollye McClain] and I all went to Howard and some of my cousins, the Macadoos [ph.] have all gone to Howard, I mean, it's just kind of a family institution. Speaker 1: Okay so you weren't--so you didn't really have a, a second, another school in mind or? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not really, all of my, the students in the, in the twenty-six of my high school class, most of them ended up going to--the tradition was, or the trajectory was that you went to someplace in Washington State, or Oregon coming from Alaska, very few went--my girlfriend Sheila [Sheila Selkregg] went to Colorado I believe, but, but very rarely was there kind of a trek from Alaska to an East--an East Coast school. But Howard was always where, where I was gonna go and I wanted to be a lawyer. Speaker 1: Now, now was there a general feeling amongst the students that they would go someplace and then come back to Alaska? Or were they feeling well, once I get outta here, I'm not coming back (laughter) or, or-- Speaker 2: You know, I mean I think it varied when I look at where people are now? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Alex [Alex Tatum] and Sheila are back in Alaska, Craig Goodrich is back in Alaska, Howard Weaver's in Washington State and Ty Settles [ph.] is in Oregon. Laura Davis [ph.] I think is in Atlanta [Georgia]. So some did come back, Joe Ac- Acton [Joseph Acton] is still in Alaska. But others just kind of left and I think even, I'm not sure Sheila ever thought she'd end up back in Alaska, although her family, Selkreggs, were really quite big and well known. But, you know, life has its twists and turns and, you know? Story_ID: 635483 Speaker 1: All right, Howard University [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you take the trek all the way from the great Northwest-- Speaker 2: To Howard (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where you can see Russia out your back window. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. Speaker 1: (Laughter) All the way to Howard. Now did you fly to Howard? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yes. I flew, what I did was, 'cause I started in summer school, so I flew to Louisville, Kentucky for a little bit and stayed with my auntie, and then flew from Louisville to Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: So this is 1968 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay, now wh- had you decided on a major? Were you--? Speaker 2: I was gonna do political sciences 'cause I thought I wanted to go to law school and, you know, even today, students are under the, the erroneous assumption that if you wanna go to law school, you should major in political science. In reality you should major in either philosophy or English, philosophy so you can think, English so you can write, you know. So, but that's why I got into political science, that I thought I wanted to go to law school, but then I realized in my junior year that I didn't really wanna practice law, what I liked was kind of the study of aspects of the law and what I really liked was the research, and so I decided to go to graduate school. Speaker 1: Okay, well we're not gonna speed you through that fast. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter) But what were some of the, the--well what was the, what was the--get--now this is a black campus now you had, you had never been to an all-black-- Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: --environment before right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So how did-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --how did that affect you? How did you?-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, my mom [Mabel Molock McClain] before she passed she--because we were living in Arizona and, 'cause that she had always told us that for an undergraduate education we had to go to an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], they didn't use, they weren't using that term then, but she said to a black institution, you know. And she had gone to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], and so we kind of contin- we, we really never thought about anything else, and Howard had such a, played such a prominent role in the family that, you know, and I will not trade any of my time at Howard, it was formative in so many ways. I remember my freshman year, it was a science class, I think it was biology, I'm not sure if it was a big lecture, it was down in the Valley that's where all the science buildings are. Speaker 1: The death valley (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter) And this was a young, a young professor (background noise), I don't know whether--I didn't turn off my phone, that's what you're hearing, I need to do that. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, it stopped for now, can we do it on the break? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. A young guy, I don't know whether he was fresh out of graduate school or what, but at the end of that semester, the entire class, he gave the entire class an incomplete, he said none of us had come up to where he thought we should be. And then he gave us this little talk and this was how, this was '68 [1968], he said, "There are people on a waiting list waiting to get these seats that you have, and you are not doing what you're supposed to do, so you'll just all redo the work next semester." I said oh my goodness, you know? So it was a kind, it was, it was--Howard at that time was the kind of mindset or the--what you got from the professors is, yes we know that there's a lot of racism in the world and yes we know that maybe some of you didn't get the foundation or background in high school that you should have gotten, but the question now is, what are you gonna do about it, okay? So it was like there's a standard and you either meet it or you don't and it was very empowering, I mean because issues of race, I was never told I couldn't do, because I was black there was this, never this, you know, any expectations that somehow because I was black, that I couldn't achieve. Now there were issues of gender I think that, that, that black institutions have had to deal with and so I did deal with issues of gender particularly in graduate school [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. But it was a very secure and comfortable environment in which you could explore your intellectual desires and, and needs and aspirations and it was wonderful, it was just wonderful, you know. Story_ID: 635484 Speaker 1: So you're in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], this is the fall of-- Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: This is after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was-- Speaker 2: Was assassinated-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in April. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I was in Alaska at the time. Speaker 1: Do you remember that--what happened that day? Was that, you know, D.C. was in a riot (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was always a lag time because--okay, now we have instant news and satellites and everything. In '68 [1968], in Alaska, there were three channels on the television, there was a local channel, I think CBS had its own channel and ABC and NBC shared a channel. So, you know, 'The Huntley-Brinkley' ['The Huntley-Brinkley Report'] and 'Walter Cronkite' ['CBS Evening News with Walter Cronkite'] would be taped when it ran in Seattle [Washington], the tapes would be put on a plane, flown to Anchorage [Alaska] and my father [Robert McClain, Sr.] would be watching the news at about midnight or, you know, for the World Series games they would be taped, they'd fly out, my father and, you know, and his friends would be watching the games at one and two in the morning. So there wasn't this instant news, so it, it, it seemed like we heard about the assassination of Dr. King in the afternoon or the next day, I mean, I, I can't remember exactly what time he was shot, I think it was like in the evening. Speaker 1: It was actually in the-- Speaker 2: Or late afternoon (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it was, yeah, it was in the afternoon. Speaker 2: Late afternoon? So that we weren't talking about it until the next day at school when we finally got word that he had been assassinated. And it was one of those, those kinds of things, 'cause we had, in my social studies class, and I think it was, was Mr. Sheaff [ph.], it was almost Al- Alex [Alex Tatum], Marianne [Marianne Sorel (ph.)] and I, everybody's kind of turning to us like, you know, "Well what does this mean?" And I think basically it's--'cause we're sitting up in Alaska with you okay? I mean it's like we, we are just as disconnected in some ways although there was a very active NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Anchorage and, and there were these issues. I had actually filed a complaint about service in a restaurant in downtown Anchorage with the Anchorage Human Rights Commission [Anchorage Equal Rights Commission]. So we did have these, have these issues, but it was something that did affect us but it wasn't as direct, I remember after, you know, when they had riots, Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] closed down, shut down because of the riots and so this was in a period, you're waiting for all of your acceptances and things, you know, from schools. And so I was concerned about, well is it gonna reopen? I mean what, I mean what's gonna happen, but yeah, so we got it, but it was always on a delayed basis-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --as everything is in Alaska. Speaker 1: So was there a memorial service or anything held at the school in Alaska [East Anchorage High School, Anchorage, Alaska]? Speaker 2: I don't bel- I don't remember that. Story_ID: 635485 Speaker 1: The church that we attended in, in Mountain View [Anchorage, Alaska] had a, had a service later, but--and it wasn't, we actually attended on post churches, but some friends of mine, black friends of mine in high school went to this church in Mountain View which I think was an A.M.E. church [African Methodist Episcopal], I think (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what--was church important growing up? I don't think I, I asked you a question about that but-- Speaker 1: My mother [Mabel Molock McClain] was Methodist, my father [Robert McClain, Sr.] was Disciples of Christ, and my mother was an A.M.E., my father was--my Grandfather Poppy [Willie McClain] was, I guess what you'd call mainline Methodist. Speaker 2: M- M.E.? Yeah. Speaker 1: No, but he wasn't A.M.E. Speaker 2: Yeah but M.E., just a Methodist Episcopal. Speaker 1: Methodist Episcopal, yes, yes. And so, we tended to, most of our time we attended church on base which was a, which was just a nondenominational Protestant service, there was Catholic-- Speaker 2: The chapel? Speaker 1: In the chapel, and later in life I guess when we left the post my father continued to be Disciples of Christ, a number of my cousins and I were, were Episcopalian, my brother [Robert McClain, Jr.] is Disciples of Christ, and my sister [Dollye McClain], I think she's still Disciples of Christ, but she attends various, various churches. So it wasn't the kind of traditional black church connection, but there was a church connection, it just was not a particular denomination. Speaker 2: Okay. So I wondered because there, there's a lot of set- settings here in the, in the lower forty-eight [states] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and, and all white settings there would be some obligatory, you know, memorial service where, you know, even if blacks were in the minority there'd-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --be some service held or something said, you know, in most places but I think, I think that the exception was in Arizo- you know, -zona [Arizona], and places like that we have so few that nobody seemed too-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean I don't remember, there could have something in the school [East Anchorage High School, Anchorage, Alaska], I just don't-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --remember, I do remember the one at the church, but I don't remember at school. Speaker 2: Okay, all right I just wondered. And did you remember your family's reaction to it? Did your father give-- Speaker 1: Well everybody was shocked. I remember my father and so--and so--you know, some of his, you know, colleagues being shocked and concerned but, I mean it was like we were so far removed from so much, you know, that it didn't have the same effect as it did in the lower forty-eight. Speaker 2: And, and you were saying that, that you, you filed a suit? Speaker 1: It wasn't a suit. Speaker 2: I, I thought it was a-- Speaker 1: I filed a complaint [through the Anchorage Human Rights Commission; Anchorage Equal Rights Commission]. Speaker 2: --a complaint, yeah. Speaker 1: Against a restaurant a friend and I had gone to, they refu- basically they refused to service, to serve us and they sent a tester in basically to see whether it was kind of an isolated incident or, I think, I'm not sure how it was resolved, but I did, I mean I've never kind of shied away from those kinds of things, and I was upset that we weren't served. Speaker 2: Okay, but that wasn't the general rule in Alaska? Speaker 1: Not to my knowledge, no (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 635486 Speaker 1: Okay so, here we are at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and, and what was, what was the political climate like at Howard when you were there? Speaker 2: Well there's a lot of activism, I mean, it was just kind of the tail end--well not the tail end but you have the Civil Rights Movement going and then you have the rise of the anti-Vietnam [Vietnam War] activity and I never, no one in my generation pledged a fraternity or sorority. My brother [Robert McClain, Jr.] pledged when he was in grad school, he pledged a grad chapter 'cause there was so much else, else going on that those things, you know, fraternity, sorority didn't seem that important of something to be involved in, you know? Plus at that time, and I've, you know, I just couldn't see paying someone a lot of money for them to be mean to me during pledging, it just didn't make any sense to me. Plus they would come in and take your stuff, you know, if they liked your stereo or whatever, and it just, it just seemed that this is just not something that I'd want to get involved in, and so I never really, I never pledged a sorority and I knew my sister [Dollye McClain] and my other cousins that went to, they were in Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and in other places at this time, you know, it just seemed that there were other things that were more important. Speaker 1: Okay, so did--were you a par- part of campus organizations? Speaker 2: When I was in graduate school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --I was. As an undergraduate I wasn't as involved in student groups, I worked part time on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], first for a Republican congressman from Alaska, there was only one congress person 'cause I'd done so much in high school [East Anchorage High School, Anchorage, Alaska], Howard Pollock [Howard Wallace Pollock], and then I shifted to the Democratic Senate to Mike Gravel. So I was, was, you know, working and, and going to school, but in graduate school when I had, when I was not really, when I was on fellowship and I wasn't working I was, I was very involved in campus activities as well as departmental activities (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now, now was it, was it hard to get an internship on Capitol Hill? Was it a-- Speaker 2: It, well because I had done some stuff in high school, this is what led to the job with the, Alaska only has one congressman, and at that time it was Republican congressman, Howard Pollock. And then when Gravel was elected I shifted to the [U.S.] Senate side, and a number of my other Howard girlfriends, you know, also worked on Capitol Hill. Joann Harris, well Joann Harris Price [ph.], she's worked for Schweiker [Richard Schweiker] out of Pennsylvania. She was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and several others I mean. So I had this kind of group of friends that worked on Capitol Hill and then we were all going to school as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: We- were your positions supported by Howard-- Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: --or, or in any-- Speaker 2: No, you were on the payroll of the, of the House [U.S. House of Representatives] member. Speaker 1: I mean did, did, had Howard helped set 'em up or anything (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: So you just went on your own over-- Speaker 2: Yeah, all of us, well, well my thing was from, you know, all the stuff I'd done in high school in Alaska, you know and Joann had done a lot of stuff in Pennsylvania and they had these connections so that's how, you know. I'm not sure how extensive Howard's internship program and stuff were-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at that particular point in time. Speaker 1: All right. I didn't know that, and it really was, I was-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know whether they did or not-- Speaker 1: --I was just asking if, if--'cause-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --it seemed like something the political science department might, might hook up. Speaker 2: No they, no not at that time. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 635487 Speaker 1: Now, president of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was [HistoryMaker] James Cheek, right? Is that who it is (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes, yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: He came, he became president I think in '69 [1969], or '70 [sic. 1968], it was Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] I think when I started. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then Cheek came in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Well who were some of the professors in poli sci [political science] when you were there then that made an impression on you? Speaker 2: Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Ron was actually my M.A. thesis director. Vincent Brown, Robert Martin, all of whom are now no longer with us. Ron's death was very premature, last fall, or was it spring, I'm trying to--I think it was last spring. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I had some young professors who, well Bill Ellis [William Ellis] was my dissertation director, there was Archie Singham [Archibald Singham]. Paul Roberts [sic. Paul Robertson] who taught methods and then he was recalled by Manley [Michael Manley] back to Jamaica and I think he's head of the, the PNP party [People's National Party] now in, in Jamaica. And then there were some young, just kind of right out of graduate school, [HistoryMaker] Charles Henry who's now at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], had just finished Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and came to Howard. Lenneal Henderson who is now at the University of Baltimore [Baltimore, Maryland], but I think was just out of Berkeley as well, just finished his degree at Berkeley. And this was when, it's 1970, Howard had gotten a million and something dollars from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], and the history department had gotten a similar amount to restructure their graduate programs and to try and recruit black American faculty to Howard in the history department and the political science department. So whereas the department when I was an undergraduate consisted mainly of primarily of white faculty, by the time I, in my junior year of thinking about going to graduate school, the department had completely changed and there were these people like Archie Singham and Bill Ellis who had been at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], who I had thought that, boy I'd really like to go to Michigan to study with them, ended up at Howard. So it was just intellectually, it was just a very, very exciting place and it was a completely different department from when I was an undergraduate, to graduate school. Speaker 1: Okay so that--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so that was one of the reasons why I decided that. Speaker 1: So I'm saying, when you first started most of the teachers were white? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And a lot of them were former CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] or current CIA, and they were adjuncts and they'd, you know, I mean it was, yeah, yeah. But by the time I got to graduate school there'd been this complete-- Speaker 1: That's interesting-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I never would have thought that. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But, yeah I didn't realize that. Now did you have much interaction with the Afro studies department? [HistoryMaker] Russell Adams and-- Speaker 2: Russell, yes, Dr. Adams, he finished he's a, he's a political scientist, had finished this degree at Chicago. And Mickey McGuire, who Robert McGuire [Robert Grayson McGuire III], who passed suddenly was very active, was in African American study- studies, but I remember Dr. Adams well. Speaker 1: Now those were the days you, you were there, I think when they were just starting up the National Black Political Assembly. Did, did you have any interaction with-- Speaker 2: No, I think Ron Walters was involved in that I, I-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --believe, Walters and who else? But no I, I mean I was aware of it and followed it but was not involved in it. Speaker 1: Okay. 'Cause I know it was a big, had a big assembly in Gary, Indiana. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: And then in Little Rock [Arkansas]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, those are also the days of the African Liberation Support Committee. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It was a political international type effort, an African Liberation Day in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I think it was the biggest international political thing that, you know, that happened every year for a number of years. I don't know how many years but, they had four or five years. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, now did you check that out? Or did you, were you-- Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember, I'm sure I must have but I can't remember any vivid memories of me being there. Story_ID: 635488 Speaker 1: So you worked for--now here, now here is where the, the outline actually picks you up right (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: They get you now, so, okay now I can turn to this. All right, okay. So, in '69 [1969], you worked for Mike Gravel, Democrat from Alaska, so, so what did you do for Mike Gravel as an intern? Speaker 2: Oh, I was just, you know, answered letters, ran the, you know, nothing high powered, I was a, you know, a, a, college, young college student operating the robo pen, you know, as they, you know, actually doing some research which I, which I liked. Speaker 1: Oh that is something that most of the people may not know about the robo pen. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Now this here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The autopen, yeah. Speaker 1: See so this, the scientist just signs-- Speaker 2: Signs his signature-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, the letters that are done would come into where this room, there are about three or four of us in there and we would put the, the letters under the, the autopen to, you know, and then seal 'em to go out, yeah. Speaker 1: Then people get the letter and they see the signature scribbled on their wall (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no, it's a machine (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So that's, that's interesting now to bring out, but you're, you were eighteen I guess? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --eighteen years old. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, now it says here in 1970, now I don't know this doesn't make any sense to me but, you become program coordinator for the National Coordinating Council on Drug Abuse [National Coordinating Council on Drug Abuse Education and Information; National Coordinating Council on Drug Education]? Th- that can't be right, is it? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was-- Speaker 1: Oh? Is it? Speaker 2: --a position, I left Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] and I went to this, this group that, I don't know whether I was program coordinator, I'm not sure what it's, I'd, I helped with programs on drug abuse and that thing. It wasn't, I don't, I don't think I was there very long. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And then I worked for, I'm trying to remember, I think I was working someplace else before I went to that program, 'cause then I came back to Capitol Hill and, with Birch Bayh at some point, some I'm not, but I did work with a, with a, with a group drug, national drug council. Speaker 1: Okay. So Birch Bayh, you're like twenty years old-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --when you're with Birch Bayh. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, did--well why did you leave Gravel's office or, or how did it, well I guess you'd already left Gravel's office? Speaker 2: I had left Gravel's office-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and I went to work for this, for this drug coordinating council. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause they made me a, a nice offer and as a college--I mean, you're not making much money, you know, so anything kind of seems useful. And there was a woman who went to work there that used to work for a Michigan senator, Annette Abrams, she also went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and so I went there. I'm not sure exactly what, why I left Gravel's office, 'cause he was still in office, I mean he hadn't been defeated yet so, I don't know, they must have just offered me a little bit more money. Speaker 1: Okay. So Birch, Birch Bayh, so I--is it, is it, would it be fa- true to say that if you, well once you start interning on Capitol Hill and you know what's going on it's easier to get a good job (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To get a, to get another job and to get back, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: All right, okay so what was going on with Birch Bayh's office the same kind of thing? Speaker 2: Same kind of thing, and then that was the year that he was running for president and then he stopped running, I mean his, his first wife, Marvella [Marvella Hern Bayh] was diagnosed with cancer and so he, he did not run. And then, I think I was on the campaign payroll for working out of the Capitol Hill office but I'm not sure. And so when all of that kind of went away then lots of staff went away. Story_ID: 635489 Speaker 1: You also worked for EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission]? Speaker 2: Yes, now that was an internship. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a very long internship. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I did that through the rest of my undergraduate days [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and I think I did that through part of my graduate school [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] before I actually went on fellowship, 'cause when I started graduate school I wasn't on fellowship, yeah, but, but I, I worked there for, for a couple of years I think. Speaker 1: Okay, now what did, what did, did you learn at EEOC? Speaker 2: I learned a lot about compliance and Title VII, you know, the backlog on cases, I mean how long it, it took, you know, when you filed a complaint, you had to file first with the state agency and there had to be so many days that click by before the federal agency could pick it up. And when I was at the EEOC, the backlog on cases was just so incredible, they still had some cases that they even hadn't made decisions on from when the agency was first setup and I think the agency went online in '66 [1966], or '67 [1967], 'cause it was grew, grew out of Title VII of the '64 Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII], you know. And so you just saw how, I mean and so many people were suffering but it was like this, this big organization found it very difficult to kind of give people relief, you know, 'cause it have at that point--it didn't have cease and desist authority. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, it didn't have subpoena authority, you had to go through the justice department, I think they do have it now but at that time, so much, you had to go to the [U.S.] Department of Justice to, to get the kinds of powers you needed to help people who were discriminated against. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is all during the Nixon administration [President Richard Milhous Nixon], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 635490 Speaker 1: Now at, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in those early years, those first four years, did--I know Howard is, always brings speakers to campus and there's always something going on. What, what part of campus life did you participate in and what did, did, did anybody come, come to campus and really impress you? Speaker 2: Well there were just, I mean there was always people, I mean Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was around. Speaker 1: Yeah that's right when he was for--forming Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: PUSH. Speaker 1: --and all that, during that-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now he sticks out on my mi- he sticks out, I mean I, I know I went to lots of other talks, you know. Or Bill Cosby's comedy routine when he used to perform at, at Howard and he'd talk about Howard women so bad, 'cause he'd say he would, he would be at Cramton Auditorium [Washington, D.C.] and he said he used to come to Howard's campus and stand by that tree right out there and no one wanted to give him a look 'cause his daddy wasn't a doctor and he wasn't light and everything, you know, and so don't come up and talk to me now because, you know. And he was being funny, but I think he was actually being quite truthful. But Jesse Jackson stands out because in one of my speech classes, one of our assignments was to, it was speech or mass communication, it wasn't even called mass communication at that point, so it must have been just speech, speech class. The group was divided into two parts and one group was to sit in the audience, listen to a speech by watching a visual, the others of us were either to st- to, you know, stand in the back with our backs turned but not to be rude, or to be in a--in, in, in a way like outside the door where all you could hear was what he was saying but didn't have the visual. And our views of the speech were really quite different, you know, those of us, I was in the group that, that didn't have a visual, you know, and we thought, well my gosh it seemed disjointed, we couldn't understand, you know, what the point was or where he was going. Whereas, the people who sat in the audience and could see the visual and everything, you know, really thought, oh well yeah, he was going here, he was going there, so it did--it, it, it was an exercise in, in how much the visual plays into what people hear. Speaker 1: What was the conclusion of that study? Speaker 2: I can't remember. Speaker 1: I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, in, in our group is that the visual does make a difference in speech making. You know, that even a, a kind of rambling disjointed speech, if people are seeing the speaker who's really cri- you know, charismatic, that there's this, this perception that, yes the speech was really wonderful. Whereas those of us who were listening without any visual didn't think that the speech was as wonderful as those that were sitting in the audience. Story_ID: 635491 Speaker 1: At Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] are there any stories from your undergraduate days about something that really made an impression on you that was going on, on campus or in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was always so much going on, I'm trying to think if there was any one particular event. I mean one event that I do remember and it wasn't at Howard, it was because I was working for a Republican congressman [Howard Wallace Pollock], I was able to see Nixon's inauguration, although I wasn't a fan of Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. Speaker 1: Now this in '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: No, this was in '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause he won in '68 [1968]-- Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: --and was inaugurated in, in '69 [1969]. I think--and this is not like a major event, but I just do, there used to be, and there probably still is now, the student kind of lounge area was called the Punch Out, and the reason it was called the Punch Out was that every student that spent their days there punched out of the university, failed out of the university. And I remember I would go in there sometimes and there'd be all of these kids playing cards, you know, and I just couldn't understand how you could play cards all day and get your work done? And obviously they didn't so--which is why it was called, it was called the Punch Out. There were things at Howard at the time that you had to take swimming and pass swimming in order to graduate. And the pools were kind of sex segregated. There was this women's pool in this old building, I guess it used to be the physical education building and well there was this pool in this basement, it wasn't even a full size pool. It was just a small thing where they had built this new gym at that time, which had I guess a much larger pool which is where the men got to swim. But the thing that I remember about this old gym where we had our classes in swimming, was in this room where we were doing exercises, there were no machines or anything, but there was a picture of Martin Delany in his uniform that was taken during the Civil War. Speaker 1: In the pool, the room with the pool? Speaker 2: Not the pool (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: In, in the room where we exercised-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but it was in this building where the pool was in the basement, but it must have been the exer- the, the men's exercise place before they built this new one-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and then they turned this old facility over to the women and I used to, I was, I would just marvel that this picture sat on the wall in this building, I would--this very, very famous, famous man, you know, I was thinking well maybe this should be in the Moorland-Spingarn room [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.] or something but, you know, there was just so much, but I just, you know, I was a real fan of Martin Delany having read a lot about him, in my black political thought class. Story_ID: 635492 Speaker 1: Oh I think, I guess one of the events when I, was when Tony Brown became dean of the new school of communication [School of Communications]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Then it was--'cause I used to watch 'Tony Brown's Journal' all the time and he was like, I think he was the founding dean, I guess 'cause it's now called the Johnson School of Communications [John H. Johnson School of Communications; Cathy Hughes School of Communications], but he was the founding dean and that was like a big deal on campus. I mean, he doesn't have a Ph.D., to my knowledge but, but, you know, he was this-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --this famous person there. Speaker 2: There's, there's a Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--two Howard connections there that I remember from his show, and one was Chancellor Williams in the history-- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) department, who wrote 'Destruction of Black Civilization' ['The Destruction of Black Civilization: Great Issues of a Race from 4500 B.C. to 2000 A.D.']. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And the other one is Frances Welsing [Frances Cress Welsing]. Speaker 1: Yes, now that I remember. Speaker 2: Who had the battle with the, the white guy who won the Nobel Prize about race [Nobel Prize in Physics]. Speaker 1: Jen- Jenkins--Shockley? Speaker 2: Yeah, Shockley (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Shockley. Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: Shockley. Speaker 2: --William Shockley. Speaker 1: Shockley. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. You know, at the time, though that's, I, I remember when Frances Welsing came out with her theory that blacks--I think whites, if I can remember this, this was so long, whites envied the melanin of the, that blacks had or something, you know. And as an academic now, I'm a little suspect of her, well I'm not even sure what her methodology was. But the faculty that I remember that--I mean besides the ones in political science was, there was a historian by the name of Olive Taylor who I just thought her classes were so incredible, I mean she was so phenomenal in terms of her teaching style she was very dynamic. I also liked Rayford Logan, I mean he, you know, was really at the tail end of his career then, but it was just like, how can you not want to take a class from this giant, you know. I never had a class with Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown], but he was still, still around at that time. Speaker 2: But John Killens [John Oliver Killens] was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I never took a class with him. Speaker 2: Did, did you take many literature classes or writing classes? Speaker 1: Not any- I took what was required, but I didn't, most of my, my courses were in political science and history-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --'cause I was a history minor. Speaker 2: Do you remember Chike Onwuachi [P. Chike Onwuachi] in, he's a political scientist. Speaker 1: No, he wasn't there when I was there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Who was it? I, I did take a writing class, but that was the only, I think other than, than what I was required to take. Speaker 2: I remember you were saying that, that undergraduates who wanna be law students should probably take writing and philosophy? Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was wondering if you took any writing classes or-- Speaker 1: I took one, I took one and I can't remember who the professor was but it was, I'm even blanking on the term, what is it? (Unclear), it's not like free form or something like that but it was a writing class, yeah. Speaker 2: Di- did you take any philosophy? Speaker 1: Yes, but I can't remember with whom, and I, I have to look at my transcript, I can't, I can't remember with whom, but yes I had to take, I had to take that, those, but I can't remember who, who taught me. Story_ID: 635493 Speaker 1: At any rate, on the verge of graduation, did you think about leaving Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to pursue your master's [degree] or? Speaker 2: I had thought about going to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], but then when the folks from Michigan ended up at Howard, you know, it was Paul Robinson [sic. Paul Robertson], not, not Roberts, I said, Paul Robinson, Archie Singham [Archibald Singham], Bill Ellis [William Ellis]. And Michigan had imploded, the department had imploded at that point, which is why a lot of these people were leaving. And so it just seems since it was co- completely new department and it was so, you know, one of the areas that I was interested in was, it was called black politics at the time, we now refer to the broad areas as kind of race, ethnicity and politics. And that's what I, I mean I could get that at Howard from people who were writing in the area during some of the early work. Speaker 1: That was, was there a, before we get completely away from undergraduate school, was there a capstone paper that you had to write in political science to graduate? And what, wh- what, was it a research paper? Speaker 2: I wrote a research paper on Roosevelt's [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] kitchen cabinet on Mary McLeod Bethune, and Ralph Bunche and others. It wasn't an undergraduate thesis, I think it was a major paper for a class, but it was a lot of original research, I mean I just, I just found research really interesting and fascinating. I mean, to be able to contribute to knowledge just seemed so exciting to me. Story_ID: 635494 Speaker 1: So, graduate school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], what was your thesis in graduate school? Speaker 2: I took this class from Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] which was called comparative politics of black communities, and for the paper we had to choose a black community in a white host country, these were Ron's words, and we could not use the United States, we couldn't use any of the Caribbean and he, all of these places he put off limits. I ended up doing my work on blacks in Canada, my paper for that class on black Canadians. And I got so fascinated by the topic and there was not a lot of work out there. Then I did that for my master's [degree] thesis and we were in--at Howard at the time, you had to write a full master's thesis on your way to your dissertation, you know, there wasn't the kind of, you know, more recent thing where you're granted a master's along the way after you pass your Ph.D. qualifying exam. So I basically took six different sets of comprehensive exams, two on my master's and four on my doctorate, you know on the way to the doctorate. But I was so fascinated by this topic that I wrote it for my master's thesis and it became my dissertation. And my first little monograph, it was ca- which was called 'Alienation and Resistance: The Political Behavior of Afro-Canadians' [Paula D. McClain], and so, for my dissertation I did fieldwork and I used three communities, Toronto [Canada], Montreal [Canada] and Halifax, Nova Scotia [Canada], each of which had different black Canadian communities, each with different experiences with, with the country. And in fact, even in 2012, and I graduated in December of '77 [1977], there's more work on black Canadians, but not a lot, I mean I ran into a woman at a conference, the American Political Science Association conference in Seattle [Washington] recently who is teaching at McGill [McGill University, Montreal, Canada] or whatever and I told her, you know, that I did my dissertation or whatever. She said, "You're the one?" She says, "You know, we've heard that there's a study that was done by an American," and so I still, tho- that work still gets cites, you know? But each of these communities was very different, most people assume that blacks in Ontario were descendants of escaped American slaves, but many of the slaves that escaped to Canada returned to the United States after emancipation. So, Hiram Revels [Hiram Rhodes Revels] and Blanche K. Bruce, you know, actually one or, one or both of them had been in Canada and then returned to the United States to run for elected office or in the senators things, they didn't run at the time you were appointed by the state legislature. And Canada had a slave trade but because it bordered the United States, their issues related to slavery were really not talked about a lot. So you have these pockets in Hamilton [Canada] and outside Durham [Canada], of blacks who are descendant from these earlier groups and then into Montreal, I mean, into Toronto after World War II [WWII], you have more of this Caribbean and African immigration. And Halifax, during the American Revolutionary War, the British put together several fighting units called Black Pioneers, these were U.S. slaves who their service for fighting for British was freedom and transport to Halifax, or to Nova Scotia and given land. So outside of Halifax and Dartmouth [Canada] you have all of these little pockets of black communities that are descendants of this, of those that fought in the Black Pioneers. And then the British transported a lot of maroons when they were trying to put down the uprising in Jamaica and put them into Halifax, Nova Scotia. In Montreal, some of them were descendants of slaves, but Oscar Peterson is from Montreal, the actor Raymond St. Jacques is from Montreal, I mean, so there're all of these black Canadians who grew up in the Little Burgundy region [Montreal, Canada], which was where down by the, the railroad depot, 'cause a lot of them were Pullman porters, you know, that would go across Canada on, well I don't they were called Pullman in Canada, but still the same kind of, of porter. So it was, it was really fascinating, you know? And I teach a comparative race class now [at Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], which is kind of an extension of, of, of, not my dissertation but this emerging area of comparative race where you look at issues of race, not just in the United States but across lots of countries. Story_ID: 635495 Speaker 1: How does the black Canadian experience compare to the one in the United States? Speaker 2: Well, the first summer I did some fieldwork, which was '74 [1974], no '75 [1975], summer of '75 [1975]. I had done all this fieldwork and, well all of this, this, this research and I got into the field and I realized these people are Canadians, so this framework that I brought with me as a black American, I had to kind of step back, I mean I, I still did some work in '75 [1975]. But I had to learn a lot about Canadian society, about Canadian values, about the governmental structure and in Canada they go up to grade thirteen, as opposed to grade twelve. So my first time into there I was saying, okay, education is so important for black Americans, you know? Why wasn't I seeing it among black Canadians? Well, it wasn't, didn't have the same value for Canadians in general, that we think about in terms of the U.S. at the time, so trying to evaluate black Canadians by some American--black American standard just was not going to work. So when I regrouped and learned a lot about the Canadian governmental structure, I realize that a national civil rights movement would not be possible in Canada because of the parliamentary structure and that so many powers were reserved for the provinces, and civil rights was one of those that was a provincial issue so that organizing to, to pressure parliament to do something was not going to get you anywhere. So you ended up with these very localized groups in Nova Scotia [Canada], in Quebec [Canada], in Ontario [Canada], that then, you know, worked to get the provincial governments to pass legislation guaranteeing certain civil rights. The head of the Ontario Civil Rights Com- Human Rights Commission [Ontario Human Rights Commission] at the time was an American by the name of Dan Hill [Daniel G. Hill], who was a Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] grad, and I used a lot of Howard connections to kind of get to people. His son Dan Hill, Jr. [Dan Hill] actually, years ago, became a very famous musician, Canadian musician. And so, black Canadians could gain or lose rights as they moved from one province to another, you know. So there were so many differences. And also, they kind of looked to the United States and what blacks were doing in the United States as kind of benchmarks or guidelines to kind of help them think about how they wanted to push their issues. But also in, you know, Toronto [Canada], at that point still had a functioning unit of the you--Universal Negro Improvement Association for Marcus Garvey, I mean there were some very elderly black Canadians who still would hold meetings, you know? And I mean Garvey had been deported since what, late '30s [1930s]? Speaker 1: Twenty-seven [1927]. Speaker 2: Or '20s [1920s], I mean, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, but here in Toronto you still had this unit of the Universal Negro Improvement Association and so it was lots of different, different contrast and things to the U.S. case. Speaker 1: I think Garvey was, well his last visit to North America was to Canada 'cause he wasn't allowed to come into the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Into the United States. Speaker 1: Yeah so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and-- Speaker 1: And, you know, that's so he died in 1940, so I, I, yeah, but yeah there's still a UNIA now actually. Speaker 2: Yeah, still, still functioning, I, it was and it was just ama- they still, you know, and I just found that fascinating. Speaker 1: Okay so, so this became your Ph.D. dis- dissertation as well (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yes. Story_ID: 635496 Speaker 1: Well let me go, I, you know, I, I failed to ask you about Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] in '68 [1968], when you start off, did, did, I know he was-- Speaker 2: He was assassinated (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --when I, I was at my aunties, I had come in from Alaska to Kentucky, to Louisville, Kentucky, and I had this transistor radio and turned it on when I woke up and that's when I was hearing that Robert Kennedy had been assassinated, I think it was in August [sic. June] I believe. Speaker 1: Now, now were you for Robert Kennedy's campaign for president? 'Cause it--I know that the Democrats were split then and I'm not-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --asking you if you actually worked on the campaign, if you did, you should tell me, but, but if, were you for Kennedy or, or McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] or any of the other candidates for--? Speaker 2: When I, in '68 [1968], I mean, well I was kind of like freshly out of Alaska, you know, going to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] so-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --all of this was going on, but I at that point, you know, as a new eighteen year old right out of Alaska hadn't really kind of focused on those campaigns. And since I was going to work for a Republican [Howard Wallace Pollock], even though I was not a Republican, I was a registered Democrat, but if you got one congressperson from Alaska, you know, you kind of work where, you know, the office is. So, I would not have, even if I had wanted to work for McCarthy, I couldn't when I was working for a Republican congressman for-- Speaker 1: And, was there any particular candidate that you gravitated towards the most? Or was it, you know, of tho- of that group of Humphrey [Hubert Humphrey], McCarthy and Kennedy? Speaker 2: Probably, I mean, Kennedy by the time I got to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] had already been assassinated, so McCarthy probably was more in keeping with where I was politically at that time, but working for a Republican. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now also you, you were at, still in school at '72 [1972], when McGovern [George McGovern] ran against Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And so, how did you, did you have any strong feelings in, in '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: Well, really for McGovern I mean, you know, Birch Bayh had been in the race-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and then had to pull out, so clearly it was McGovern, you know who had my support. Now it was a horrible election, I mean you know, Nixon won in a landslide. Speaker 1: Yeah di- did you have any analysis of that? I mean wh- what were people saying about that, that then? I mean why McGovern who had such good will and, you know-- Speaker 2: I can't, I don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was trounced by-- Speaker 2: I mean he was really trounced, you know? I think in '72 [1972], I don't think the nation as a whole had moved in the direction of as much opposition to Vietnam [Vietnam War] as we ended up being. And, I mean, this all kind of hindsight, I mean, McGovern focused on a lot of his voters were young voters and what we know is that young people don't turn out as much, you know, and as consistently as older, older voters do. And, you know, I mean, it was, it was, I mean, clearly there was more involved when, you know, I think the only state McGovern took, was that D.C.? I mean did he take his own? Speaker 1: I mean that, that--was it South Dakota? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Or North- North--was it North? Speaker 2: One of those (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --Dakotas. Speaker 1: It was Dakotas, I think, yeah. I think he, I think he got his own state, I think, he got, he, he may have got three, three others-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was, it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) like Massachusetts maybe, and? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was-- Speaker 1: He might have gotten Illinois. Story_ID: 635497 Speaker 1: Now this is--the reason why, you know, inside school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I mean this is such a, when, when you're in school there's, there's a lot of talk and a lot of debate and they've got professors you know, giving their opinions and, you know, all, lots of organizations around. Did, wh- what do you remember much of the discussion and talk about Watergate? Speaker 2: Oh, a lot, I mean a lot, I mean because it was, I mean as it was unfolding in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and on the front pages of The Washington Post, it's like, you know, and if you were already not positively inclined to Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], all of this just continued to reinforce what you thought you knew about him anyway. Speaker 1: So? I-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: From what I remember the news started breaking in '73 [1973], I guess. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean, it really started breaking, I mean they mentioned it in '72 [1972], when the election was going on, but it didn't-- Speaker 2: It didn't, it didn't-- Speaker 1: But the real mess started-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --emerging in '73 [1973]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, you know, and we didn't have, I mean the way we have now the instant, you know and the tw- and the cable, the cable channels, I mean when you think about at the time that journalist were really journalist, you know? I mean, Woodward [Bob Woodward] and Bernstein [Carl Bernstein], if Ben Bradlee had told 'em, "You need to st- you know, stop this," but Ben Bradlee let them, let them run with it. And my goodness, I mean the, the corruption, the constitutional violations, I mean it's just like a crook in the White House, I mean literally, a crook in the White House. Speaker 1: Were, were you surprised that, I guess em- employees of Nixon's campaign actually had-- Speaker 2: No, I had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) burglarized-- Speaker 2: --worked on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, and working on Capitol Hill quickly disabuses you of any sense that these elected officials are there to represent the constituents, I mean, it, you know, you go in with this, you know, kind of idealized view of, of government and the importance and everything of this. And then, when you're on Capitol Hill for a while, you realize that, you know, congressmen, senators go to vote not having read anything, they vote what their staff tells them too. I mean there were people when I was on the [U.S.] Senate side there were senators that were talked about as being like good senators, Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] was viewed as a good senator in the sense that he actually paid attention to issues and things and his staff was good enough that, that he was really versed on stuff. Birch Bayh was considered a good senator because he had issues that were really important to him, he was up on things, he actually read things, his subcommittee was juvenile delinquency [U.S. Senate Subcommittee on Juvenile Delinquency] and so, but then there were others you knew who, you know, who people knew didn't read anything, didn't, you know, were inebriated most of the time, I mean. So, it's, it's, it--working on Capitol Hill does not reinforce the positive about, about government, you know, which kind of amazes me 'cause I still went into political science, I teach this, I, you know, but I love it, I love it so. Speaker 1: So, now when you were in school, did the Democrats control the--both houses? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: At the, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So they controlled the Senate and the House [U.S. House of Representatives] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: And but the president was-- Speaker 2: Was-- Speaker 1: --Nixon? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Richard Nixon? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, did the department basically follow Water- I mean di- did--was it a--I, you know, I--did they really--? Speaker 2: I'm not sure whether we talked about it a lot in all the classes, 'cause the classes, you know, IR [international relations], I mean different classes. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I know the graduate students, you know, we talked about it a lot, I mean, and it was great for faculty that were teaching American politics during Watergate because you had kind of readymade lesson plans, you know, to kind of talk about these issues. But, I don't remember in terms of my graduate school whether that became the central focus of our discussion in class as much as it was at just a generalized discussion of undergraduate students. Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wondered if field trips were actually, you know, reorganized to go to the trial, you know? I mean technically they were hit there-- Speaker 2: The hearings, no I don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hearings. Speaker 2: I think some of the faculty were able to get, to get seats in the hearings, but, you know. And of course, I mean we all, you know, watched Barbara Jordan's speech late at night, you know, on the house committee [U.S House Committee on the Judiciary] when they were debating impeachment articles, impeachment for Nixon, I think she came on like 11:30 or something at night. But it wa- it's, it's one of those speeches that you remember and she was just, I mean, her speaking voice and her phrasing and her--I mean it was just, it was phenomenal, you know to watch her. Story_ID: 635498 Speaker 1: It says here that you worked as a consultant for the Social Science Research Center at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, I did a manual, I did a social science manual on, on research sources, I have no idea where that manual is-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at this time, but that's what that was about. Speaker 1: Okay but it, this indicates that you really know your research and how to research and with your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that time, I mean and computers weren't-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That was the time when nobody had any computers so it was all library, you know, card file sources to try and find material, you know, the big printouts of the census data and, you know? Speaker 1: Did you, did, did you call to make strong relationships with lab- certain librarians to be able to get what you needed? Speaker 2: I think so, I mean Howard, Howard had some very good reference librarians and it was also, they also had a consortium with other area universities so you could go use whatever books and things Howard didn't have, you could go over to Catholic [The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.] or GW [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.] or Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] or Maryland [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland] at that point and use theirs as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay so, you got your Ph.D. in 1977? Speaker 2: I finished in the summer of-- Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, although Howard has me in the class of '78 [1978]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because the degree wasn't, the actual graduation ceremony wasn't until May, but I defended in July, July 21 of 1977, and my transcript was stamped on December 31, 1977, so I always put down '77 [1977]-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --as having gotten my degree. Speaker 1: Okay now, now you end up going to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] to conduct some research. Now, what was that for? Speaker 2: Well that was, I took classes. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: That was the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. That's a big quantitative statistical training, and I did the summer of '78 [1978], and the summer of '79 [1979]. Story_ID: 635499 Speaker 1: All right so, after graduation for--well after your Ph.D. work was done, you took a job at University of Wisconsin I mean--at Milwaukee (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Milwaukee, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right, I defended my dissertation in July-- Speaker 1: UWM. Speaker 2: --I, I got the job, I mean 'cause you're on the market, you know, that, that fall and spring when you're finishing your dissertation, and I took the position, defended my dissertation on July 21, 1977, 'cause I had to have it finished by August 1st to go as an assistant professor, if I didn't finish, I'd have a year and I'd be an instructor. So I finished it, my dad and I drove up, I had a little Volkswagen, I rented an apartment of a woman who was coming back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], she was a Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] grad or something, and so we literally just kind of switched apartments, she took mine in D.C. and I took hers and I started as an assistant professor at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now that's--but you, you didn't like Milwaukee very much? Speaker 2: I didn't like the City of Milwaukee [Wisconsin], I loved the department, at that time it was, it was a highly ranked department, there were some really incredible people in it. And I met the, the guy who became my mentor, Harold Rose, who's an urban geographer was at UWM. But I didn't like the city, it was very segregated, I mean on, on the segregation index, it was always either one or two switching with Chicago [Illinois], in terms of being segregated neighborhoods, and Milwaukee was the city where the school system had been put in the hands of a special master under the federal court because there had been collusion with the school board, the banks, the real estate agents and the lending institutions to keep blacks on the North Side of Milwaukee and to prevent them from, from spilling over. And whenever they spilled over into another neighborhood, then the school board would redraw the districts, so that these black kids always stayed in these, these historically black schools. So there was this, this, this, you know, underlying tension as well as, there was always, you know, you come to a four way stop, there was a bar on each, on each, you know, corner, the breweries were wor- you know, Schlitz [Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company], Millers [Miller Brewing Company], I mean all the breweries. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, so the city smelled like hops all the time. And at that time the most popular show, this was in '77 [1977], was 'Happy Days' and I tell my folks, well by this time, my dad had remarried, and told my parents [McClain's stepmother, Annette Williams McClain and Robert McClain, Sr.], you know, "You think that's Milwaukee in the '50s [1950s]? This is Milwaukee today." I mean it was, you know, I'd go to Chicago as often as I could to shop or, you know, but there was good jazz in Milwaukee because Al Jarreau was from Milwaukee, and Buddy Montgomery, part of The Montgomery Brothers, Wes [Wes Montgomery] trio. Buddy had come to Milwaukee some years before, had met someone, a woman, settled down and he would play in the bar at the Pfister Hotel [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] when he was in town when he wasn't touring, so you could go down and just, and just listen to great jazz, but I did not like Milwaukee. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were in Milwaukee for how many years? Speaker 2: Well, I think two or three 'cause then I got a post doc [postdoctoral fellowship] at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, and so I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] from '80 [1980], to '81 [1981]. Speaker 1: Okay but you, you--oh you did the re- this research at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) During the summer. Speaker 1: During the summer? Speaker 2: During the summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was statistics. I took courses in statistics and quantitative methods, that's what ICPSR does, the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, they run courses. And the newest statistical techniques, foundations, a whole host of things, I did two summers-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) up there. Story_ID: 635500 Speaker 1: In '81 [1981], you went to Wharton School at Penn [University of Pennsylvania] then you said, so. Speaker 2: I think it, was it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's a post doc [postdoctoral fellowship]-- Speaker 2: But was it '80 [1980], '81 [1981]? Speaker 1: It was '80 [1980], '81 [1981], is that it? Speaker 2: I'm trying to think. I st- it was '77 [1977], '78 [1978]; '78 [1978], '79 [1979], I thought I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the Wharton School fr- '80 [1980], '81 [1981] 'cause I thought I went to Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] in '81 [1981]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The fall of '81 [1981], I believe. Speaker 1: All right, University of Pennsylvania so, now what other schools did business-- Speaker 2: The business school. Speaker 1: The business school. Speaker 2: Yeah. They had a group called the st- statistical, well the Analysis Center, it was the Analysis Center for statistics and energy research [Analysis Center for Evaluation of Energy Modeling and Statistics]. And so, I went to work with a bunch of statisticians, I had, had no background in energy at the time but that's what they were doing in terms of trying to verify the federal government's models on, on, on crude petroleum production and all of those kinds of things. And so I, I basically had a year to work on my own work but also kind of honed some on my skills. Speaker 1: And this--just kind of speak about how important that kind of work is. I mean every time we turn on the news these days for the political campaigns and they give statistics, they give statistics about what life is supposed to be like today in the pa- paper everyday what, what did--what would you say? Speaker 2: I mean I find my work has I mean two different elements I have some qualitative, but highly, but, but the other part of it is, is, is highly quantitative and one of the things that as a social scientist, as a political scientist, what you want is not conjectures, you don't want kind of anecdotes, you want to be able to show some generalized patterns and the only way you can do that is with data that allows you to run some statistical models. Now it doesn't mean that people--some person can't say, "Well, that doesn't, you know, that's not my experience." Yeah, it might not be, but we can talk about some generalized patterns. So we know a lot based on, on, on data on black voters and various Latino voting groups and Asian voting groups, we, you know, we know lots of things now that the anecdotal data would not have told us at all. And so I find that these, these, these skills, and that's what they are, statistics are skills, are very important. And also, because the news media, they're interested in, in what we call marginal, just the percentages, you know, of what people, you know, which people are--favor Romney [Mitt Romney], which people favor Santorum [Rick Santorum]. As social scientist and political scientist we're interested in the why, you know, what's behind that, what types of people, you know, what income groups, what racial groups, what kind of historical characteristics go into this? So we're more interested in, in the why and what it might tell us in terms of predicting, projecting out and, you know, as we run up to the 2012 election, a number of political scientists will run their models and will give predictions as to where in fact, they think the race is gonna be. In 2008, most of them were correct in terms of the percentages where it was gonna fall. Speaker 1: Okay, so (cough), so you, you're at the, the Wharton School is a good place to learn, the, the Analysis Center there is used for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. It, it no longer exists. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: But it was, it was, it was statisticians and I enjoyed that year there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now you're doing like, higher--that, that statistics is higher mathematics? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a branch of mathematics. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I don't do, I can't stand at a board and do, you know, derivations and those kinds of things, but I know exactly what's going on behind the statistics that I use. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, and what I should look out for and what violations of assumptions, those kinds of things so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. 'Cause I know that two, you know, two streams of some--but, you know, I mean well I know being able to understand the statistic is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --is really important. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Some people-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --will look-- Speaker 2: And what assumptions went into-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, what, I mean 'cause the machine will give you a number, okay you just have to understand whether or not, you know, whether or not, you know, you can put any confidence in that number or those coefficients. So you need to kind of back behind to see what the researcher, what assumptions the researcher built into the model that she's using, and how much credence you should put in the results that you see. Story_ID: 635501 Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-two [1982], you moved to Arizona State University-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in Tempe [Arizona]? Speaker 2: Tempe, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay now you're back in Arizona? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now did-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --did you still have family there in Arizona (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh no. No, my dad [Robert McClain, Sr.] still had friends, so when he and my stepmom [Annette Williams McClain] would come to visit us we'd drive to Sierra Vista [Arizona] 'cause a lot of those soldiers never run, never trans- you know, they were never rotated so they ended up buying homes in Sierra Vista and staying out there. Speaker 1: Okay, so how, how did you like the University of Arizona? Speaker 2: I was at Arizona State. Speaker 1: Arizona State. Speaker 2: Arizona State. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: I enjoyed it, I mean I was in an all graduate unit, it was a School of Public Affairs, it was then an all graduate unit, no undergraduates, and I enjoyed the school, I enjoyed my colleagues, I met my husband [Paul C. Jacobson] in Arizona-- Speaker 1: Well how did you met? Speaker 2: And, at the Episcopal church right off campus, St. Augustine's [St. Augustine's Episcopal Parish, Tempe, Arizona], he, he attended he, he had gone to law school at Arizona State, he did his undergraduate at Pomona College [Claremont, California] and then--he was actually raised in Phoenix [Arizona] although he was born in New York. And we met at St. Augustine's and then we were married at St. Augustine's in Tempe. Then in '90 [1990], we moved to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Well is there, anything sig- significant at the, in your days at the--well I know you, you edited a book ['Urban Minority Administrators: Politics, Policy, and Style'] with Albert Kar- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Al Karnig [Albert Karnig]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He's now president of Cal State, San Bernardino [California State University, San Bernardino, San Bernardino, California]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: He was the director of the school when I was hired, and Al and I actually wrote a number of pieces together, articles, my first article in the American Pol- American Political Science Review was co-edit- co-authored with, Al Karnig-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in 1990, and so, I got, I mean I got a lot of work done, one of the things when I was--the School of Public Affairs was a public policy, public administration program and I enjoyed it but I realize that my own research trajectory was not going into the direction of public administration and public policy. And so I had to kind of have this two pronged strategy in terms of my research of publishing in public policy journals, but also making sure I'd published in political science journals so that I could actually return to a straight political science program, which is what I did when I went to the University of Virginia. Story_ID: 635502 Speaker 1: All right so, '89 [1989], let's see, okay with, with Harold Rose you released 'Race, Place, and Risk' (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'And Risk: Black Homicide in Urban America' ['Race, Place, and Risk: Black Homicide in Urban America,' Paula D. McClain and Harold Rose]. Speaker 1: Okay Speaker 2: It was the first, well what--among the first in depth studies of black on black homicide, and we used five or six different cities; it was Detroit [Michigan], St. Louis [Missouri], Houston [Texas], L.A. [Los Angeles, California], but there were six cities, I'm blanking on, St. Louis, did I say St. Louis? But the causes and the factors that contributed to what we were seeing at that point was an increase on black on black violence and we had a lot of different--Harold as a res- Harold is just a creative researcher. We started with a, with a sample of victims which we got by ordering data from public health departments in the cities, the study ran from 1960 through '85 [1985], I believe, so we had about twenty-five years' worth of data and we ordered death certificates based on the health departments names and numbers of who died, I mean there's a difference, we didn't use the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] statistics because if, if you look at 'em you have, you come up with two different numbers because the FBI has statistics on everybody who died within the city, and we were only interested in residents and county health departments only keep the stats of resident deaths I mean in terms of the ones that they report. So by starting with the city or county health department, then ordering death certificates for all of the people and then identifying the black victims, I mean it was just a real lot of detective work to kind of get to, once we got the victims sample, then we were able to find out whether anyone was ever arrested for the homicide and if they were what the dep- disposition of the case was. And so we had victim data, we got, if we could identify the offender and if they were incarcerated we got interviews, there, I actually did a series of interviews in, it's coming back to me, Jackson, which is the women's prison up in Michigan. Then once we, you know, then got data on the offenders, we got school data on the victims, I mean it was, it was just a massive effort and, an incr- an incredible study that really kind of talked about the various factors of why some cities looked like they were high homicide cities in the aggregate like Atlanta [Georgia]. But basically in Atlanta most of the homicides were domestic, so unless you were in that particular household, your risk of being a homicide victim was a lot lower than in a place like St. Louis where it was mostly unknown and on the street. So we identified all of these differences in the rate of black homicide and the factors that contributed to it. Speaker 1: Is there a generalization that, that can be extrapolated from that research that could characterize black on black crime in--? Speaker 2: I don't think, given the fact that we found differences among cities that there's one generalization that one can identify. But, what our work it was it spawned a lot of other work, you know? And there's lots of people now, lots of scholars who have done more work on black homicide and I no longer do that, I think the last piece Harold and I wrote was an update in '95 [1995], I believe on the cities-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that we had looked at. Story_ID: 635503 Speaker 1: Well first it's like, could we generalize that most black victims of homicides are people that are known by the perpetrator or I don't know, could you? Speaker 2: It varies, it varies. That's what I was talking about the differences in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Yeah, but is there a--did you do like a, did you mush these together at some point all the cit- cities and then try to get a generalization about most of (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think we did a, a statistical analysis like that because, although we tried to get comparable data across cities, sometimes the way the data were collected or recorded was, was different. In fact, I had a sabbatical at Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], and what we were interested in is that you get these data and the homicides are classified as unknown meaning that neither the, the victim or the offender knew each other, or they'd get classified as drug related and we wanted to know, you know, what went into these classifications? So since I was in Tempe [Arizona] and I had a sabbatical coming up, I got permission to ride with the Phoenix [Arizona] homicide detail, and I did that for six months and they would call me on--originally, initially they were calling me on every homicide and then I only wanted to be called on homicides where the victim was nonwhite. And one of the things we, I learned from the six months, which only resulted in about a page and a half in the book is that each jurisdiction has its own definition of what constitutes a drug related homicide or unknown or stranger related. In Phoenix at that point, if one person was involved in drugs, let me not, see if I can get this, it's either both people had to be involved in drugs for it to go down as drug related, or some jurisdictions if just one person was involved in drugs the homicide went down as drug related even though it might not have been related. So there was so much slippage in these classifications that for us to cla- take all unknown homicides across all cities or all drug knowing that there was no uniformity in how these data were collected, I think would have, would have led to, to more uncertainty that any kind of generalizable knowledge. Speaker 1: Okay. What--was there anything in this study ['Race, Place, and Risk: Black Homicide in Urban America,' Paula D. McClain and Harold Rose] that surprised you about black, black on black crime? Speaker 2: It depressed us a lot because one of the things that we found was, that when we looked at these homicides, what was important was not the event at the moment that the homicide occurred, someone fighting over a jacket or something, it was what these two people brought with them to this interaction that resulted in one person losing their lives. So it wasn't just that someone wanted the jacket, which is why we went back and we tried to get family information and school information. And the [U.S.] Social Security Administration, we got work history data, of course they, they blinded the, you know, we sent them social security numbers, they sent us back social security data minus one, so we had no way of being able to, to connect a record with a person, but it did give us a generalized notion of how many quarters individuals were in the workforce, whether or not they were in the workforce. We got school records, so we knew, and, and school districts differed, one school district is that once a person was dead, then there was no confidentiality, another, you know, was when there was still confidential, but to give us this we'll kind of mask the data. So we just had lots of information that kind of got us to what factors, household factors, whether or not their parents saved, you know, whether or not they had a bank account, how much schooling they had, that gave us more of a sense of what people were bringing to these events. So, we didn't start from, we didn't view the event as what was important, it was what these people brought with them to this event that resulted in somebody dying. Story_ID: 635504 Speaker 1: So, could this knowledge be used to predict that if people have certain factors in their background that they're more, more likely to be in a situation where they'll either kill someone or be killed? Speaker 2: You know, I wanna be cautious in saying yes because you know this kind--and then it gets to well, maybe we should do something with these people before if we know that there are these characteristics. Our thing was trying to think about ways to interdict, that if you had--can identify high risk kids that have certain factors, what can you do to interrupt what may in fact be a developing pattern, you know. As opposed to what some policy makers wanna do is okay well let's just, you know, isolate them, kind of put them away. For, for example when, when, I guess was it, was one of Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] elections, there was all of this, you know, de- debate about, you know, money going towards midnight basketball, you know. Well, that was actually a pretty kind of effective deterrent 'cause if you had kids playing basketball at times when they would, might be on the street doing other things? It actually, for a lot of cities, was--reduced the crime rate, but for politicians who really are not that in--some of them are not that interested in really solving problems, it's just what makes good, you know, kind of red meat for whatever their base happens to be. And so a lot of the programs which would have been considered homicide prevention, homicide interdiction programs, were viewed as things that were frivolous, you know, why are we wasting money on this? Speaker 1: Now this happened after this study ['Race, Place, and Risk: Black Homicide in Urban America,' Paula D. McClain and Harold Rose] was done by you. But do you remember the national pit- Ten Point Coalition in Boston [Massachusetts], Reverend Rivers [HistoryMaker Reverend Eugene Rivers]? Speaker 2: Rivers, that was, that was later I think, wasn't it? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah this is later-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --around '97 [1997]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --or so. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they had some of those kinds of things, you know, in it but I can't remember exactly what his ten points were. Speaker 1: Well they, they were like organizers basically going door to door-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know? And like SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] did in the South if you-- Speaker 2: Oh okay. Speaker 1: They got their directions from Bob Mo- Moses [Robert Parris Moses] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Moses, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, yeah. So that's, that's interesting now, you know. Okay so this study, this is in 1990. Story_ID: 635505 Speaker 1: In '91 [1991] you begin teaching at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], and how did that take place? How did you end up moving to University of Virginia? Speaker 2: Oh, they came after me. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: And, you know, I think Paul [McClain's husband, Paul C. Jacobson] and I were ready to leave Arizona, he was a partner in a midtown law firm and, you know, Arizona, I mean, it was hot, I mean we loved our home and, on Sesame Street and I got-- Speaker 1: You lived on Sesame Street? Speaker 2: We lived on Sesame Street, we lived in this development where the builder had a sense of humor because the other streets in the development were Oxford [Drive], Harvard [Drive], Cornell [Drive], one other university, and Sesame, and we lived on Sesame Street. And our younger daughter [Jessica McClain-Jacobson] just thought this was so, so cool, and-- Speaker 1: Streets named after institutions of hi- higher learning? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right and Sesame Street, is, is the last, is one of the streets that's mixed in. We were just kind of ready to leave Arizona, it was--there's been so much development and concrete and everything that during the summer it would be like 116 [degrees] during the day and 114 at night, I mean there was like no, no break and it would start going over the 100 degrees later part of March, and then the temperature wouldn't break until October, you know? And so we, we were just, we were just ready, we were just ready to leave. Speaker 1: Now, now what about the political climate in Arizona? Arizona is the home of Barry Goldwater-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and the John McCain-- Speaker 2: But you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) McCain. Speaker 2: Yeah, but what was really interesting about Goldwater-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --is today, Goldwater would be the moderate of the dep- of the, the Republican Party. I actually, I served on the Urban League board the--of Phoenix [Greater Phoenix Urban League, Phoenix, Arizona], and Junius Bowman who was then the director of the Urban League and had been director for decades, had said like in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], or whenever the Urban League was formed in Phoenix [Arizona], money from Barry Goldwater and his wife, Peggy [Margaret Johnson Goldwater], kept it going. Peggy Goldwater was the founder of Planned Parenthood [Mother's Health Clinic; Planned Parenthood of Central and Northern Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona], it was in the forefront of, you know, so he had this very libertarian streak, what his opposition to the '64 Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] and, you know, the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] is really what, you know, kind of got people thinking of him in these very negative terms. But he had, you know, he supported the Urban League and Junius said that there was a parade I guess after his opposition to the '64 Civil Rights Act where he was booed, but by in it was--he was really hurt because they didn't understand, you know, there was no understanding, you know, his opposition, you know, to that. But there was this other side of him that most people didn't know and maybe it was because his wife was far more progressive in a lot of areas, you know than he was, maybe it's, it's from, even though he's Episcopalian, maybe it was from, you know, the Jewish background, 'cause they were Jewish, that there was this more progressive stream, but he would not, he would be the moderate in the Republican Party these days. Speaker 1: Now, the--Arizona was also the only state not to-- Speaker 2: Have Martin Luther King's holiday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day], absolutely, absolutely, I mean, it's, it's, it's pretty regressive. I'm not sure, well let me not slam Arizona. I was gonna say, you know, what can you expect from--when a state is founded by criminals (laughter) you know, when, when people who are let out of jails, you know, who became the territorial government, came from the East Coast to, to Arizona (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't realize that. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: That there were people who were kind of run of, of, of other areas, you know, who then formed state government and so, it's--but you know there were all these pockets of, there were these pockets of Democrats, and Arizona had had a Democratic lieutenant govern- I mean Democratic governor, Raul Castro [Raul Hector Castro], at one point, had had Democrats. But it's now really gone so far right that it's, it's really kind of horrible. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, and Jan Brewer's an-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) interesting person. Speaker 2: Oh my, gosh. Story_ID: 635506 Speaker 1: University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], 1991, you were at the Woodrow Wilson department of foreign affairs. Speaker 2: Government and Foreign Affairs [Woodrow Wilson Department of Government and Foreign Affairs]. Speaker 1: Government--okay. Speaker 2: It's now the Department of Politics [Woodrow Wilson Department of Politics], they've changed their name. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, well tell us about that. Speaker 2: I loved that department as well, I was department chair starting in '94 [1994] to '97 [1997], I believe. I worked with some really good colleagues, I had some good graduate students, in fact, my last graduate student, Alan Kendrick [J. Alan Kendrick], I actually brought to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] with me because I couldn't leave him there, I had to finish his, you know, get him finished, we loved living in, in Charlottesville [Virginia], there was an offer for my husband [Paul C. Jacobson], in my package, he went to the, the Cooper Center for Public Service [Weldon Cooper Center for Public Service, Charlottesville, Virginia] and as a result of that, he, he does bond law, municipal, municipal law, he made a connect with Sands Anderson [Sands Anderson PC], which is a Richmond [Virginia] law firm which is, I mean he's a partner there, he's been there about twenty, twenty years? However--eighteen years now, and so he commuted from Charlottesville to Richmond. And our younger daughter [Jessica McClain-Jacobson] was born in Charlottesville, older daughter [Kristina McClain-Jacobson Ragland] was born in Phoenix [Arizona], and it, it was, Charlottesville was just a beautiful place to live and the University of Virginia is just a really great university. And so, I, I lo- it was, it took me two years to decide, took us two years to decide to come to Duke because we enjoyed Charlottesville so much and liked the university but, but, but Duke was the best, was the best-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --intellectual decision. Speaker 1: Well, you published a couple of books, one, you edited 'Minority Group Influence: Agenda Setting, Formulation, and Public Policy'? Speaker 2: Um-hm. That was over the conference, it was actually held at Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], but I think I finished it when I was at the University of Virginia. Speaker 1: And the other book, I guess it was, precipitated by the Rodney King? Speaker 2: '"Can We All Get Along?"' ['"Can We All Get Along?": Racial and Ethnic Minorities in American Politics,' Paula D. McClain and Joseph Stewart, Jr.] that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I published at the University of Virginia, yeah, it's a, it's a book that's like an introduction to racial and ethnic minorities in American politics. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Steve Tauber [Steven C. Tauber] who is my co-author on the textbook ['American Government in Black and White'] was my graduate student at UVA. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I got a lot of work done at UVA. I just found it very fascinating. Speaker 1: Well, kind of recap that story for those who are watching this three hundred years from now. Speaker 2: Well the title, the book is not about Rodney King but it comes from a quote, statement that he made at a news conference after the riots when the police were convic- acquitted in the Silicon Valley jury. And, and his plea was just can we all get along? And so the book just-- Speaker 1: And he, what had happened to him? Speaker 2: He had been beaten by, in '92 [1992], by these L.A. cops, I mean just really brutalized by these cops and they eventually were, they moved the trial, the police were indicted, they moved the trial out of L.A. [Los Angeles, California], they moved it to Silicon Valley [California], which was, you know, would have been more in favor, favor of the police and they acquitted them for, I think they were eventually brought back on civil rights charges and I think only one was convicted at that point, but it was a pretty horrible, horrible-- Speaker 1: And the fact that it was on videotape. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Made it a sensation and a-- Speaker 2: And people were, I mean, they ran it, you could see it over and over and over again, yeah. And so we took the title for the book because it's, it's about the political behavior of various racial and ethnic minority groups and we took the title from his, from his talk, from his, his comment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and that book is now going into its sixth edition. Speaker 1: Right, right, it's been reprinted several times. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and updated and, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's been the respon- well it's been reprinted a number of times but what's the critical response to the book, what, would people say about the book? Speaker 2: It's, I mean we have a lot of adoptions, I mean it's, it's used as a text, but it contains a lot of original research. And when Joe [Joseph Stewart, Jr.] and fir- when it was first published we thought that, pretty soon we'd have lots of competition, but we don't because pulling all those, all that data together is a massive effort in order to keep the book updated. So we still have--don't have a lot of competition for that book. And I guess that the, the sixth edition, the manuscript is due December 31 of this year and it continues to sell well and we have new, you know data, all the--of course graduates students are very important to helping to update all of this, you know, but it's, it's been a pretty successful book. Story_ID: 635507 Speaker 1: In '95 you rec- you were awarded by the, with the recognition of excellence in scholarship and service to the profession by the American Political Science Association? Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay now how, how--is, is that a, you know, that's not an award that's given all the time, you know, it's, it's given, is it, is it an ann- annual award or? Speaker 2: I don't know. I mean I think that it was from the, was it the Com- Committee on the Status of Blacks [Committee on the Status of Blacks in the Profession]? Or, I'm trying, trying to, I think that we came from the Committee on the Status of Blacks, I'm not sure, of the American Political Science Association. But no, I was just surprised when I received the, the, do you think I was getting the award and so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so and how long have you been a mem- member of the American Political Science Association? Speaker 2: Probably since, I joined when I first started graduate school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in '72 [1972], and then I let my membership lapse and so I'm not sure, I think I may have rejoined in '77 [1977], when I became, you know, a professional political scientist when I had a job. So they probably count my membership from '77 [1977], as opposed to '72 [1972]. Story_ID: 635508 Speaker 1: You said the move to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] took a while to-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --take place? And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About two--a little more than two years. Speaker 1: Okay and, I know you're quoted as having said that you really enjoyed the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] but, what was that? It's, oh gosh, how does it go? I thought I had it here, let me see. It's here somewhere, just hold, hold on a second. I know I read it, read it, it's--oh here it is, "I was happy at the University of Virginia, but I am overjoyed at Duke." Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Because intellectually, as much as I loved Charlottesville [Virginia] and I loved the University of Virginia, the political science department at Virginia is ranked in the low thirties, so it may be thirty-four, thirty-three. Whereas political science at Duke is ranked in the top ten, and so there's a difference in the quality of graduate student that comes to a top ten program as opposed to a program ranked in the thirties. And although I had some really good graduate students at the University of Virginia, I get really incredible graduate students at Duke. Now, undergraduate wise, Duke and UVA pull from the same pool, and so UVA has some incredible undergraduates just like Duke has some incredible undergraduates. But I have found that my work intellectually is stronger 'cause I'm working with graduate students, many of whom have, have statistical skills that are much better than mine that, you know, challenge me, I mean they, they're just excellent. And so, a lot of my more recent projects have been projects with teams of graduate students at Duke and now they're, you know, my students are now professors at various places, and it's just, the department is just intellectually, you know, a really exciting place and my work has gotten much stronger by being at Duke. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, what, I guess what are the highlights of our, you know, tenure now at Duke? I mean, what, what have you, what do you consider to be the highlights of? Speaker 2: Well, I was elected by the faculty to be chair of Academic Council, which is the head of the faculty, and I was chair of Academic Council for two years for 2007 to 2009. So I was represented, the faculty of Duke before the administration and the Academic Council and I was, I was very pleased with that, very pleased to have been nominated and then pleased to have been elected by my colleagues to serve in that capacity and I learned a lot about the university and university administration and Duke through that capacity. I also, my current project with several different groups of graduate students, which is I stared in 2001, I was looking at the effect of Latino immigration into the South on the black white dynamic and on intergroup relations. And I found that the resources I've had at Duke for my research have really allowed me to do the kind of work that I wanna do without having to worry about whether I'm gonna have the funds to get it done. I've chaired the university appointment, promotion and tenure committee [Appointment, Promotion, Tenure Committee], which I found another positive to get me to know more about Duke, I think it really is, you know, serving on that committee is one of the quickest ways to get to know the ins and out of various departments and about the promotion process and everything at, at Duke. Story_ID: 635509 Speaker 1: Now I--I just have here that the, the pilot project, the project about the Latino [Durham Pilot Project: St. Benedict the Black meets the Virgin of Guadalupe]--? Speaker 2: Yeah we're in the second phase now. The fin- the pilot project was, we just used Durham [North Carolina] in 2003 in terms of a survey. We were, went back in the--that, that first part of project was funded by the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], second part was in 2007, we resurveyed Durham and we picked up Little Rock [Arkansas] and we picked up Memphis [Tennessee], these are all cities that differ in terms of black characteristics, but they're all considered high Latino immigration, you know, about six- in, in North Carolina, about 67 or 68 percent of the Latino immigrants are from Mexico, smaller proportion from Central and South America. And in Memphis and Little Rock, similar proportions of the immigrants are from Mexico, but it's not the traditional sending Mexican states that border Texas or Arizona and New Mexico, these immigrants are coming from the interior and down south in Mexico, so many of them are more indigenous looking, more nonwhite than some of the other parts of Mexico. And so we're looking at just kind of the racial dynamics too because these individuals are not coming into the United States with the racial tabula rasa. Mexico has a racial hierarchy, it had a slave trade. And so these individuals are already coming into the United States with a view of who's on top and who's on bottom and the question is, where do they position themselves in this country when they get here, based on what they understand to be the racial dynamic? And in the South, one of the reasons why the South is important to study, is because unlike Texas, Arizona, Mexico, New Mexico, California, which have for generations now, Mexican American populations. So these new immigrants are basically folding into extant American Mexican communities. In the South, with the exception of some parts of Florida and Lil- and some parts of Louisiana, are a new population with no extant American community, so they are having to, to kind of figure out where they position themselves without the benefit of an, an extant community to help them kind of figure out where they, where they belong. And so, what we find at least in our survey data is a great deal of negative stereotypes on the part of Latino immigrants about black Americans, seeing themselves as being closer to whites, than blacks, although white southerners don't see them, don't reciprocate in that sense. But what blacks see is another nonwhite group coming into a southern location, and so blacks tend to be a little bit more sympathetic, but there's still tensions on the part of blacks that these individuals are taking their jobs, 'cause what we have seen is, is kind of change over in certain segments, seafood processing, turkey processing, agricultural in the western part of North Carolina, landscaping where these used to be jobs that blacks held, and now we see that they're primarily held by Latinos. Now the economics literature is, is, is of two minds, one group says, well when you looking at aggregate data, there's no job replacement, another group says, well yes there is job replacement, as a political scientist, what we know is it's not the reality that becomes important, it's the perception that people have. And if people perceive that jobs that they used to hold, they no longer hold, even if they themselves still have a job, but they see others, then that becomes the reality of how they perceive Latino immigration. And so there's all of these, these forces and, and that are kind of evolving around this issue of Latino immigration, which I think is going to actually change southern politics. Speaker 1: I want to say something that was important here, I didn't wanna let it slip past and that is that the perception of reality is often as important as, or-- Speaker 2: The reality of the situation. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Then what the reality really is. Speaker 2: Yes. And there is a perception among blacks in Durham, blacks in Little Rock, not so much in Memphis, because Memphis is a majority black city, but among a certain economic segment, in all of these cities, the perception is that these people are taking our jobs. And you also see it in the schools where the perception is from--on the part of a black parent, my child had services you came, my child no longer has services. Now there's a political reason why that happened, the state legislature in North Carolina refused for years to appropriate any money for ESL [English as a Second Language] or other programs, but school districts, looking at the changes in their, in their student population, have got to provide services. So without additional money, they've got to figure out ways to handle this new population and what black parents perceive is that services that they have are now being taken away so that this new population can be serviced. Now it's the state legislature that created the situation but people on the ground don't, don't understand that, you know. And so there's just all of these tensions that your presence here is taking things away from me, you know? And that's not a positive outcome, you know, for where southern locations may find themselves. Story_ID: 635510 Speaker 1: Well tell us about the Center for the Study of Race, Ethnicity and Gender in the Social Sciences (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sciences. My colleague, Kerry Haynie [Kerry L. Haynie], and I are the founding directors of the center, it's part of the Social Science Research Institute. And the focus is race and then ethnicity, because Latinos are not considered a race they can be of any race, but the [U.S.] Census Bureau considers them an ethnic group as opposed to a race, but even within the Asian American population, we use that broad term but there are various ethnic groups, various different groupings within the Latino population and even increasingly among the black population in the United States. With immigration it's still primarily like 94 percent slave descendent, but there's this increasing proportion of the black population of the United States that are Caribbean or of various African origins. And so that's the race and ethnicity in terms of the research, the gender is the intersection of race and gender, in literature, sociology is a little bit better, but in political science or whatever, when you talk about women in politics, all the research is on white women, when we talk about race, ethnicity and politics and we're talking about elected officials who are black or Latino, it's mostly male, research on black women in politics in, in organization, Latino women just get dropped out. So the gender in our center is about this interaction for women of color within these groups. So that the, the issues related to white women are not central to our study of gender but it's the gender of women of color, women of color interacting because that's where there's just a paucity of research. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we have a number of graduate students that are fellows in the center, we have a post doc [postdoctoral fellowship], we just had our distinguished lecture which was Ed Ayers [Edward L. Ayers], who's a civil, who's a historian, he's president of the University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia], but he gave us, his lecture was on February 10th because this is, this is like the 150th anniversary of the Civil War and running up to the Emancipation Proclamation, and one of the things that that Ed was saying is that we really shouldn't separate the beginning of the Civil War from this emancipation because from the very beginning blacks were emancipating themselves whenever they knew that federal troops or anything were close that they would, they would take off. So we think about the Emancipation Proclamation as being some beginning point when in reality-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --it was all part of the Civil War, you know. So, and we've got a number of visiting scholars that, that come to spend time. We've had a graduate student from France who spent a year with us, 'cause France doesn't identify issues of race. They've got a lot of racial issues, but they don't collect racial data, they don't wanna talk about it, there's no courses. So she came over here for a year and took some courses and wrote her master's [degree] thesis when she was with us so. Speaker 1: Okay so, so does the future seem bright for the center? Speaker 2: I hope so, I mean, you know, you're always--we go through three year budget cycles and so my hope is that in 2013 we'll get another three year budget cycle, you know, but right now things are good. Speaker 1: Now there is, there has been some talk in academia and some action about rolling back such centers and African American studies departments and women's studies even and that sort of thing, especially with the tightening of budgets and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, so that's, that's not a problem at, at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] I don't think at this time? Speaker 2: I don't think right now. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I think our centers are strong, the Department of African and African American Studies here is quite strong, it's got some very, very important and very solid scholars. So I think that national trend has not affected Duke, you know, but there's always issues, you're always concerned about protecting and making sure that commitment to these things doesn't fall through, you know, the cracks at Duke. And we've got a very active black faculty organization, the Black Faculty Caucus that tries to stay on top of these issues. Story_ID: 635511 Speaker 1: Now in 2010, you co-authored with Steven C. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tauber [Steven C. Tauber]. Speaker 1: --Tauber-- Speaker 2: My student from UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'American Government in'-- Speaker 2: 'In Black and White' ['American Government in Black and White'] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'Black and White.' Now this is in the age of, this is the post racial America and-- Speaker 2: We're not in a post racial. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: No, no there's nothing post racial about America at all. This is a book that was twelve years in the making, it is the first and only American government textbooks that takes a view of the American government from the perspective of all of these other voices in the system. And normally when we talk about the fi- so it's got all the traditional things that an American government book has, but people of color are not relegated to a chapter on civil rights, they're throughout the book. For example, when we talk about the theoretical underpinnings of the [U.S.] Constitution, of course we always talk about John Locke and, and Montesquieu and others but, and Jefferson [President Thomas Jefferson], but you know, there was a black congregational minister, Lemuel Haynes, in Connecticut who was writing from a republican, classical republican perspective about why this new nation should abolish slavery, and why this should be a part of this new founding of America. There was a woman, I'm, I'm blanking on her, Mary Frances [sic. Mary Wollstonecraft], I'm blanking-- Speaker 1: Me- Me- Mary's book? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Not (unclear), this was, this was a white woman who was writing in the 1700s about why women should be included, you know. So there were all of these other voices at the same time talking but they get completely left out of the classic American government books, as if in fact, the only thing we can talk about with respect to racial and ethnic minorities is in a civil rights chapter. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: When there's all of this other data. And it just took us, I mean, like I said, the book was twelve years, it took us twelve years to write it because the research for it was so extensive that it just took a long time. Story_ID: 635512 Speaker 1: --time. Now the second edition [of 'American Government in Black and White,' Paula D. McClain and Steven C. Tauber], the manuscript is due Super Tuesday, so the second edition will come out in 2013, you know, it's done well. It's still, I mean it's, it's, it's, it a lot of people, you know, like the kind of old traditional way of teaching American government, as if in fact race was not a part, but there were, there's three sections in the original [U.S.] Constitution where race is talked about, you know? The whole Three Fifths Compromise, which wasn't developed with the Constitution but actually stems from the Articles of Confederation in terms of how they were gonna tax, you know, this particular compromise sent more power to the states, to the southern states in the [U.S.] House of Representatives than they wouldn't--would have had if slaves had not been counted as three fifths. So they don't wanna consider them human, or to benefit from any of these rights, but they want them counted for representational purposes which sends this incredible disproportionate amount of power to the southern states. So it's no accident that, you know, most of the first presidents were from the South; Washington [President George Washington], Jefferson [President Thomas Jefferson], Madison [President James Madison, Jr.], I think that, I'm trying, I'm trying to remember these, these numbers but it was something like three fourths of the [U.S.] Supreme Court justices came out of the South, I mean, so it's, you know, race has been so infused-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --from the foundation that you just cannot disconnect American government and American politics from issues of race. You know, I just found, I found it fascinating wa- and offensive that when the Republicans insisted on reading the Constitution before they opened the House, they didn't read the original constitution, which talked about we weren't gonna interdict slavery for slave trade for twenty years, you know, the Three Fifths Compromise, the whole thing, they read the amended version, but yet they're talking about the founders' vision right? Well if you're gonna talk about that, then read the original document, you know? But it's like, I'm not sure most of them knew that they were reading an amended version and not the original constitution as it was ratified in 18--in 1789. Speaker 2: I know I can't remember the specifics now, but a couple of them choked on some of the Constitution they were actually reading. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: They couldn't-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: They'd never read it before. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And they-- Speaker 1: But everything is, you know, going back to the founders, well the founders didn't believe that unpropertied white males should vote, you know, because the original voting was, or you had to be, you know, white male over the age of twenty-one with property. Now that got changed by the War of 1812, but that was an original thing 'cause in republicanism, classical republicanism it was the ownership of property that supposedly made you worthy to become a member of the polity, you know? Women were considered citizens but they didn't have the right to vote, blacks were not considered citizens, I mean, so there's, you know, all of these people spouting out all of this stuff about what the founders wanted and most of 'em have no idea who the founders were, or what the founders even believed. Speaker 2: And so, what you do in this book too from what I hear you saying, is that you chronicle important activities by Americans throughout to establish, you know, some of the freedoms we have today-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --that have gone undocumented I guess. Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely. And most people think that, that somehow the founders, there were fifty-five of them, they of course, were all white, they were all male, almost all of, all of them college educated when the population of the United States at that point in time, very few people had, had any level, any level of education, really had this sense that what they were doing is that they were writing the document for themselves, you know? Giving themselves rights and were not really concerned or that these things were going to apply to large groups of people, you know? Story_ID: 635513 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) --Is that most people think that the founders were this, you know, developer of the notion of democracy, but you know, Ben Franklin [Benjamin Franklin] took the foundation for the Albany Plan [Albany Plan of Union] from the Iroquois confederation [Iroquois Confederacy]. American Indians [Native American] had senses of democracy and processes, democratic processes before they encountered Europeans, and many of--Ben Franklin and others looked at what--you know, 'cause the Iroquois confederation was a confederation of originally I believe seven tribes and then nine that had, had specified voting procedures in terms of how many votes each of these tribes had on the council. The role of women was, was quite different, the women actually chose the chiefs of the tribes and had the power to remove the chiefs if he wasn't doing, you know, what they wanted him to do. I mean and so it's all this notion that somehow, you know, the United States is the cradle of democracy, that somehow other people didn't have these ideas before the Europeans got here, those people have no sense, no idea. So one of the things we have in the book is the, the sections that have been translated, we didn't translate them but, but from the Iroquois confederation which really show exactly what these democratic principle--we would call democratic principles and proportional representation that these various tribes had as part of their, their, their quote unquote constitution, it was called the Great Peace [Great Law of Peace], you know. And so, I mean, there's only that people just, you know, don't know and I'm, I'm just amazed when I look at our, our public figures and our elected officials, just how ignorant they are about so much, but I don't know why it continues to surprise me because, you know, our congressman here in the 4th District, David Price, is actually one of our colleagues, he's a political scientist, he has a Ph.D., as a political theorist. But now he writes on [U.S.] Congress, you know, but the David Prices are few and far between, you know. I mean he's actually very thoughtful and has a sense of history and what exactly, but most of these people just, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So this book is going into its second edition? Speaker 1: Second edition. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All right, so it's a textbook pre- pretty much and so people can't really find it in the bookstores or is it? Speaker 1: I'm not sure, it is a text and it's being marketed as a text, it's not a trade book, okay so I think most, most bookstores would not, would not carry it. I think '"Can We All Get Along?"' ['"Can We All Get Along?": Racial and Ethnic Minorities in American Politics,' Paula D. McClain and Joseph Stewart, Jr.] gets marketed as a text and a trade book, so that one might be in some bookstores, I, I know I, I've, I've seen it a couple times when I've traveled and I've kind of looked around. But 'American Government in Black and White' [Paula D. McClain and Steven C. Tauber] is, is, is marketed as a text. Story_ID: 635514 Speaker 1: What's the future of the center [Center for the Study of Race, Ethnicity and Gender in the Social Sciences, Durham, North Carolina] and, and, and what do you see yourself doing in the--'cause you're still young, so? Speaker 2: I really love what I do, I mean I see myself teaching and researching into the near future, the thought of retiring or doing something else is not something I'm thinking about right now, I, I find that I tend to--you know, when I, when I have administrative positions like when I was, you know, chair of Academic Council [at Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], I tend to do that very well so I, you know, I think I do have some talents in that area. But right now, I, I'm still, I still love my research and working with my graduate students and teaching the undergraduates and that's what I see. Speaker 1: Is there a subject right now that you really want to tackle? Speaker 2: Oh I still, I'm still working on the Latino immigration. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We've got so many papers, 'cause when--and, and, and the data to write that we'll be writing for the next couple of years, you know? I've got a couple of papers now I need to revise and get out. Speaker 1: Now I've read too that your use of grad- graduate students is, is I guess, stimulating for the students, not just busy work. Speaker 2: Right, because they come out with publications. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: I mean they are co-authors on, on these papers and so they go on the market and they've got three or four publications already, you know? And they've also learned the research enterprise, because those that were involved with me from the very beginning on this current project about Latino immigration, know what it is to go from an idea to, you know, figuring out how to find fi- I mean, you know, think about what it is you want to do, to, you know, questionnaire construction for a large survey, for trying to fi- to, to find money to pay for it for contracting with a survey firm. I do use a center for survey research at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] for all my surveys. They're, they're incredible. They're very excellent. And so they have an advantage because they hit the ground running at their, you know, when they get their job. And when they get tenure, it's just like one of my daughters [Kristian McClain-Jacobson Ragland and Jessica McClain-Jacobson] has done something, you know because they make me proud, they do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 635515 Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I guess there's, there's a lot, the conservative push that has overtaken the country basically, I see as a threat to removing opportunities, educational opportunities for, for young blacks, young black students. The resegregation of public schools, I mean Wake County [North Carolina] here, you know, has been, it's in the throes of, you know, Republicans were elected the majority on the school board and they, you know, did away with the diversity plan, they were gonna return to neighborhood schools, you know, of course we know, you know, saying though people should be able to attend schools in their neighborhood, yeah but neighborhoods are not formed voluntarily, I mean there was a reason why there are historically black neighborhoods. It's because banks wouldn't lend people money to buy homes anyplace else. So to say that somehow the neighborhood school is this ideal, without recognizing the other factors that contribute to why neighborhoods exist the way they do, just works against, you know, the resegregation now. Democrats were elected in this last election to a majority on the Wake County school board [Wake County Public School System], so they're trying to roll some of this stuff back. But it's just this, I watch some of these people, you know, it's like you have no sense of history, you know, no sense of why neighborhoods look the way they do, why some schools have high concentrations of poverty and all you can talk about is, "Oh, we just want people to go to neighborhood schools," you know? And I see so much of this, this sound bite approach to things and so many of the white electorate are really buying it, you know? And so, I mean the [U.S.] Supreme Court agreed yesterday to take the case from Texas, you know, on using race as a factor and in admissions in the second tier set of admissions in the University of Texas System, which could overturn the Grutter and Bollinger cases [Grutter v. Bollinger, 2003] from earlier. So I see all of these threats to removing opportunities for young black youth, especially those who--I mean, what we're seeing within, you know, is the divide between the black haves and the blacks have nots, it's not decreasing, it's actually getting, getting wider. And the opportunities for the black have nots seem to be getting cut more, more constrained as time goes by as opposed to expanding. And I worry about that because, you know we're not committed, we say we're committed to education, but we're really not, if we were we'd be paying our teachers so much more, we kind of view them not with a negative eye, you know, in attacking, I mean I come from a long line of teachers, you know, attacking them, we would be supporting them. And so, with all of this, I mean, it, it's like schools with high minority populations gets some of the worse teachers. My sister [Dollye McClain] is, is a principle in Montgomery County [Maryland], and she just says that some of the, you know, some of the teachers that get put in some of these schools with high minorities shouldn't be teaching anybody, you know? But the richer schools, the schools in upcounty, you know, with larger white populations get the best teachers, I mean so, there's just so much. And the manufacturing base or the economic base has changed, you know, we don't have a lot of manufacturing jobs anymore, service jobs and you wonder what's gonna happen to these kids, you know? What opportunities are there gonna be for them in the future? So I guess in some ways I get pessimistic about--with all of the, the historic notion of the election of President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], you have this kind of juxtaposition of what happens to the people on the bottom, you know? So you've got these high positives and then these increasingly low negatives as to what's gonna happen with--you know, which is why, you know, immigration becomes an issue for black populations, not that you're gonna have black populations standing with the milit. men--you know, militias or things on the border. But there are issues related to that that, you know, [U.S.] Congress is not gonna deal with, I mean 'cause everybody kind of focuses on immigration, let's just kick everybody out and close the boarders. Well, you're not gonna kick out 17 million or 11 million people or whatever who are here undocumented, so what are you going to do, you know? Why, okay, aspects of the DREAM Act [Development, Relief and Education for Alien Minors Act], which you're concerned about these people being here, you can't really think you're gonna remove 11 million people, so why remove educational opportunities from people who are gonna be part of society? Where if you don't give 'em an opportunity, they're gonna cost money on some other end, you know? And so it's, it's, it's, it's all of these complicated factors that I don't think our elected officials really have the ability to deal with, you know. So I think we're all in, all in trouble. Story_ID: 635516 Speaker 1: As a woman in academia, you've, you know, achieved, you know, quite a bit, but what--how do things stand now for women, well for you and now and for oth- other women? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think you have to, the term, you know, kind of black women covers like a lot of, a lot of people. For me, things are good, you know? But I'm a black woman with a lot of education a really good position. I'm tenured so I don't have to really worry about whether or not I'm gonna have a job. But for some of the women who are housekeepers on Duke's campus [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], or work in the cafeteria, I know there life is different, in fact, I'm gonna give you a little anecdote, 'cause I just really, it really upset me. There was a woman who was a housekeeper in one of, one of the buildings, I mean, I, I see her around and my Links chapter [The Links, Incorporated], one of our, our community service projects is a house called Genesis, Genesis Home [Durham, North Carolina], which is a transitional facility for people who are--for famil- well singles, whether it's male or female, we had our first, first male with families who are homeless. And we were serving a holiday dinner, Christmas dinner and I look in the line and I see this housekeeper, who has a job and she's working, 'cause I see her at Duke, but she's homeless and she's living in this transitional, you know? And I actually raised it, 'cause I was chair of Academic Council, but--well do we have, you know, any services or anything? And it was like, you know, the question was like, what do you, you know, what do you do? Do I acknowledge her? You know, because we know each other from this other context or, or do I not, but of course I spoke to her and she spoke to me, but it was very troubling because she works, she's got a full time job, yet she's living in a transitional facility with her kids because she was homeless, you know? And here both of us are interacting with each other but our lives are so, so different, you know. So, I think for some segment of black women, you know, professional women who have really solid jobs and, and family commitments, whether it's with a husband or a partner or, or just whatever, I think, you know, that's wonderful, but then there's a whole different, you know, group and so I don't think I can tink- talk about like black women in general because I know there are so many different parts of that community with different, different outcomes, different, different experiences. I said it's just so bothered me to know that she was homeless. Story_ID: 635517 Speaker 1: Have you had to, have you faced challenges at any of these universities based on the fact that you were a black woman? Speaker 2: Oh, I think we always do. I mean a lot of the things that, a lot of the things that happened to me when I was teaching, when I was younger, you know, as a new assistant professor don't happen to me now because I'm senior, you know. And the kinds of things students may say to a younger black female faculty person, they're not gonna say to me, I mean, so I understand that. But I don't take my experiences now as a generalized experience for black women because--teaching, because I know it's not, I just got some age on me, you know, and a record. But there's still, we have, my friend Karla Holloway [Karla FC Holloway] who is in the English department here at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], about six years ago we formed a group which we call Sister Profs [ph.] at Duke, and the provost office has been very good to give us all the names of, of black fac- black female faculty on the campus side, not the med school side [Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina], 'cause that's a different, different administration. And once a semester we send out an email, and the senior black female faculty always covered the cost, where we invite everybody to tea at the Washington Duke [Washington Duke Inn and Golf Club, Durham, North Carolina] and the only requirement is you have to wear a hat and gloves. And this becomes a way for black faculty, I mean there's a black female faculty person in engineering who without Sister Profs, we probably never would have run into, one in the business school and the law school. And so we've kind of formed this organization because we know that there are issues related to black women at Duke, black women faculty at Duke, that without this kind of organizational structure, or for people to know whom to call or whom to talk to, can vague for a very isolating situation, you know. So Sister Profs is one of those vehicles that we formed to try and give people, you know, these young faculty a way to kind of, "Hey, this is happening to me," or this is, you know what, "What should I do? How do I handle this?" And we advocate, you know? We have a very strong black faculty caucus at Duke who advocates for increased diversity within the upper levels of the administration and among the deans and, and, and staff and, and in our administration building. I mean so there are continuing issues that we face even though some of the things that happened to me as a young faculty person don't happen anymore. But I know some of those same things are probably happening to some of these younger women, you know, particularly from some you- young white male students who just don't think that you should be there, I said, "They're not gonna do that to me," you know. But they will do it to others that they feel are a little bit more vulnerable. Speaker 1: Do you have a story about that happening to you back when you were younger? Speaker 2: Oh, I mean when I was teaching at, at, at Wisconsin-Milwaukee [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], I mean it--they would just challenge you all the time, you know. And I would teach, I was teaching the introductory methods class, quantitative methods class and they would just challenge you, you know? But the thing that sticks out, this wasn't a student, but was when I first went to Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], had a colleague, nice guy but pretty socially inept, and my office was--well, okay, I'll tell two stories, my office was here and this other persons office was right next to me. And every time we would meet up in the hall, he would say to me, "Hey mama," after about the third time, I said, "I'm not your mama, and I don't talk like that. Why are you talking like that?" And he got really red, you know, he was trying to somehow relate, you know? And I said, "Just stop it, 'cause I don't appreciate it," you know. "Oh, I'm sorry, I'm sorry," you know. But it was like, why are you doing this? When I was at Wisconsin-Milwaukee, I was in the political science department and there was a professor, Doug Mendel [Douglas Mendel], who had come from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] to UWM, I'm not sure why or when but he worked in, in Southeast Asia, I mean that was his, his area and he always came in in the morning and he'd take off his shoes and he'd put on his slippers and he'd wear these slippers. And I'd hear him shuffling down the hall towards my office, and he'd swing into my office and he'd already be like in mid conversation, and he'd see me and the only thing he ever said to me was, "Rafer Johnson was a student of mine at UCLA," and then he'd shuffle out again. I guess that was the only black person he knew, I was black that's what he saw so that was his only point of reference. I would go into a classroom right behind him and he'd come out and he'd have no idea who I was. But when he saw me on the floor, "Rafer Johnson was a student of mine at UCLA." I mean so it's, okay, you know. But he was kind of, you know, not totally himself at that point. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was like, you know, and I, my other junior colleagues we'd just kind of laugh about it, it was like, what? No, but that's all he knew, he knew I was black. Story_ID: 635518 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you say is your legacy? Speaker 2: I think my legacy is a couple of things, I think I've been instrumental in getting a lot of underrepresented students to go to graduate school in political science and some of them have gone into other disciplines. So I think I've helped increase the availability pool for faculty of color at universities. And secondly, I think my research has been on the cutting edge and the first out of the box on a lot of things and has spawned a lot of other people doing that particular research on racial and ethnic minorities. So I think, I think those two, you know, my research and its importance and mentoring and getting underrepresented students to go to graduate school and get doctorates in political science. Story_ID: 635519 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything again, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could, or go back and change? Speaker 2: I, I have I guess another legacy are my daughters [Kristina McClain-Jacobson Ragland and Jessica McClain-Jacobson], I've got two, two beautiful, beautiful, beautiful daughters. What would I, would I change? I mean it's always kind of hindsight of, well if I hadn't done this, something would have been different. But you know, I, I so like the way my career has gone and what I'm doing that I can't think of, at least professionally, changing something that I wouldn't do. I mean personally we can all think about things we got involved in in high school and all this other stuff, you know, in college that we wouldn't really do again. I mean I had a life so I'm never gonna go for confirmation before [U.S.] Congress, you know, about stuff. But professionally, no I think, I think and I have to, I have to say, I have to attribute that to Harold Rose, to my mentor, I mean he, he kept me from making a lot of mistakes professionally. I mean he taught me really what it means to be a scholar and I think without his mentorship and his guidance all of these years initially, I probably wouldn't have gotten tenure [at Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], you know, I would have eventually learned how to do it. But I'm a big proponent of mentoring because I am kind of a positive result of having had Harold Rose as a mentor, who also mentor- mentored Melvin Oliver the sociologist and James Johnson the geographer, I mean, so there's a number of us around the country that Harold has had, you know a tremendous influence, influence on. And so, I ha- kind of owe my professional success to his mentorship-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --about what I should and shouldn't do. Story_ID: 635520 Speaker 1: Tell us about your daughters. Speaker 2: Oh, we have two daughters, two daughters, Kristina [Kristina McClain-Jacobson Ragland] who's thirty-two, and Jessica [Jessica McClain-Jacobson] who's twenty-two, both of our girls are adopted. Krissy is a special education math teacher in Midlothian, Virginia. She's married, she did her undergraduate work at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and her master's [degree] work, she got a master's of arts of teaching from Mary Baldwin College [Mary Baldwin University] in Staunton, Virginia. Her, she's married, her husband--she finished UVA, her husband finished Tech, Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], so they've got this, this rivalry in the household. Her husband is senior production engineer for, for CarMax [CarMax Business Services LLC], you know, everybody thinks, I mean, you know, that you just, you just see these cars on CarMax's lot, but they have all of these plants where they, you know, refurbish the cars and stuff and Josh [Joshua Ragland] travels around, their engineering group is really quite small, so they travel all around the country to figure out how they can do this better and more efficiently and effectively. He's been traveling to Alabama lately 'cause I think they're setting up another production plant there. And our younger daughter Jessica is twenty-two, is a junior a Curry College in Milton, Massachusetts, she is, is a great photographer, she's got that talent. And our older daughter Krissy is-- Speaker 1: Uh-oh, well we just, we blew a light. Speaker 2: Is that? Speaker 1: That's, that's us here, it's this light here. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And speed. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah my younger daughter Jessica, she's twenty-two, and she is a junior at Curry College in Milton, Massachusetts. She's a pretty spectacular photographer and she's studying sociology, and she thinks she wants to be a social worker, but now she's talking about graduate school, at least getting a master's so, we're, you know, she's still forward thinking in terms of graduate school so that's, that's a real positive for us. But my girls are just great, my girls are just great, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Now did your dad [Robert McClain, Sr.] get a chance to see you get your Ph.D. [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in--? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, my, my father died about five years ago, so he saw his, his, his, I'm the only, I'm the only one that has children of my brother [Robert McClain, Jr.] and sister [Dollye McClain], and so he got to see his, his, his grandchildren basically grow up and, he didn't get to see his great-grandson, because my older daughter has a little two year old now, you know? But yeah, he saw all of us graduate from college and all of us get our graduate degrees and my brother got a master's from the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky] and my sister was a Peace Corps volunteer and she got her master's from Ohio University [Athens, Ohio] and she's now in a doctoral program so, yeah, yeah, my father did see all of that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And my older daughter get, get married; he was, he was able to dance with her at her wedding. Speaker 2: Oh that's great. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 635521 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked about that we need to mention before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Not that I can think about, except I, I, I guess the thing that my female graduate students ask a lot, is how do you balance, you know, being a wife, being a mother and then being a successful academic. And what I tell them is that I think, well things are a lot different nowadays, I mean there's mu- there's family leave and all these things, when I was coming up we didn't have these policies. But it's a matter of making choices, you know if you decide to have a child right now, that, this book might not get written, so you may want to think about writing the book first and then, you know, having a child. But it's about balancing, it's about having a husband or a partner that, that is supportive of you, like my husband [Paul C. Jacobson] would know I would never consider taking a job any place where he didn't have the same opportunities. And it just so happened that my husband is still with his Virginia firm, they opened a North Carolina office, so he is the principal, the, the managing partner of the North Carolina office in Raleigh, so it all worked out nicely for us to be able to move to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] and him not having to change jobs, 'cause what he said is I'm too old, you know, to work at being partner at somebody else's firm, so he's still, you know, a partner at--it takes a lot of balancing act, it takes having, having help, you know? Graduate students who, you know, will come in and, help with ballet when, you know, and so, we've had that for the both of our girls [Kristina McClain-Jacobson Ragland and Jessica McClain-Jacobson], you know? And it's not easy, but it's doable, it's doable, and I don't think women these days have to choose between either or, you know, I think they can have a career, have a family, you know, it just takes a lot of planning and organizing. Story_ID: 635522 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think I'd like to be remembered as a woman who cared deeply about the opportunities provided for young scholars. In the discipline of political science in general, but in academia--I mean, in political science specially, but in academia, in general. I think that it's important to be a good teacher, but it's also important to be a contributor to knowledge, to be a producer of knowledge. And it's only when we have more voices producing research that shows us a different aspect of something like American politics, or American government, that gives us a fuller picture, I think that's what I've done and, yeah, so I think that's, I'm not sure I'd have a, I'd have an epithet for my tombstone yet. But, you know, at least it won't be W.C. Fields, about Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I consider Philadelphia my home now. I don't know whether if you know what his, his tombstone says, but it says, "All things considered, I'd rather be here than in Philadelphia" (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Well thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you...