 Story_ID: 613885 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Thaddeus Gilmore Mosley, that's T-H-A-D-D-E-U-S, Gilmore, G-I-L-M-O-R-E, Mosley, M-O-S-L-E-Y [HistoryMaker Thaddeus Mosley]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a story behind the name Thaddeus? Speaker 2: Well I'm named after my father [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.], but I, I suppose--after I got out of high school [New Castle Senior High School; New Castle Junior/Senior High School, New Castle, Pennsylvania] I didn't use junior, I just used Mosley, I didn't--. But people that--my sisters still call me Junior (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. I know there's a famous--I mean one of the most strident of the abolitionist senators was Thaddeus Stevens-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: From right around here. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember, well actually in my hometown, in New Castle we had a school, Thaddeus Stevens School, and of course I guess we're all familiar with the attack on Thaddeus Stevens in, in the [U.S.] Congress. But no I, I think that it was probably like most people at those time named their children biblical names. So I think that's where--how my father got, he got his name. Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born July 23rd, 1926 in New Castle, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. And I'm sorry, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired postal worker, but I'm a, a sculptor. Speaker 1: Okay and what's today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is the, wait a minute, 11th of August, 19--I mean 2008. (Laughter) I'm still in the nine- past century. Story_ID: 613886 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone that-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --only require a short answer. First one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Seafood. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Some, blue-green and t- blue I guess. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Well fav- my favorite time of the year would probably be fall approaching winter. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, I love going to New York [New York] any time I can go (laughter), any time I can--I have money to stay there at least a week. I love going to New York. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I don't know if I have a favorite phrase or saying, but one thing I used to tell my students when I was teaching that it's doing and not being. And by that I meant there's a lot of people that want to be an artist, but they don't want to do the work. And I says you know, it's not being anything; it's doing the work is what it's about. So-- Speaker 1: So you don't be an artist, you do art. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, that's--or anything as far as that matter, you know, but it's a lot of people enjoy being something and not doing something. So that's what's--one of the things I was always saying and probably my favorite other saying was Mark Twain's there's no vice like advice. (Laughter) I used to say a lot too. Particularly because people would ask me, "Should I do this, should I do that?" I said, "Well I, I don't know what's in your mind, (unclear)," I says, "but you have to think this is what this class is about. You're--because what are you gonna do when I'm not with you; I'm not at your house or in your studio? You have to make up your mind." And, and I says, "As long as you remember there is no vice like advice." So that was probably the thing I've said a lot (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 613887 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Helen Lee Fagan, that's her maiden name, that's H-E-L-E-N, Lee, L-E--L-E-E, F, Fagan, F-A-G-A-N [Helen Fagan Mosley]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother was born, I have to really think 'cause I've written this down, in Thurmond, West Virginia. And her birthday is June 7th, 1903. And she passed eight years ago. So she was ninety-seven. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? First of all, how far back can you trace them? Can they--can you go very far back? Speaker 2: No, my mother's written down some things which I have, but I remember my grandfather, her father, you know, my maternal grandfather is Richard Fagan. And he was a coal miner. He did some preaching I guess. But he was born in Virginia. But, but he lived in West Virginia when my mother was born, and--because you know the coal mines. And I saw him, oh, in the, in the, in the early '40s [1940s]. He died in '47 [1947]. And he I guess was born in the late 1870s, something like that. But now I never knew my maternal grandmother. We had pictures. She died when my mother was only five years old. So we--I knew other than looking at the pictures of her, and her name was Rosa Graves [Rosa Graves Fagan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about your ancestors, your grandfather or your grandmother that are told? Speaker 2: Not much. No, more--the (unclear) stories came out of course when my mother's Uncle Robert [ph.] was also a coal miner. And during the First World War [World War I, WWI] up in northern Pennsylvania, they were trying to get more people to farm and whatnot. And so they almost gave people land and stuff like that. So my mother's Uncle Robert, he, he got like 688 acres of ground. So he called his brother, which is my grandfather (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is in, in Virginia? Or? Speaker 2: No, no this is Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: In Pennsylvania, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Up in Weedville, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Weedville? Speaker 2: Yes, like weeds (laughter)? Speaker 1: Okay like Meadville, only it's Weedville. Speaker 2: Yes, but much further north and toward, and toward the middle of the state, going toward New York border. Up around--and so, so uncle, so my Grandfather Richard, he went--he went up to help his brother. Story_ID: 613888 Speaker 1: And my dad's [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.]--he, he happened to be in another little town, his father [Fleming Mosley] and three sons. They were in Elbon, which was not too--about fifteen, sixteen miles away. And that's how my mother [Helen Fagan Mosley] and father met. 'Cause there weren't that many black people up there. And, and so that's how my mother and father--and my three older sisters, they, they were born in Elbon, Pennsylvania in the, in the early '20s [1920s]. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Well did your mother talk about--now, now did she grow up, up there? Or did she-- Speaker 1: Well, she grew up mainly in West Virginia. Speaker 2: West Virginia, okay. Speaker 1: But by the time she was in her teens, they moved up to Weedville [Pennsylvania], you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: All right did she, did she get a chance to finish school there? Speaker 1: No. And neither did my, my father. My Aunt Mattie [Mattie Mosley Dawson (ph.)] who (unclear), and then she went to Storer College in West Virginia. Speaker 2: Right, that's defunct now, that's Harpers Ferry [West Virginia], Storer. Speaker 1: Yes, because she was attractive young lady and my dad [sic.] had three sons 'cause boys could always go (laughter), boys could always go to work. But he decided that--my grandfather decided he didn't want his daughter to be a maid and be taken advantage of in any way. So she went to Storer College. My [maternal] grandfather himself [Richard Fagan], he had started to--from what my mother says-- Speaker 2: Now let me go back a little bit, 'cause I'm getting mixed up 'cause we're on your mother's side of the family. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: We jumped to your father's. But let's start with your father's--now first of all, let's finish your mother's. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And maybe--can you give us some idea of what it was like for her growing up? Did she talk about what it was like for her when she-- Speaker 1: Yeah, she did talk about birthing--after her mother [Rosa Graves Fagan] died, my father [sic.] got a woman--'cause he worked, you know in the mines--to look after her and her two brothers. But the woman, you know, she drank and smoked and my--and after my grandfather found that out, he, he decided that he would, he would get, you know, remarried. So he, he, he got--he remarried and the--it was a bad situation for my mother and my younger uncles because the woman had had a son of her own and she, so she favored her child over my mother and, and my mother's bro- younger brothers. So my mother and her never really, really got along and, and so my mother said that was one of the reasons she married when she was around seventeen, was to get out of the house and get from--away from this woman, you know. And they--but she said it was a difficult situation you know. Speaker 2: Now did your mother--what did she do for a living? I mean did she have any other job outside of the home or? Speaker 1: The only thing--she, she was a seamstress and she used to sew, you know in fact she made most of my sisters' clothes when they were little. And but she, she used to sew for--like one as I remember when I was young, there was a, a--when we were in New Castle [Pennsylvania], there was a, a female attorney. And she made a lot of tailor made clothes for--the woman's name was Teffer [ph.] and I remember she made a lot of clothes for her, you know, like particularly suits and, and, and formal dresses and stuff like that. Story_ID: 613889 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side. Now can you give us--your, your father's name was Thaddeus [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you're a junior actually (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, and what is your father's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My father's--was born in 1901, and I'm trying to think, I think June 20th, 1901. And I don't know what town he was born in, but he was born in Kentucky is the only thing I know. Speaker 1: Okay. So you don't have a sense if he's born in western Kentucky or central Kentucky? Speaker 2: All I know is in the coal mining area. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's probably eastern Kentucky I guess, I'm thinking. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, near West Virginia. Speaker 2: Yeah. 'Cause he landed, eventually he landed in West Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, so now how far back can you take his side of the family? Any stories about slavery or any of those days? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, the, the only story--and again I have to go back to my mother's [Helen Fagan Mosley] side, the stuff she had written down, was that her, her grandfather had been an ex-slave and fought in the Civil War. But she didn't know much other than that. Speaker 1: Do you know his name, what his name might be? Speaker 2: No. But I think, I had an idea it was Richard and I think her father [Richard Fagan] was named after because I think he was the eldest, and he was named after him. Speaker 1: So would it be Fagan? Would his last name be Fagan (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fagan, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so maybe Richard Fagan? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 613890 Speaker 1: Now on your father's side, you said, you said there's not any information hardly (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I never met my grandfather, my paternal grand- grandfather [Fleming Mosley]. Speaker 1: What about your grand- paternal grandmother? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) And my mother [Helen Fagan Mosley], by the time she married my father [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.], her would be mother-in-law had passed away. So she never knew her either. Speaker 1: Okay. So now your--was your father raised in Kentucky before he-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, raised in Kentucky in the coal mining area, and then he moved up to the--Weedville [Pennsylvania], near Weedville. Speaker 2: He moved up to Elbon, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Elbon, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, his dad bought the property up there and he moved up to Elbon. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So they, they were farmers in Elbon? Speaker 2: They were farmers--mostly, well it was a--it's a, it's a situation that if people really--that no longer exists. Most mine--he was a coal miner. But most miners were farmers too. I mean like what they did, they worked in the mines in the winter and all like that. A lot of times in the summer they would get time off to do farming. So, so both my grandfathers were miners and farmers at the same time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's the type of thing I don't think exist anymore, but it was very common, even when we used to live what they used to call No. 5 Mine [Elbon, Pennsylvania] near Grove City, Pennsylvania. We had a gigantic garden like everyone else. And everyone raised--worked in the mines, and when they weren't in the mines, they were working these big gardens and farms. Story_ID: 613891 Speaker 1: So you said your father's sister was sent to Storer College [Harpers Ferry, West Virginia]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And did she become a teacher? Speaker 2: She became a nurse. Speaker 1: A nurse, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. And what, what's her name? She's Aunt-- Speaker 2: She's Mattie Dawson [Mattie Mosley Dawson (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Aunt Mattie, okay. Mattie Dawson. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's actually--her name was Mattie Mosley, but she-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --married--actually she married someone that taught there whose name was Dawson [ph.], that taught at Storer College. Speaker 1: Okay. So she became a nurse. And where did she work? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know, you know. And I've only, I've only seen her once or twice when I was small. And then they--I think he got a job somewhere in Dayton from Storer College. Everyone called him Professor Dawson. So, so but I don't know where. And we never kept up with them. And I was a lot young- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they moved to Dayton, Ohio. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was he associated with Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] you think? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't, I don't have a clue. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but he went to--they moved from Storer where Storer--from there, but see they were--she was, she was the eldest of my father's siblings. And so I never really saw them, and you know so I never knew much about them. But I know that you know, from my mother [Helen Fagan Mosley] and father [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.] said they moved from West Virginia up to Dayton where he was teaching there. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was teaching--a teacher, and they called him Professor Dawson. Speaker 2: They called him Professor Dawson, yeah. Speaker 1: In those days, you could be a professor if you taught grade school even--you know, if you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah, but, but, but he taught at, he taught at Storer. Speaker 1: Okay, so chances are-- Speaker 2: He taught at Storer and that's how my aunt married him young. And, and, and so he-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Chances, now were they in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church by any chance? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Chances are he might have taught at Wilberforce if he moved to Dayton. Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause I, I don't know, I don't know what type of school Storer was, really. I knew a friend of mines much later, a guy I went to Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] with his wife, was going to Storer. Speaker 1: Yeah, Storer was a small black college [HBCU], had a black president and everything. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. It stayed open until 19--into the mid-'60s [1960s] I think, I think it finally closed [sic.]. In fact early '60s [1960s] 'cause I think Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] was the last person to speak at commencement there. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: In '59 [1959] or '60 [sic. 1950]. Speaker 2: Yeah, so-- Speaker 1: They just couldn't get the money and they closed. Speaker 2: It was a, it was a church school also? Speaker 1: I believe it was A.M.E. school. Speaker 2: Okay. So he may have well went from-- Speaker 1: Yeah, before they closed, he might have moved on to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or even before. Speaker 2: Well he'd gone before that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, he--most of his kids grew up in Dayton. They were in Dayton when I, when--in the '40s [1940s] or so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I was in high school [New Castle Senior High School; New Castle Junior/Senior High School, New Castle, Pennsylvania] they were in Dayton. Story_ID: 613892 Speaker 1: Now does your father [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.]--did he have a chance to go to school and finish? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was, he had tremendous interest in books and I still have some of his books from the '20s [1920s] that he signed his name in and I think, think it's one of my--maybe his father [Fleming Mosley] was interested in books as he started--I'm trying to think of the school--Booker T. Washington (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]? Speaker 2: No, no. They--he went before he started Tuskegee, one of those schools--in Virginia? Speaker 1: Oh, Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Hampton, yeah. He had started, my mother [Helen Fagan Mosley] said he had started to Hampton, but when his father died--he was the eldest son. So he dropped out of school to take care of his younger brothers and sisters. So I guess that was the practice way back then, you know. So my mother said he never finished college. He, but he had started there for a year or so, then his father died. But, but my father loved books and I think it was one of the, one of my things I--attributes I took from him is the love of books and, and reading. And I have a few. My dad had a lot of books, but when my mother and father divorced and all, my mother had--he had a big bookcase, and but my mother, she loved dishes and all like that. So I remember when I went to the [U.S. military] service, my mother took all the books and put 'em in cardboard boxes and put 'em in the cellar. Course the cellar in this house was a dirt cellar. So it ruined--when I got home, all the books, except a few on top were ruined, you know. And, but them--but my dad had 'em signed, his name, in Elbon [Pennsylvania] and 1920 and, and like that you know, so. Speaker 1: Okay. What, what kind of books was he most interested in? Speaker 2: History. The books that I have were mostly history books. Like Grant's [ph.] life and French, some French history, United States history. Most, most of what he had--well, at least the ones I rescued were history-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) history and biography. Story_ID: 613893 Speaker 1: Now you said your parents met up there in Weedville [Pennsylvania], Elba area. Speaker 2: Elbon [Pennsylvania] and Weed- um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Elbon area. And is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Well they--my, my mother's uncle, who was up there first, he, he was in what they call the Odd Fellows [Independent Order of Odd Fellows], which I don't know--it's like a, I guess some type of a social or fraternal organization. I never knew what the Odd Fellows were. (Laughter) But, but, but then my grandfather was also an Odd Fellow. So, so they would go, although one lived in Weedville and one went to Elbon, was in Elbon, so that's how my mother [Helen Fagan Mosley] got to know my, my father [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.], through her uncle, you know. So and not many black people being up there, you know, so it was sort of a, a, as you say, a, a very convenient arrangement you know. Story_ID: 613894 Speaker 1: Now, now tell us, now when you think about your parents' personalities and their talents and their dispositions, even their looks, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Probably looks, probably my dad [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.]. Yeah, probably, probably--very much like my, my dad. My mother's family, because my grandmother [Rosa Graves Fagan] was mulatto. So my mother's family tended to be much lighter. In fact although my mother [Helen Fagan Mosley] was light brown skinned, her cousins used to call her black 'cause she was darker than they were. But, but no means what we, we would call dark. But my father--and then too my father was very muscular. But, but I, I--but I didn't have my father's height, you know. And his brother was, was--my cousins did on my--. But I take in some ways a little bit of both. My mother was also--she could sew and she, and she made flowers. She did all that sort of stuff. And my dad, of course he hunted and fished, but he also would get steel and make--and not because he needed 'em, but he would make big forks and knives just pound them like a blacksmith but just for fun like. But, but I think combinations of both. And of course both of them were interested in music. My mother played piano and my father played some trumpet. His brother played mandolin and guitar. So there was that interest in music and so that was--. And both of them were very sociable. My mother, she loved the club life, you know she belonged to Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star] and all this stuff. And I can remember when I was little, it was always a big thing when the Eastern Star would meet at our house because they had to come all the way out to No. 5 Mine [Elbon, Pennsylvania] from New Castle [Pennsylvania]. And my mother would decorate the house. Cook off all this stuff, you know. And but, and my dad, you know, was a very good cook. My mother was a traditional cook, but my dad would make goulash, all kinds of--he worked in the mines, so I guess when Hungarians and Italians and stuff he worked with, he'd pick up their dishes and he'd make 'em at home, you know. So whereas my mother would be more apt to make traditional like chicken and pork chops. And so we always loved when my dad cooked because always something different, you know. Story_ID: 613895 Speaker 1: I was asking you about your parents [Helen Fagan Mosley and Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.] and who you think you took after the most (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you were talking about both your parents were involved in creative processes, they could make things and do things with their hands. And your father liked to read, and you know, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and both of 'em liked music. We always had a piano in the house, you know. And so, and so there was a lot, lot of music in that sense, you know. Speaker 1: And you even talked about the cooking. Speaker 2: Yeah, my father-- Speaker 1: Your father being able to cook Hungarian dishes and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. My father cooked. We had--well when you live in these little towns, when we lived up--actually No. 5 Mine [Elbon, Pennsylvania], which is very close to Grove City [Pennsylvania], when you live up there, it's just like it's mining camp like, you know. My--company store, the, the U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation] there owned the mines, the houses and practically everything, you know. But so the people were very close. It was only like two black families in this whole situation maybe out of about a couple hundred population. So all the families--when everyone--when anyone close had a party, they invited everyone, Hungarians, Polish, regardless of who you were. Everyone went to the party and bought something and all like that. So it was like if you want to say a melting pot, that's a very--these situations because everyone was socially on the same class level. They all were coal miners and, and gardeners so to speak, you know. Story_ID: 613896 Speaker 1: Now you--is New Castle [Pennsylvania] up near the place where your parents settled in the first place (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Yeah, New Castle, well that area is about eighteen miles from New Castle, Grove City's [Grove City, Pennsylvania] about eighteen miles. Speaker 1: Now when did your parents move to New Castle? Speaker 2: Well my mother [Helen Fagan Mosley]--I would say in nine--from Elbon to I guess about 1924 to New Castle 'cause I was born in '26 [1926] in New Castle. And my younger sister [Corliss Mosley Woodlee] was born in 1927, and my sister before me [Orvetta Mosley Ward], she was born I think 1924 in Elbon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, so somewhere in between that time, we moved from, moved from Elbon to--Elbon, Pennsylvania to, to New Castle, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay, 1924. Now was your, your father [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.] doing the same kind of work? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah coal mine, see, travel from mine to mine. One mine we come--. That's why they came to New Castle 'cause he was working in the mines. And then my mother, she didn't like it out there in the country, you know. So that's one reason for the separation and eventual divorce, was my dad, he didn't--you know he, he didn't mind being out in the country, but my mother, she, she, she didn't--also she--we had my three older sisters, and she didn't want them just to grow up out there in, in, in the mines like. So we moved back to New Castle. I started grade school there [at West Side School, New Castle, Pennsylvania] when I was six, so that would be 1932. And so we moved back to New Castle somewhere around 1933 or '34 [1934]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when we, when we moved back to New Castle and I s- you know, we all stayed there 'til we all grown, grew up and left, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 613897 Speaker 1: I want you to tell me what it was like and do you have an, an--now how many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I have four sisters, no brothers. Speaker 1: Four sisters, no brothers. And you're the--which one are you? Speaker 2: I'm next to the last child. Speaker 1: Next to the last, okay, all right. Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Well not, not--just no more than like most kids, Christmas and stuff like that, living in country and stuff like that. But one thing I used to remember a great--you know as I got older. When I was a little kid I was very close to my dad. And my dad knew a lot about plants. And he picked wild mushrooms and all that. He could identify any plant by the common name that you saw in the woods, you know. And my mother [Helen Fagan Mosley] used to say he would make up this spring tonic, you know, out of these herbs and stuff. She says, "And I was strong as he was. I'd be working in that garden with a hoe and spade." She says, "I'd be right beside--," she called my father Ted [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.], "I'd be right beside him." She said, "I don't know what that spring--what he made in that tonic, but that was some powerful stuff." But he knew--and he knew any kind of wild mushroom. And I never--as I got, you know when I got older, I used to think about that. I wonder how he learned that, you know. But, but he would say, "Let's go--," I was a little, I didn't even started school, I remember that. He said, "Let's go pick mushrooms." And I'd say--well I just be along and, and I would see something, I'd say, "That--," he say, "No, no, that's no good. That's such and such a thing. That's--," you know, but. Those were things that I, I remember. And of course I remember like all little kids, the holidays were big among poor people and of course my dad would work in the mines. And so Christmastime was always a, you know, a lot of stuff because he was working, you know, during--'cause coal was a prime thing for heat and all--any kind of energy back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], you know. Everything--coal, you'd see coal--you--everyone burned coal stoves, coal furnaces and all that kind of stuff. So there was a--always that demand, you know. Story_ID: 613898 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well the sights of course, depending on New Castle [Pennsylvania], or depending on--'course I grow up--when I was a little kid, there was--up around we went to a country school and there were just woods, you know. And we had a little stream in the backyard. 'Course we had like everyone else, we raised chickens, pigs, and that sort of stuff. And I guess one of the--I suppose the same--my mother [Helen Fagan Mosley] did lots and lots of canning, like everyone else. We, she would can up to two and three hundred jars of food, you know, we had--. And I, I--when we were kids, everyone was washing jars and bringing in apples and berries and everything. And she canned all this stuff. And I think one of the prominent things I remember is the--preparing the--or cooking the fruit to can like berries and peaches and apples. Made her own applesauce and all this stuff. So particularly in the fall and, and you'd always--strong odors of fruits was always big in our house. Story_ID: 613899 Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest memory of school? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I can, I can even remember the schoolteacher's name. Her name was Ms. Whiting [ph.]. Speaker 1: You had one schoolteacher? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Was it one schoolteacher? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was a one room schoolhouse. Speaker 1: This is at--okay. Speaker 2: And went--there was two schools. But when you got in fifth grade, you went to the other school across from fifth to eighth grade, then you had to go to Grove City [Pennsylvania] if you were gonna go to the high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade school? Speaker 2: Well it's No. 5 Mine grade school (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) No. 5 Mine--. Now was it paid for by the mining company, or? Speaker 2: I don't, I would imagine being that there were very few property tax play- payers, 'cause most of the mining houses, including--most of the houses including the store, was owned by U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation]. The U.S. Steel owned the mine [No. 5 Mine, Elbon, Pennsylvania]. And so I would imagine there were only--except for the few bosses that lived there, there weren't many people that owned the houses. So they couldn't have been collecting property taxes. So I don't know, I'm just, I'm just surmising that. I don't know how, how the, how the school was paid for. But it was divided up with first, second and third grade on one side, and I think fourth and fifth on the other side. So you had the board split in half, and she would teach--I guess when you think back about it, it was quite a trick, you know. To, to keep these different grades busy all at one time, you know, and so (laughter), so you think about teachers now that just teach one class, you know at a time. But she was teaching five grades at a time, or five or six grades at a time, I forget which one. But I know that they had the other school, I think it was fifth, sixth and seventh you went--I mean sixth, seventh and eighth you went to the other school, but. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By the time I was in, in, in, in second or third grade, we moved back to New Castle [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay, and there you had a bigger school. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, a city school. Speaker 1: What was the name of the grade school in New Castle? Speaker 2: Well the first school I went to was West Side School [New Castle, Pennsylvania] 'cause we lived on west side in New Castle. And then when we moved, I went to North Street School, which almost downtown New Castle. And from there I went to George Washington Junior High [George Washington Junior High School; George Washington Intermediate School, New Castle, Pennsylvania]. And then from there New Castle Senior High [New Castle Senior High School; New Castle Junior/Senior High School, New Castle, Pennsylvania] they called it back in those days. Speaker 1: Okay. Well did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Well my favorite subjects when I was young was probably English and math. I was always very good in English, you know. Speaker 1: So did you have a--is there a particular teacher that stands out that may have helped you have an interest in it? Speaker 2: Well I, I--there was one woman, English teacher in high school named Ms. Kelly [ph.]. And I also took French in junior high. I had a French teacher named Ms. Yule [ph.]. 'Cause back in those days, no married woman could teach, you know. All the women were, were single. But for math in junior high I had a man named Mr. Ward [ph.] that was a good algebra teacher and whatnot. And I, you know, I learned a lot from him. Those were some of my favorite teachers. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 613900 Speaker 1: Did you get to the movies much when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. There was--movies were big back in those days and there were--in New Castle [Pennsylvania] there were about three or four downtown movies. I don't think there's one now (laughter), you know, downtown. So yeah we went to movies fairly often, it was only like ten cents as I can remember. Speaker 1: Now was the theater segregated or? Speaker 2: No, nothing--the only thing segregated in New Castle as I can remember was swimming pool. And swimming pool and the, and the main place we used to go to the dance. It was always amazing that--it was called the Arena [New Castle, Pennsylvania]. Black people had Friday night and white people had Saturday night. But because the music, a lot of the whites, although they couldn't get in, they'd go and (laughter) stand outside, listen to the music. Speaker 1: 'Cause they liked the black music. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So the--but, but, but, but in high school, it wasn't, you know you could--as long as you're in school, you, you could go to the dance. It wasn't any segregation there. But the swimming pool, you couldn't go to the park pool. And, and which was quite a ways away anyhow, but couldn't go there. Those were the main things that--but, but all the athletic teams and stuff were, were you know, there wasn't any segregation there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 613901 Speaker 1: Now what about artwork? Did you draw pictures when you were growing up, or? Speaker 2: Well when I was in grade school, when I, when I was in grade school, there was another kid named Sammy Jasser [ph.]. We used to draw particularly for the--what they call the science class, not science, but whatever they call--a nature study class. We--one thing we did I remember we did like the, the pond in summer and pond in the winter. And, and the winter kids were skating, we had drawings of frogs in the mud and we had, you know, and we had ice, you know. Then in the summer we had kids fishing and the frogs jumping up and fish jumping and trees and all like that. And I think that--the teacher kept that up on, on the board for, for the longest, longest of time. But when I went to junior high [George Washington Junior High School; George Washington Intermediate School, New Castle, Pennsylvania], they didn't have much in the way of art. They made--it was more crafty sort of things. And I never took art in high school [New Castle Senior High School; New Castle Junior/Senior High School, New Castle, Pennsylvania], you know. My interest in art came when I went to University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. And I had a friend named Charles Wilson [ph.], just passed away (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay now I don't wanna get too far into it yet. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: But I just wanted to get, make sure that I got the story about grade school. So you were drawing in grade school. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: But you didn't have any program really in junior high. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Did you draw for fun at home at all? Did you ever do that? Or was it just in school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, yeah. I drew a little, little--not much, you know, not much. Speaker 1: Okay, well I just wanted to establish that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then, then I-- Story_ID: 613902 Speaker 1: Wanted to ask you about music. Now so you said you played the piano a little bit, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I sang a cappella choir three years in high school [New Castle Senior High School; New Castle Junior/Senior High School, New Castle, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I sang of course in church choir, junior choir in church. But I sang, I guess the musical training was, was I sang a cappella choir for three years in, in high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a--did you have a favorite kind of popular music you were listening to? Were you listening to--? Speaker 2: Well, you know when I was coming up, they didn't have teenage music, you know. 'Cause teenagers didn't have any money. So, so the teenagers, we listened to Duke Ellington, Count Basie and people like that in the '30s [1930s] that were, that were popular with the adults 'cause that's the only music you heard, you know. Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite musician in those days, of those that you mentioned? Speaker 2: Well when I was very young, I guess in, in, in, in the mid-'30s [1930s], I think, I wanted--I liked Louis, you know I heard Louis Armstrong and my mother [Helen Fagan Mosley], my mother get me a trumpet. And us not having money, she said, "Well a trumpet is too hard on you. Your dad [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.] used to play, wasn't--." But she said, "Why don't you take piano lessons like your sister?" But I thought that was sort of effeminate (laughter), so I didn't wanna learn how to play a piano. I'm very sorry that I didn't at least, you know, have the opportunity, you know, 'cause we always had a pretty good upright piano, you know. So but I never, you know took, took--I'm sorry I didn't take those lessons. Speaker 1: Now did you hear most of your music on the radio, or the juke box, or what do you think? Speaker 2: Well most, most of the music we heard was actually at home you know when I was very young. And we had a radio. But my mother played a lot and actually my mother, my sisters eventually had like a, a gospel singing group and they used to travel to Cleveland [Ohio] and all around Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] from New C- New Castle [Pennsylvania], churches. So there was a lot of just singing in the house. And my oldest sister was one--was a fantastic singer. I always said one of the best singers I ever heard and she sang in the clubs and stuff much later. But, but there was-- Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Bea, Beatrice Mosley [Beatrice Mosley Young]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she sang in Akron [Ohio], she sang on the Canadian line during the summer. But she was married and that interfered with her career a lot, but she could sing and play. She played piano and organ. But she was the best musician in our immediate family. She could play better than my mother could and I only had--all four my sisters took piano lessons, but only two could play: my younger sister [Corliss Mosley Woodlee] and my oldest sister. Story_ID: 613903 Speaker 1: So when you were in high school, now did you play sports in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I ran track. Played--and junior high [George Washington Junior High School; George Washington Intermediate School, New Castle, Pennsylvania] I played basketball and ran track. But when I got ready to go to the senior high, they said I was too short for basketball. And so that disheartened me (laughter). But I did play a lot of basketball; I played 'til I was thirty-five, thirty-six years old. Semi-pro around here and stuff, yeah. Played a long time, yeah. Speaker 1: So you weren't too short for that then apparently (laughter)? Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So now were you involved in high school clubs and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in, I was in debate club. Other than debate club, I have to look at my yearbook. And, and the choir and track. I wasn't involved in too many other things. Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your high school? This is-- Speaker 2: New Castle-- Speaker 1: New Castle High School. Speaker 2: --Senior High used to call it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. New Castle Senior High [New Castle Senior High School, New Castle, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: They--now they just call it New Castle High [sic. New Castle Junior/Senior High School, New Castle, Pennsylvania], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 613904 Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation [from New Castle Senior High School; New Castle Junior/Senior High School, New Castle, Pennsylvania], I mean what was your concentration? What did you wanna, wanna be at that point? Speaker 2: Well you know the war [World War II, WWII] was on, so there was--so, so we, so I graduated at odd time. I graduated, at that time you had graduation twice a year, and I graduated in January. If I had graduated in June, I would have gone to the service in that June '44 [1944] instead of January of '45 [1945]. But I think while, while I was in service, again, I, I, I think I started to reading psychology books because I got very interested in how people thought just by dealing with the [U.S.] military and the different officers and stuff, you know when I was in boot camp up at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois] and then I went to Floyd Bennett Field in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: So you just went--right after high school graduation, you signed up immediately. Speaker 2: No, I didn't sign up; they were waiting for me (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, you were drafted-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so you were drafted right out of high school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And they, they sent you to Great Lakes. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: All right now, now in those days I don't know--now you went up there when they had that, that great band [Great Lakes Navy Band], right? At Great Lakes? Were you up there with those guys-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Willie, Will Smith. There was--I don't know if you know who Will Smith, Willie Smith was? Speaker 1: Not the-- Speaker 2: Alto player. Speaker 1: Okay, that's not the--I've heard of Willie "Lion" Smith [Willie "The Lion" Smith], the piano player (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that's the piano player. Speaker 1: He, he's much older. Speaker 2: Yeah, but there, there was a guy, a black guy named Willie Smith. Speaker 1: Will Smith? Okay. Speaker 2: And Willie Smith was very strange because you know he played with Harry James and a couple big, some--a lot of big bands way back in--if look him up. But he was very light skinned, he looked almost like a Mexican. So he was one of the few blacks that were playing in white bands and they didn't realize he was black at that time. But he was in the band up at Great Lakes. And, and of course after that, or--he, he was a big star with Norman Granz, 'Jazz at the Philharmonic.' That, that's the Willie Smith I'm talking about. Yeah, and, and Buddy Young was there-- Speaker 1: Okay, but-- Speaker 2: --and Marion Motley, Paul Patterson. Speaker 1: Now Buddy Young was the great football player, right? Speaker 2: Buddy Young, tremendous track man. He played with the Colts [Baltimore Colts; Indianapolis Colts] and--but he was big, big at University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah, now he was about your size. Now you're about what, what, five-- Speaker 2: I'm 5'3". Buddy Young was about 5'5", but he was really big. He must weighed about 185 pounds or so. But all--it was strange sort, sort of chunky you know big legs, and he could fly. And, and he had a sister that was also a runner. His name was Claude and, and her name was Claudine [Claudine Young]. And she, she would-- Speaker 1: So Buddy Young's given name was Claude? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay I'd never heard that, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and, and back in those days--and Marion Motley played for Cleveland Browns. He was up there. Chuck Cooper. Speaker 1: Tarzan Cooper? The-- Speaker 2: No, Chuck Cooper was the guy--there's picture on the steps. He played, he played for Duquesne University [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Basketball player. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was the first black in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. And, but they had all these guys, and Paul Brown was the director of athletics--(unclear) had the Cleveland Browns later. Speaker 1: He was the director of athletics at Great Lakes? Speaker 2: Yeah. When I, when we were there. Story_ID: 613905 Speaker 1: Yeah, now Marion Motley I think was the first, one of the first blacks that played pro football-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --he and another fel- fellow named Bill Willis I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were out of Canton [Ohio] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 2: --they're out of Canton area. There Paul Brown--well I, I can remember very well, you know when they were shipping all of us out. We were going to San Francisco [California]. So we asked Motley (laughter), said, "Mot, aren't you being shipped out?" They called it OGU, Outgoing Unit. He said, "I'm not going anywhere." He said, "Paul told the admiral, he said he can ship everyone else out, but he's keeping me with him throughout the war [World War II, WWII]. He's gonna start a pro football team." And so Marion Motley never left Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois]. (Laughter) He stayed at Great Lakes all during, all during the war. Speaker 1: He never shipped out. Speaker 2: Never shipped out. Speaker 1: Now he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He and Paul Brown stayed there then, yeah. Speaker 1: Now what was he, what was he like? Did you get to know him? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Buddy Young and those are all guys that we, we will probably never interview-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I knew Buddy Young. How, how I got to know Marion Motley, they used to have these pickup football games between the, between the barracks in the evening. So Paul Patterson, I don't know if you knew Paul Patterson. Paul Patterson was sort of, you understand an anomaly for that area. He was, he was the left handed quarterback for University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], same team Buddy Young played on. You know back in the days when they didn't have many black quarterbacks playing, you know, ma- playing for major universities. And, and, and so that, so this, had this one guy kept dropping the ball, he's throwing--he was all, all, all Detroit high school [Detroit, Michigan]. So Motley said, "Can anyone over there catch a pass?" I said, "I can catch a pass." He said, "Where are you from?" I said, "I'm from New Castle, Pennsylv- ." He said, "New Castle, Pennsylvania?" I said, "Yeah." He said, "Anyone from western Pennsylvania can catch a football." Says, says, "You get in here," you know. So, so, so actually when Buddy Young--when Illinois opened up at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] when I was a freshman. The first, first game. And, and so I was telling guys at school I, I knew Buddy, and I was running cross country my first year at Pitt. And I said, "Yeah I was in service with Bud- ." They said, "You're kidding." Said, "Yeah, so you're going to see him." Story_ID: 613906 Speaker 1: Now I forgot what I was saying about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we were talking about Paul Patterson. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: He's a left handed quarterback. Speaker 1: I was thinking about when, when I started school in '46 [1946], we played, you know Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] played Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. And our star at that time was a guy named Bimbo Cecconi [Louis "Bimbo" Cecconi] and then Bobby Lee was with--from my hometown. But anyhow, I was telling, telling them that I knew--. So we were all standing by the stadium. And, and the Illinois team was staying at the William Penn Hotel downtown [Omni William Penn Hotel, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. And they had 'em all in taxi cabs. So anyhow the cabs are coming out and Buddy Young sees me, he said, "Hey there's New Castle! Stop the car, stop the--," he said, so he jumped out, you know. So they stopped and, and then all the people said, "Man he really knew, know you." And I said--he come, he said, "Why didn't you come in, in the locker room? You know, you just ask for me." I said no, I, I know all the reporters and whatnot, you know, around town. 'Cause he was a big, big star, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, Buddy Young was one of the top--yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah because even, even, even before he went back to--when he was in, in the, in the [U.S.] Navy, it was people advising him where to go, or to quit school or not go to school, you know. But Buddy Young also was a fantastic track man I think the 50 [sic. 100 yard dash] he had to be at that time--I think only, only one person I think might probably beat him in the 50, might have been Glenn Davis in the 100. But, and I think hardly anyone beat him in the, in the fifty. You know and we used to run, you know, in, in, in the indoors of the Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois]. And Buddy, he just blow past every, every, everyone, yeah. He was something. Speaker 2: Now he, he went, he played pro football for a while. Speaker 1: He played for the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts] and he became one of their major scouts. But he got, he got--he was killed in a car accident. Yeah, he came here to recruit--this, we had this one kid at Pitt named Crabtree in I think it must have been in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Eric Crabtree? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I remember him. Speaker 1: And he came here to recruit him, you know. Speaker 2: Now Marion Motley of course, he waited for Paul Brown to form the Cleveland Browns. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: And that's where he went to play along with-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was original Cleveland Brown and--. Yeah Motley was a big, rough guy. I mean I guess he might have been about six foot tall, but he was about 250 and had legs like tree trunks (laughter). And we used to play basketball in the gym at--those guys would drive in, Motley would hit 'em and they say, "You hit--you just knocked me down 'cause I was small." He said, "I don't care who---anyone drive, you're gonna drive past me, I don't care who you are. You be King Kong." (Laughter) Yeah Motley was something. Yeah, that was--had a buddy, a friend of mine from New Castle [Pennsylvania] played end. At first he was with Cleveland Browns, then he came here to the Steelers [Pittsburgh Steelers]. And he was talking about you know, about Paul Brown, said, "Paul Brown don't, don't fool around," he said, "the only one who could play with Paul Brown was Marion Motley." He said, "Motley sometimes would pick him up and put him on his shoulder," you know (laughter). He said, "But no one else better not try that," you know (laughter). But yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, so those are--you, you knew all the athletes. Story_ID: 613907 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I did not know the story of these athletes at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois]. I th- I know about the musicians-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Clark Terry was there I hear and a lot of the great black musicians, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Because see they had--was all segregated, but except--the camp--I mean it was a curious situation when you really think of it. That the, the companies were segregated, but the athletic teams and the music you know, anyone could play. You know the team was--the football teams and Motley [Marion Motley] played fullback and linebacker for the football team. And they played--they went to Italy, they played, you know all overseas, you know, the armed services and stuff. And they--you know all the teams up there were integrated teams, you know. But meanwhile the companies were segregated. You know so you, you, you figure that out, you know. It's a funny thing was that a couple of years ago I was a consultant for a World War II [WWII] project, monument, they were--competition. And I was a consultant. So I had all these old veterans still wearing their, (laughter) their VFW [Veterans of Foreign Wars] stuff. So this, the guy that was I think head of the veteran--veterans memorial at that time, he was a guy named Judge Brofski [ph.]. He was really been a judge. And so they were asking me, "Mr. Mosley [HistoryMaker Thaddeus Mosley], were you in World War II?" And I says yeah. They said, "What part of the [U.S. military] service were you in?" I said, "I was in the black navy." (Laughter) And they looked at me, "What do you mean?" They said, "There was no black navy." (Laughter) I said, "Yeah there was a black army and a black navy. You just so--you just didn't see it, you know." But it's amazing thing that some people at that time, they didn't realize the segre- you know that the services were segregated. Speaker 1: Now did you realize at the time that you were drafted? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: That--you knew it when you got in, when you were drafted? Speaker 2: I knew it after I was drafted, no. Speaker 1: But you didn't think about it before. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Did, I mean--I guess I wonder like what accounts for that? Were there not black men from the World War I [WWI] era that talked about going to the service? People didn't talk about that? Speaker 2: Well I didn't know, you know I didn't know any, any vet- I knew very few people that, that, that, that had been. And, and actually I knew this one friend of mine, his, his great uncle had been in the Civil War. And, and that's--he--we used to talk to him, we were kids, you know. He talked about being in, in, in, in the--being in the Civil War. And his last name was Gardner. But I don't remember anyone, you know, in, in the '40s [1940s] that was in, in, in, in the--talked about being in the Second World--in the First World War (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that's an interesting--that's an interesting story there. So you knew a Civil War vet in the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in the 1930s I guess, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, 1930s, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: In fact I have a picture somewhere of him and his uncle up in cold storage. His Uncle Jess, his name was Jess Gardner [ph.]. Story_ID: 613908 Speaker 1: It was a strange situation. He married a much younger woman and she was, she was a domestic, but she wrote these dime Western stories. You know? Or you wouldn't remember, but back in the old days, they used to have these pulp fiction magazines. (Laughter) And, and, and you could buy 'em like di- you could buy these things for a dime or twenty cents. Speaker 2: Now is this a black woman? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, so she wrote pulp--what was her name? Speaker 1: Her name was Maude Gardner [ph.]. Speaker 2: Maude Gardner. Speaker 1: But I don't know the name she wrote under. She wrote, she wrote under a man name like a young, like Sam Montgomery [ph.], something like that. Don't--the reason why I, I, I got to, to--'cause this good buddy of mine lived right down the street, was his aunt. And he says, "Aunt, you should let me write some of this dialogue for you." It was about--you know it was Westerns. Speaker 2: So did she do pretty good? Did she make pretty good? Speaker 1: Oh, I guess she got like a penny a line or something like that, you know. But she made money. Yeah, she had stuff published. Speaker 2: So people who read these pulp Westerns probably had no idea a black woman-- Speaker 1: I, I have no idea-- Speaker 2: --not a woman first of all, or a black woman was writing, some of them. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. No one knew who she was, even no one--she was, if you saw her, she was a little church, little, little churchgoing lady. And at that time her husband [Jess Gardner (ph.)] had died and she wore black all the time. Matronly shoes. Just a little tiny woman. You would have never guessed a million and one years that she wrote Western fiction. Speaker 2: Now did she--as far as you know, did she have any practical experience out west to talk, to draw on? Speaker 1: I don't have a clue. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: 'Cause she never, you know, except that her nephew who's dead now, been dead for a while, except if he hadn't told us she was writing, we would have never, never known. 'Cause she--I don't think any of her friends knew she did it, or what friends she had. 'Cause she, you know 'cause she worked as a maid in the day and just kept her little house at night. Speaker 2: And she lived in--was it in New Castle [Pennsylvania] or? Speaker 1: Yeah. She lived on the same street, West Paul Street, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right, just about six houses away from me, but it was one of the things that really surprised me when, (laughter) when he said, "You need to get me to help you write some of this dialogue. Like, 'Joe, keep your hands up,'" (laughter). Speaker 2: I guess I--if you've seen enough movies, you can probably write 'em I guess. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I--it was I guess standard fare. I never read, I never saw--but she did have some copies at the house, you know. But he said, "Yeah," he said, "Aunt Maude writes Westerns." I said, "What?" You know. Speaker 2: Gee, that's an interesting story. Is there a--did she have any particular characters she would write about? Speaker 1: I, I, I don't know. And it was a strange thing that he and, and, and--her husband never had any children. I would imagine, and I don't know, that he had to be thirty years or forty years older than he was--she, she was a lot younger than he was. And so they never had any children. And, and she--my, my buddy, he really lived in Midland [Pennsylvania]. But he'd come and spend summers with them. And, and it was his, his mother's older sister. He called her Aunt Maude. And she was just a little, meek, you know, quiet person. And you would never would have thought that, you know, if someone would have stood up and said--dressed up like she dressed her day, said well who in this crowd--pick out the one that writes Westerns, you could have won $2 million 'cause no one would ever guess that she, she, she wrote. And, and it was never know. You know my mother [Helen Fagan Mosley] didn't know it. You know, you know how church people in small towns talk. She just kept her, you know, to herself in that way. Story_ID: 613909 Speaker 1: Now you went overseas in the [U.S.] Navy. Now were you in a--what, what kind of outfit were you in, in the Navy? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: 'Cause I know they tried to make you a cook, that's--I know that. Speaker 2: No, actually they wanted me to go in the submarines because of my height. But I guess they were going to make me a cook in the submarine. But actually you know I went to Floyd Bennett Field in Jamaica, New York. And I took aero gunnery. And then now this is a strange story in a way. When you go to--when I went to Floyd Bennett Field, they give--it was a gigantic place, like all places in wartime. And they get all these people just coming out, out of boot camp. At this place they give a test. And, and the people that score the highest, you can pick a service school you can go to, you can try out for officer or you can go to--if you want mechanic, you can, you can pick a school. And so they have traditionally, which I was never, you know, they have like a graduation ceremony. And so some of the guys had been there before, like this one guy we called him Levy Robinson [ph.], happened to be from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. He says, "Mosley [HistoryMaker Thaddeus Mosley], they're canceling the ceremony." I said, "What do you mean?" He says, "Because you got the top grade." (Laughter) He said, "You got the top grade, so the admiral doesn't want to give an award to a black sailor, so they're canceling the thing." And I said, "What?" So I was so angry that when they asked me what school I wanted to go to, I told them I didn't want to go to any (laughter), you know. And so okay for that, 'cause we gonna put you house cleaning, which mean cleaning barracks, you know, and offices. So the guy that was charge of this had been--his name was Perneski [ph.]. He'd been an old outlaw and he already played outlaw in the old Westerns in the '30s [1930s]. In fact, you know, when they showed the movies in the service, you see old big cheese, "Here come the chief! Chief Perneski!" He was always in the gang of bad guys (laughter). And we recognized him. So, so they put me in, in, in the barracks cleaning squad since I didn't wanna go to school. And so--but they had different divisions. He came around one day, he says, "Mosley can you play basketball?" And I said, "Yeah, I can play basketball." He says, "Well look, they're having intramural teams and we'll play, you know, can you get up a team?" And I said, "Yeah, we, you know, find out who wants to play." So we, so he said, "Okay." And now these guys--we're going to start, start winning, and when we start winning, then they said, "Okay Mosley, you go to the flight line." And the flight line you learn how to bring in the planes and turn 'em around and stuff like that. So, so I, I went to the flight line. Then I went to Lido Beach for aerial gunner- gunnery, which is on Long Island [sic. Long Beach, New York]. And we--you take, you know, you learn how to shoot .50 caliber machine guns and, and, and the aircraft, you know. And so then guys came out and they looking for guys that vol- volunteer for the amphibs because the war in Europe was about over, but the big push in Japan--. Guy says, "You joining the amphibs?" I said, "Man the only thing I'm joining is the home front, see if I can get out of here." Story_ID: 613910 Speaker 1: But then they shipped us over to Hawaii. And then from there we went to Guam, and then there we went to Peleliu. And I was in, in logistic support company 507. What we did, we unloaded ships and all that sort of stuff. Speaker 2: How do you spell Pereliu? Speaker 1: Peleliu? Speaker 2: Oh, Pel- Peleliu. Speaker 1: As I remember is P-E-L-L-I-E-U [sic.]. They spell it two different ways, some (pronunciation) Peleliu, Peleliu, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. And the Marianas [Mariana Islands]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The Mariana chain. But anyhow from there, what we used to, we used to load ships. And again, they had basketball tournaments. So we had this--so the lieutenant, we had one really, really good lieutenant. And again it was a situation where it was a black company, but all white officers. But we had this one guy, trying to think of his name. But, but--his name was White, last name was White. Lieutenant White [ph.]. But anyhow, he said, "Well they're--we're having a basketball tournament. You think--and so--and we need someone to be athletic specialist that can coach basketball." I said, "Well I can coach basketball." And so he said, "Can you?" I said, "Yeah." And so I said, "I used to be captain part time in junior high school [George Washington Junior High School; George Washington Intermediate School, New Castle, Pennsylvania], I captained--." So he says, "Okay." So, so we started--so we, but I had, I was lucky. I had one guy from West Virginia that had been all-state, his name was Herman had been all-stated three years. They had a guy from Kansas City, his name was Welcome T. Motton [ph.]. Speaker 2: Welcome T. Motton. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah. And he had played for North Carolina, had a guy up in Galveston, had a guy from Chicago [Illinois] named Smith [ph.] that played for Drake University [Des Moines, Iowa]. Had a guy from Galveston, Texas named Makey, Tex Makey [ph.]. I had some, I had some ball players. And this guy from West Virginia, he would have made the greatest ballet dancer I'd ever seen. That guy could turn his back to the basket, and go straight up three feet off the front, turn to the left, turn to the right, turn the same spot. And then, so I met some guys from Elkhorn, and I said, "You guys are pretty good." I--he said, "Where you from?" He say, he, "We're from Elkhorn, West Virginia." It's two brothers. I said, "You ever hear of a guy named Herman Neal [ph.]?" He said, "Yeah, he won three state championships for us." I said, "Well he played--," I said, "whatever happened to him?" He said, "Man that guy is about three hundred pounds. He never went back in the coal mines, never went to school or nothing." But, but, but we won, we won those championships over there. 'Cause that guy, Lieutenant White says, "Any time these guys--they don't work. You just, you just practice. Practice twice a day 'cause we're gonna win the championship." And we did because these other teams, as we eliminate 'em, they take the best off of those teams, but they weren't used to playing together, you know. (Laughter) And so, so, so I had 'em running three man weaves and all that stuff, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So did you have--so your team was all black? Speaker 1: Yeah, yes, the company was all black. Speaker 2: And then the, and then the--so you played the white guys in different-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So was--I mean in the, in the, in the [U.S.] Navy in those days, was it, was it, was it--did you get a sense of satisfaction beating all the white squads? Speaker 1: Well, well our coach, I mean our ca- what was strange, our other officers, they would never sit with us. They'd sit up with the officers. But, but-- Speaker 2: With all the white officers? Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. But, but, but, but Lieutenant White, this guy from Texas, he'd come down and he'd put his arm around us on, on the bench he says, "We're gonna win 'cause we're the best." And man, after that would shake up those other officers so bad. And you know and, and, and you know you always wondered about this guy because he was from Texas, but he was the least prejudiced. But he also played piano, you know, he played--he got a piano from somebody and you'd always hear him in there playing the piano. He was listening to music. But it was sort of strange in that sense, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I was only nineteen years old at the time. Story_ID: 613911 Speaker 1: Now you said when you were in the South Pacific there was a exercise to I guess kind of smoke out the, the Japanese snipers (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, after the war [World War II, WWII] was over. Speaker 1: They were still on the islands, right? That was after the war? Speaker 2: Well they weren't really snipers. The only thing they did, they would come out at night, come down the high- the (unclear) and take, steal food and even sometimes they'd come up and they'd climb up in one of those high palm trees and watch the movies. (Laughter) One time they captured a couple, couple of 'em up in the tree. Someone, something fell and the guy looked up and they said, "Someone up there." And they--guys went up with guns and--and they were totally unarmed, you know. But they had mined, they had the trail up to these caves mine. But they--'course they knew what--but they wanted to come down and surrender. And they wouldn't. And so they decided they would smoke 'em out with those flame throwers, and they did, you know. But the main thing about it, which you probably heard--that what made me think about that was I think some years ago where that guy had been hiding out in Iwo Jima [Japan] for fifty years or so (laughter). You know, and I thought about those guys. You know what I mean, they weren't bothering anybody. They just would hide up in that cave. They didn't know the war was over or anything. 'Cause they thought they were gonna be shot or killed if they came out, you know. Story_ID: 613912 Speaker 1: Did anything else happen significant before you came back to the states? Speaker 2: Not too, too much. When I came back to San Francisco [California] I was surprised by San Francisco at the time. 'Cause it was--even, even, even though I'd been stationed in New York [at Floyd Bennett Field, New York, New York], San Francisco was probably the most I'd call liberated city in America. I, I went to a dance where Betty Carter played, and you saw Japanese, whites, every, every, everyone, which didn't happen much even in New York [New York] in the '40s [1940s]. And then a lot of times, and then we were going down the street because all of us were, even in New York or some restaurants, they didn't want you to come in. And we'd go down the street looking for a restaurant and they'd wave us in, you know. You know, it's, "Come in, come in, come in!" While, you know and when I came to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], there was hardly a restaurant in '46 [1946] that you could go in and, and eat downtown, you know. So that--and the funny thing speaking along those lines, I was, I was--I'd never been, been south anywhere. And so we got--we were discharged in Bainbridge, Maryland [United States Naval Training Center, Bainbridge, Port Deposit, Maryland]. So I ran into a couple of guys from New Castle [Pennsylvania] getting out and a couple--and they said, "Come on, let's all go and have lunch." And so it was in this bus station or some place. And we go in this restaurant and there's a white rope down the middle of the place. So we don't notice that. We all go on one side. And so the, the bartender said, "Hey, you white guys have to go on the other side. This is the colored side." And they said, "What?" They says, "See that rope?" (Laughter) He said, "You guys have to go on the other side of that rope." He said, "Well can we stay be- can we eat beside?" He said, "Oh, yeah; long as you're on the other side of that rope." (Laughter) And we were, we were all laughing, you know because we were all getting out the [U.S.] Navy. You know, said, he said, he said, there's a guy said, young white guy, guy said, "Well why, why do you have that rope there?" He says, "Well, the white have to be on that side, the colored have to be on that side." He says, "Why is that?" He says, "That's the law." The guy says, "That's a, that's a funny law," (laughter) he said, he said, "we're all in the Navy." He says, "It doesn't make any difference; that's the law," you know (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now correct me if I'm wrong, but black people could walk down the street with white people, it's no problem, right? Speaker 2: I, I, yeah, you know we were all in the service. No, that was not a situation. Speaker 1: But you were in a restaurant, you had to be separated by a rope. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's hard, it's hard to figure out. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 613913 Speaker 1: So did you come right back to your hometown after (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I came back to New Castle [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: New Castle, okay. Speaker 2: And then I, I applied to University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. I came home. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what year is this? This is nineteen forty-- Speaker 2: In 1946. Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946], okay. Speaker 2: I came home in--I imagine May. In September I started school. Speaker 1: So this was paid for with the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] I take it. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now how did you like University of Pittsburgh? Speaker 2: Well when I first came to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], I think every, every place reflects the mood of the town. There was no black professors in those days, you know, and of course there were black athletes and so forth like that. And, and, and of course all the fraternities and sororities, now they were all segregated. Not only with race, but nationality, like the Jews had their sororities and fraternities and so forth. But I joined what they called the Pitt independence associa- independence association. And it was like a--but it was coed. It was--we sponsored dances and stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And among other things, it was a social thing. You had nothing to do with gender or, or, or race. So I joined that, I joined that organization. Story_ID: 613914 Speaker 1: We're talking about University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You--but--yeah. Well like I said, it-- Speaker 1: Now did you live on campus? Speaker 2: No, no. No, I lived in the Hill [Hill District, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. In fact in those days, Pittsburgh being a city school, and they didn't build dormitories until they had to be about twenty years or so after I was out of school. No--there was no--except for places in Oakland [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] where fraternity houses were, and, and, and no, no blacks had fraternity houses at that time. But except the kids that lived on campus, they lived at fraternity houses, but there was no, no university dorms. Everybody had to find--there was a lot of apartments in Oakland for rent and rooms like that. Like football players, they had, they had a dorm, big house they stayed in. But, but most of the people went home, you know. Speaker 1: So you were twenty years old, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're living on the Hill. Now the Hill I guess had a, you know, is, well it's known as a black neighborhood all over the country. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In a lot of ways and what was-- Speaker 2: Now the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] was located in the Hill and all the nightclubs and stuff, black nightclubs were located in the Hill. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and there was a, you know, a, a--you wanna say, also Pittsburgh, because of the union employment in the mills and all like that, provided money for a lifestyle that a lot of blacks in other situations didn't have. You know 'cause the mills were big and construction was big. And all these jobs were, were union scale jobs, which a lot of people--some unions, blacks couldn't get in for a while, such as bricklaying and stuff like that. But eventually got in. But a lot of people were against the unions because they were American exclusives I always say. But, but the union jobs provided means for people who wanted educations, parents could afford if they had a, a mill job or a union job, the kids could go to school and so forth and like that. But also provided for people that wanted to buy hou- homes, and for one thing it really provided was they could maintain some outstanding clubs and so forth like that, so--and fraternal organizations and, and, and churches were big and strong back then. And so it provided a vibrant social and cultural life that has since you know, diminished, even I guess everywhere like Detroit [Michigan] is not what it was and parts of Chicago [Illinois] is not what it was, but. Story_ID: 613915 Speaker 1: But at the same time Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]--people always say well, why so many musicians came out of Pittsburgh? I said well one thing was that my first set of kids [Martel Mosley, Rochelle Mosley Sisco and Lorna Mosley]--I was married twice--when they were in middle school, you could bring--if you wanted to play an instrument, you could bring one home. You could, you could bring home an instrument. But now that no longer exists. So gangs of kids brought home--one of my daughters brought home a violin. But since she wouldn't practice, I made her take it back 'cause maybe someone else might wanna play it, you know. So I, I think those, those things that people took for granted didn't realize that it was because taxes were, were, were paying for it. So you have so many people now that don't wanna pay taxes and don't wanna pay--you know, that's the big thing, don't pay taxes. But what they're talking about of course is don't, don't cut into rich people's money, you know (laughter). So, so, so, so what happens is of course not only were the libraries opened, opened longer and museum was totally free and when I, when I got in, was interested in art, you know that's how I learned. When I say about going to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], Carnegie Museum is right across the street, so any show you only had to walk across the street to go see it, you know. But now if you have to pay even student fee, whatever it is, seven, eight bucks [dollars], you're gonna think three or four times if you're a student about going into a museum unless you really, you know--that's the main thing you wanna do that, that day or that night, you know. Story_ID: 613916 Speaker 1: What was your major at University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: I was a English/journalism major. Speaker 1: English and journalism. Okay now why did you, why did you pick those? Did you have any experience in the [U.S.] Navy in writing or? Speaker 2: Oh, no. Because in high school [New Castle Senior High School; New Castle Junior/Senior High School, New Castle, Pennsylvania], I was always very good in poetry and literature and so forth, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you--were you familiar with the, with the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] in those days and the--some of the black writers? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was, I was familiar with the Courier when I was in, in, in junior high school [George Washington Junior High School; George Washington Intermediate School] because the Courier, even in New Castle [Pennsylvania], everyone got the Courier if nothing other than the number tips. There used to be a, a column, I forget the name of the guy, but most people will remember that had numbers written in the car- you know, in the cartoon. And people would get--they, many people would buy the, buy the paper just to see what number tips were coming out. So at that time, my stepfather, he--I, I would walk downtown, which wasn't far from my house, and get the Courier. 'Cause every, everyone read Bootsie and I forget the other, other, other column--the other cartoon that was so popular. But the Courier you know, it was amazing that people, particularly black people, read the Courier if they didn't read anything else in this whole area, you know. So it was, it was, it was a gigantic paper. So I was very, very familiar. Speaker 1: Yeah, national distribution too, all over the country. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I mean at least going west and south I know. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well west and east. Well they had Billy Rowe who wrote the New York/Broadway column [Harlem Note Book], show business out of, out of New York [New York] and Wendell Phillips, I mean not Wendell Phillips, but Wendell Smith that wrote the sports, national sports and all like that. So--and, and--so it was, you know. I don't think there's ever been a black paper like the Pittsburgh Courier. Speaker 1: In those days, yeah. Robert C. Vann was the editor. Speaker 2: Yeah, Robert L. Vann [Robert Lee Vann], yeah. Speaker 1: Robert L. Vann, right, Robert L. Vann. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a judge [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Judge Vann. Speaker 1: Yeah, and they had writers like George Schuyler, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, George Schuyler. Speaker 1: --J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers]. That's right, New York was--Schuyler was from New York. Speaker 2: Yeah they had--and Langston--Langston Hughes ran a column. Speaker 1: Langston Hughes, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Tons of people. Story_ID: 613917 Speaker 1: Were these writers--I mean were you consciously trying to be like those writers-- Speaker 2: No, my, my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or did you see a place for yourself in the black press, or? Speaker 2: No, my, my interest was really magazine writing I guess was the sequence I was interested in. I, I wasn't aware that magazines were gonna go down as fast as they did. But that was my--I wanted to--I didn't wanna do strictly newspaper writing. Speaker 1: So what magazines did you have in mind? I mean like which ones? Speaker 2: Well, of course there was Ebony was out. Speaker 1: Just, probably just got out, right? Speaker 2: Well Ebony was out when I, when I was in [U.S. military] service, yeah. And so--and, and, and I eventually wrote, did some freelance for Ebony. I did some stringing for Ebony. I did a story, small story on Charles Mingus one time when he was at the (unclear) in the '50s [1950s]. And I did freelance crafts and hobbies and I did--there was Sepia magazine. I did probably the first story on George Benson, my cousin and I. He, Ken- Kenny Washington [ph.], he's in, lives in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] now, but we did George I guess was maybe about eight or nine years old at that time. Speaker 1: Really? Okay, so this was in the, what in the in 1950s? Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --early '50s [1950s], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After I was, after I was out of school [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], but, but that was my vision was doing magazine writing. And I wasn't thinking about just black magazines, I was just thinking about, you know, the magazines that you know, like even, even Life or stuff like that. Speaker 1: Life, Look, Saturday Evening Post [The Saturday Evening Post], stuff like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, or stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So okay, so you thought you saw things changing I guess as a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because I think before you went in the service, I don't think any blacks were writing for any of these. I mean-- Speaker 2: Well not, not many, but there were people like--in--that did freelance for like I have Harper's Magazine when Richard Wright wrote stuff and Langston Hughes wrote stuff, you know. And I knew Gwendolyn Brooks, you know out of Chicago [Illinois], poet, had some stuff published and, and was, you know. So you know things were, were, were changing after, after, after, after the war [World War II, WWII] and stuff, though. That's what I was thinking about at the time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So you had a chance to do something. You, you think you--I mean a chance was coming if it wasn't there already. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but, but I don't think I was even thinking in that terms. I wasn't even--I, I don't think I was aware that there wasn't a chance, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: 'Cause you were totally innocent. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well I wasn't totally innocent, because I remember when I graduated, I had a, a, a--you know and this professor, I--he worked part time for, at the time for The Pittsburgh Press. It was not long out of business now, he said, but then, "I'll say anything you want me to say. You're a good student," he said, "but they're picking their people down there, and I don't think you have a chance." He said, "But I'm being very honest with you," he said, "I don't think they'll take you, there's no color down there at The Press." He says and--I say, "Well no I'm not gonna--not gonna you know, put you under any stress or strain. No, it's okay," you know. Speaker 1: Now had, had you done any writing in the service? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Story_ID: 613918 Speaker 1: They--did they treat you pretty good at University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, the teachers were--yeah. Some teachers gave me very good on papers and stuff, those guys said, can't think--can't imagine this pa- paper being done any better. And then they, the head at the journalism department was a guy named Robert X. Graham. And first thing he said, you know, "You don't have to be shor- tall, short, any race, any nationality or any gender to write, you just have to write," you know (laughter). And that's his thing--as writers come in every size, every color, every shape. He says, "You can't tell a writer by his looks, you can only tell by what, what they write." But he was a, he was very, very encouraging and he'd say, "Well, you know, freelance, you know for those who can't find a job, spend some time freelancing, you know." And that's what I did a lot otherwise, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So you graduated in 1950. Speaker 2: Fifty [1950], yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Right, now by this time had you--were you married by this time or did you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was married, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, now when did you get married? Speaker 2: I got married my sophomore year in college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah, by the time I graduated, I had two kids [Martel Mosley and Rochelle Mosley Sisco]. Speaker 1: And now were you working too at this time, by this time? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I worked, I was working for a hospital photo guild was a guy that did hospital photo work and I was--had become a darkroom technician. I developed pictures. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did that while I was in college, you know, '40 [1940] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did they teach you how to do it? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So when you, when you graduated--well, well-- Speaker 2: I was still working there when I graduated. Speaker 1: So now how did-- Speaker 2: I was working two or three jobs at different times (laughter). Speaker 1: Now how did the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] come into the picture? Speaker 2: Well when I joined--even when I was still in college, you know during Christmastime, you could always go down and make a couple of weekends at the post office, if you wanna work Christmas. And that's how I started down there. And then after--some guys that I knew had said why don't you take the test, you know if you--'cause the, the job at, at the--working as a darkroom technician, post office paid a lot more. So that's how I took the test and went in the post office. And I quit doing the--I quit doing the photo stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Now so you worked for the post office. Now this is the beginning of a, of a career at the post office, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked forty years, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You worked your whole--forty years. That's a, that's longer than--most people retire at thirty, but you worked forty years. Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked forty years, yeah. Speaker 1: Was that--was retirement age--was there a retirement age? Speaker 2: I could have, I could have gone ten years earlier, but I had younger children by my second marriage [to Yvonne Reed Mosley]. Speaker 1: Okay so everything we say, all the--I mean the--well I'm gonna ask you about the post office too, but I just want to make whoever's watching this clear that whatever we say after this time about you sculpting and doing photography, writing articles, you were working at the post office too. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. When I was working for the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] I worked at the post office at the same time. Speaker 1: Okay, so everything else you did, which was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I worked at night at the post office, and I would go to basketball games in the evening or afternoon, and then the Courier went to press on Wednesday. I would do my copy and photographs at home on Monday night. I was off Monday night and Tuesday night from the post office. I would do my work at home on Monday--my--type up my copy and if I had pictures developed and stuff, I had a darkroom in my basement. And I did my own--some of my own photography. And I would do that on Monday and Tuesday. Story_ID: 613919 Speaker 1: If you don't mind me asking, like how much did they pay you at the, at the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] say? As opposed to the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. Say, say for your--on a story at the Courier? Speaker 2: I was, I was paid--and I can't remember, but I'm thinking that--I was a part-time worker working supposedly twenty hours a week. And I don't, I can't remember. But the pay wasn't bad. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was worth doing it and of course I enjoyed doing it, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But I wasn't like--and I was like a staff, you know, writer. I had a column and, and I covered mostly high school and some of the college sports. Speaker 1: Okay. Now the post office I've I have heard from people, or it's the kind of job that you can--you get to work, you do your job and when you're done, you're done, right? For the day--you're done for the day (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: You don't have to take work home, you don't have to think about what's gone happen the next-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's one reason why--unless you're trying to be a supervisor, or, or you're trying to be--if you're trying to be a supervisor then you have a playbook, or the people that were trying to, to be--I'm trying to give you the right name, but was like the postal investigators and stuff like that. If you do get that, then you, then you have to--you have to pass these tests. You have to do this and that. But the good thing about it, you could make a decent salary, and you could forget--you know except for if you had--we had schemes to do. You had tests to do. We--I had, I had at that time I used to have Ohio, Indiana 'cause--the postal transportation and all the--I knew every city, what line went through all parts of Ohio and Indiana. And so see you had to pass that test once a year. But other than that, you had no real responsibilities except to go to work and come home. And that freed you up--a lot of people went to school, worked at night, went to dental school, law school and all like that because you had that, that--once you got on one shift, night shift or evening shift, you could stay there as long as you wanted to. And you could go to school or you could do whatever, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a good job for somebody that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so a lot of people had two or three jobs. Just working jobs, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, so you, you supervised transportation to--you were--well you had something to do with the-- Speaker 2: No, well-- Speaker 1: --transportation of mail to Ohio and Indiana? Speaker 2: No, they--in those days they used to have what they call Postal Transportation Service; it was separated from the letter. When Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] come in, he combined it all. And, but Postal Transportation, what they did is that the mail that went on the trains to parts of Indiana or parts of Ohio, parts--certain trains went. And you learned--as you sorted the mail, you learned where to put--where to put the mail that went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], St. Louis [Missouri], went to Cleveland [Ohio] and (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So if you--if I sent a package to Elyria, Ohio, you'd know what train to get it close enough to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, what train it's going, going, going on. That's what you had to know, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 613920 Speaker 1: But in the meantime now, now you're writing for the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier]. And you, you wrote sports columns? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you wrote, what other kind? Speaker 2: I wrote sport--local sports stories. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And mostly that's what you were doing? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Sports stories, okay. And you shot photos too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now did you--now when you were writing sports, you, you mentioned the, the famous sports writer there-- Speaker 2: Wendell Smith. Speaker 1: Wendell Smith, yeah. Was he--were you, were you pretty close with him, or did you--? Speaker 2: No, Wendell Smith actually was most of the time on the West Coast. And the guy that I really worked for was Bill--actually when he took over, was Bill Nunn, 'cause his dad [Bill Nunn, Sr.] had been managing editor. And Bill Nunn the actor is Bill Nunn, III. And Bill Nunn, Jr. actually was still Steelers' [Pittsburgh Steelers] scout, and he was national, he was national sports editor when I came in. Speaker 1: Oh, Bill Nunn, Jr. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he still works for the Steelers. And-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his son is the actor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and his father was the managing editor when I worked at the paper. Speaker 1: Okay. So this would be the--so we're talking about three of them now? Three Bill Nunns? Speaker 2: Yeah, there's three, three Bill Nunns. Speaker 1: One was the managing editor, and one was the sports-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the father. Speaker 1: Okay, sports, and then the actor is the third. Speaker 2: Yeah, actor is the third, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: He's the third, okay, all right. That's interesting, what a family. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So--and Bill Nunn is famous for being Radio Raheem in 'Do the Right Thing' if those who wanna-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: And 'Sister Act' and all that stuff, yeah. Speaker 1: Bill Nunn, okay. Speaker 2: 'Canadian Bacon,' (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) So he grew up in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] here? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah he went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. He had a sister [Lynell Nunn Wilson] that went--I don't know if she went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. I don't know where, where she went, but she became like a prosecuting attorney in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] I think. There was just the two children, a girl and a boy. Story_ID: 613921 Speaker 1: You also knew the famous black photographer who's now super famous. Not--well not super famous, but a lot of people in photography know the name of Teenie Harris [Charles "Teenie" Harris], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Teenie Harris has gotten to be a legend, yeah. Yeah Teenie--when I first worked--I knew him up 'til he died, you know. In fact there's a story on the wall on me and Teenie someone did, and I have it framed. But yeah Teenie was one of the most vibrant, you know, high energy person you ever met. Never stopped moving. And he would always say, "Well Mosley [HistoryMaker Thaddeus Mosley] I can't take your picture, you got to take 'em yourself. I got to do such and such a thing." 'Cause he did all--most of the picture work, all the photography for the local scene, you know. And he had a little studio. But yeah he's--in fact the main thing Teenie had an eye for celebrity, and he had an eye for developing, an eye you might call it the journalist eye. Of what--human interest eye. What--and he took a lot of those pictures. Almost everything he took was either human interest or celebrity. And he, so he had--at one time in his house they had over like ten thousand negatives in his house 'cause he took pictures from the '30s [1930s] up until he stopped, you know. So that must have been about forty years, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So Teenie Harris. Did he teach you how to shoot or did you already know how to shoot? Speaker 2: No, I taught--I--the, the guy that taught me in a way, besides my cousin who took photojournalism at Duquesne University [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], was the guy that I--a guy named Isadore Frishman who, who I worked at the pho- photo guild for, you know the hospital photo guild. And he was a guy that, that taught me. And although--and but I used like a Rolleiflex. Teenie used--what is it, Speed Graphic? This big--that took (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that big press camera. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he took-- Speaker 1: Graflex, yeah. Speaker 2: He used, yeah and took the pack, and the--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 613922 Speaker 1: So you would develop--you'd write your story, develop your own photos-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and get 'em over there [to the Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That took twenty hours a week, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so now how did--now when did you start doing artwork? Now what, what inspired you to do artwork? Speaker 2: Well growing--I've always liked art, you know. And one time when I was young I thought I'd like to be a painter, you know like most people think about stuff. But by going to Carnegie [Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and stuff, but what really propelled me was in the early '50s [1950s] when the Scandinavian, Scandinavian designs first came out, well I bought some of the furniture, and all the brochures had--and also the photo display, furniture displays, they had decorative sculpture, birds and fish and stuff. So I decided I could do that and I started making some of my own. And then I got really reading about Brancusi [Constantin Brancusi] and I never--I didn't know who Brancusi was. I didn't know what African art was. But I was taking a class in Western civilization and I guess in my sophomore year, might have been my junior year. And I don't know if you know Horace Parlan, the piano player. He's very--he lives in Denmark, but he played with Mingus [Charles Mingus] and played with Lou Dawes [ph.]. He played with a lot of people. But he was at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] the same time I was and we were in the same class. And we were looking at taking this class and they were talking about African art influence on Brancusi. The first time I'd ever really noticed an African art. And that became one of my big influences insofar as art was concerned. But doing art was when I decided to make some of my own decorative stuff from looking at the Scandinavian displays. And I bought Scandinavian art in the early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay. So Brancusi was influenced by African sculpture. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And you know, I think a lot of people have heard this, Picasso [Pablo Picasso] was actually influenced by African art too. Speaker 2: Well, Picasso--painting, but, but sculpture wise, Brancusi, Jacques Lipchitz. Everyone from around that period where African tribal art was what really turned in my mind, the Western art, totally around, you know, was the, the big catalyst. Story_ID: 613923 Speaker 1: I've heard that you sculpted one of the first--now when did--what was your first, what was your first sculpture piece? Speaker 2: It's hard to tell now. I made some little clay heads in the very early '50s [1950s]. None of them are around. And one of the earliest, my girlfriend has, a big head was done in '55 [1955]. And there's a small piece on the stairs that was done in the '50s [1950s]. But you know I don't know the first piece. And there was one-- Speaker 1: Now did you just--I mean what happened? What was the inspiration--you just say I think I'm gonna sculpt and just go to the art store and get you a chisel? Speaker 2: No--well at that time you could go to Pitt bookstore [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], or you could go to different hardware stores. One hardware store on south (unclear)--you go to Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], they had woodcarving tools. No one has them anymore, you know, 'cause no one carves. But I, but I just decided--well that you could make some things. So I could make birds, I could make fish, simple. So you just start making. And then you start reading, start looking and, and like I say the museum [Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] was free at that time. So I would go all--since I worked at night and whatnot, I could go and look at a lot, and look and see how things were made. I bought books, Tom Gross, Gross' book on how to, how to sculpt. And just look in and whatnot and doing a lot, then you eventually can learn anything if you really, you know, put your mind this is what you wanna do. You have to have a--some sort of a passion or you're not gonna do it, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 613924 Speaker 1: So now I heard that you sculpted a bust of Dizzy Gillespie in--sometime in the late '50s [1950s], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was in the--I would imagine it was late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And it was--your son was saying it was on display in downtown Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well actually a music--High Fidelity Music Store [ph.] bought it. And, and they had it in, in the window. And, and someone stole it, never seen it since (laughter). But I did have a picture one time and I, I have it somewhere, but I don't know where among all this piles of stuff. And I showed it to Dizzy Gillespie when he was in town here [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] one time. He said, "I'd given you anything for that, anything, any (unclear)." I said, well I, I, I sold it for seven hundred bucks [dollars] back then and it was stolen and we never, never seen it, you know. So whoever has it, you know, I never heard anyone say they, they've seen a sculpture of Dizzy Gillespie. I've done another abstract called 'Up Tempo' [ph.] about seven or eight years ago, but it's been sold too. But it's not a recognizable thing like the other one was, you know. Story_ID: 613925 Speaker 1: When you started sculpting, I mean how long did it take you to, I guess get to the style you pres- I mean--or I might, I might be being presumptuous here, but do you have like a style that you developed? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And when did you develop your signature style of sculpting? Speaker 2: Well I would imagine I didn't get to where I am now 'til about in, in, in the, in the late, in the '60s [1960s]. I had a show at the Carnegie [Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in '68 [1968]. So the idea of the weight and space philosophy, I didn't do that 'til the late '60s [1960s] I would imagine. Speaker 1: Okay, so you call it the weight and space. Speaker 2: Weight and space. It's a spatial concept where the thing may look like it's floating; the heaviest part is up and not down. So it's just called weight and space. Speaker 1: So these, these pieces are I take it they're balanced where they-- Speaker 2: Well they're fitted together and then there, and there, there's some balance, yeah. Speaker 1: I mean I, what I'm getting at is what makes 'em stay up if they look like they're kind of off, you know? Speaker 2: Well they have a center of gravity and, and they're either pinned or fitted so that they're stable, you know. And they have a broad enough base that it, it, it supports, it supports. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you, did you develop that concept yourself? Speaker 2: No, it is, it is a rather common concept, but just done in different ways, you know. It's like if you want to say in jazz, swing there's not just one swing, although say like Armstrong [Louis Armstrong] was like the first great swing and everything set the style for swing and also style for solo style. But there's a lot of other styles beyond you know, what Armstrong 'course got from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. Eldridge, they called Little Jazz, came--patterned himself after-- Speaker 1: Roy Eldridge? Speaker 2: Roy, Roy Eldridge. He was a north sider, not too far from here he lived. And then Dizzy, Dizzy Gillespie copied, patterned himself off of Roy Eldridge. So that--you have that. So it isn't just a one--a one id- one idea of a concept there; it can be many ideas that spring from. There's a lot of people that do weight and space. Particularly Brancusi [Constantin Brancusi], weight and space (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So is it analogous to jazz in the sense that-- Speaker 2: Not really. The, the, the only analogy to jazz would be the people who are more--that improvise more in art. They don't do models, they just may start with an idea. And of course there's a lot of artists that name the things from jazz, but you know, it, it's more a, as I say, like Stuart Davis, (unclear), there's a book called 'Seeing Jazz' ['Seeing Jazz: Artists and Writers on Jazz'], and it's a lot of artists from every stripe down to people like Raymond Saunders, [HistoryMaker] Sam Gilliam and, and there's people that painted or sculpted with, with, with maybe rhythmic or feeling of jazz and so forth, you know. Speaker 1: Now do you, do you--well I heard that you actually sculpt with music on. You play with music (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not often, no. Speaker 1: Oh, you don't? Okay. Speaker 2: Because I don't know, I play, I play music before I start working. But once I start working, I don't hear anything because it's a pounding sound (laughter). You're not gonna listen to music while hammering--hitting a mallet and hitting a, hitting a, using a mallet to hit a gauge or a chisel, no. Story_ID: 613926 Speaker 1: From what I understand, you would go to the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You, you go there early in the morning or what time would you go to the post office (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I worked all three different shifts, you know. Speaker 1: So a typical day as a sculptor would be go-- Speaker 2: Well, my--when I lived here, I, I started to work at six o'clock in the morning. Speaker 1: Sculpting, or at the post office? Speaker 2: No, I started--post office. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I got--was off at 2:30. Then I had three kids [Martel Mosley, Rochelle Mosley Sisco and Lorna Mosley]. I would cook dinner and I'd stay here, at home, five, and, and everyone from three to six or 6:30, they did homework. I would go to the studio, and when it was here, I'd just go downstairs. And I'd work 'til ten o'clock. From like five 'til about ten then I'd come home; or six to ten and I'd come home. See that everyone was in bed by 10:30 and on the weekends of course I could work eight, nine, ten hours; all day Saturday and all day Sunday. But that was a typical sort of situation, you know. Speaker 1: Now this is from the late '50s [1950s] on, or what do you think? Speaker 2: Yeah, from--I, I, you know I've always worked. But when I lived on South Side [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I had a studio in the backyard. So sometimes I'd work 'til--I had a building in the backyard, so I would work from five sometimes 'til ten or eleven. But I never--when I worked day time, I seldom went to bed before ele- even now 11:30 or midnight. And now I get up around 7:30. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so now did this, did your sculpting like eliminate your writing? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. It eliminated photography, it eliminated everything, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're really like working at this, you know, this was like-- Speaker 2: Well it became a lifestyle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, the art, the art--I--writing was sort of commercial and I could remember my cousin saying you know, in the '50s [1950s], I said well I, I don't wanna freelance anymore. I wanna spend all my time you know sculpting. And then when I quit the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] I told, I told Bill Nunn [Bill Nunn, Jr.] I was gonna stop writing and spend all my time doing sculpture. And that was in, in, in the early '50s [1950s], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah I made a decision that I just wanted to be as much as I could, a creative person and, and, and I didn't have to worry about income; I didn't have to make money from what I was doing because I had a steady job (laughter), you know. Story_ID: 613927 Speaker 1: Now how did you get your work out there to be exhibited and that sort of thing? I mean would you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well there--I joined-- Speaker 1: These are heavy pieces and stuff, so how do you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I move 'em--they come apart. But then there, there was a group called Associated Artists of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], it's a big organization. And they had a show at the Carnegie Museum [Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] every year. And in two years will be their hundredth anniversary, so how long that group's been going. Speaker 1: So about what year was it that you exhibited with Associated Artists? Speaker 2: I started in the '60s [1960s]. Same thing with Society of Sculptors [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. I started in the '60s [1960s]. There's a group called Society of Sculptors, and Associated Artists of Pittsburgh. And I also, there was also an abstract group. And I showed with all those groups. Speaker 1: Okay, Associated Artists, and what was the other group? Speaker 2: Society of Sculptors. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Group A, which was the abstract group. Speaker 1: And Group A, okay. Speaker 2: And then we had a--probably we had mostly a black art group called Group One [Watt Lane Art Club; Group One] in, in, in the early '60s [1960s]. But we also had some white artists that showed with us. But the group was at least 70 percent black. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you exhibited with the Associated Artists, was that your first major exhibit at the Carnegie Museum (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Society--yeah, well it was the first group I showed at the Carnegie Museum with. But the first show, my solo show was in 1968, my first solo show at the Carnegie Museum. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are--were you showing large pieces in those days? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: I mean about--were they--'cause we saw some big ones downstairs, but there are some bigger ones than that, right? Speaker 2: No, they were about-- Speaker 1: About the same size? Okay. Speaker 2: That's about as high as they've gotten. That, that was--those pieces you saw downstairs was in my second show and some from the '70s [1970s], and some from the '90s [1990s]. But on the third floor there's some from the '60s [1960s], and they're a good size that were shown in my first show. I've always worked on a scale, what I call museum scale stuff that would be shown in museums. And people with--that wanted high visibility in scu- in sculpture, stuff that had a lot of presence, you know, and so that's the scale I've always worked on, mainly. Story_ID: 613928 Speaker 1: I've read that you were, you've been in--as you've read about art, you were inspired by Brancusi [Constantin Brancusi] and then the-- Speaker 2: And Noguchi [Isamu Noguchi] and-- Speaker 1: Noguchi and-- Speaker 2: African tribal art. Speaker 1: And African tribal art, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those are my three main influences, yeah. Speaker 1: What is it about--or what tribal groups in Africa did you study or do you-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What travel groups or national groups in Africa do you study the most? Speaker 2: You mean tribal groups? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well mostly, most of the tribal groups that come out of western Africa, like from Ghana; Ivory Coast; Cameroons; and Nigeria, the Yoruba, Nigeria; Dan in Liberia. And, and the Senufo, Ivory Coast. And, and, and the Kuba in the Congo. To me, the Congos have the most diverse of the African--but, but then too you have to look at the African continent having the most diverse and the most abundance of sculpture I'd say of any continent in the world. You don't see the diversity that has come out of the West Coast of Africa. Although all countries in Africa produce sculpture. But I'm saying my main interest had been what has come out of western and central Africa. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 613929 Speaker 1: Now in the '60s [1960s], you know it was the Civil Rights Movement was in its heyday and, and the--a lot of the--I mean the Civil Rights Movement and the arts movement kind of came together what they call the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, somewhat. Speaker 1: --Black Arts Movement. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Do you consider yourself a part of that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Why not? Speaker 2: Well I, I've done, I've done a few things I call political art, but not a great deal. And most of the stuff I've done had to do with--how should I say? Had to do--as, as a tribute or an honor. Like I, I did a piece in '97 [1997] I called 'Fanfare for Fannie' [Thaddeus Mosley] as tribute to Fannie Lou Hamer. I did a piece also in the '90s [1990s] I called seven subter- terrestrial moons in the name for--in honor of Harriet Tubman ['Subterranean Moons - for Harriet Tubman,' Thaddeus Mosley]. For her traveling in the, in the--but there's no way you could look at these pieces and think of--in terms as political pieces. I mean there's no one with a gun or there's no one--I actually call--trying to think of the name of the guy from Boston [Massachusetts], Chandler [Dana Chandler]. Did you know him? I used to call him the Black Panther painter. He did a painting, 'Fred Hampton's Door' ['Fred Hampton's Door II']. Speaker 1: No I don't know--Chandler, Chandler. I don't know him. Speaker 2: Yeah he was, he was one of the top of the--did a lot of things on the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]. He was very hot at one time. That's the trouble with that stuff. It's hot and then no one pays any attention to it, you know. You know the, you know the propaganda stuff. But no, I, I, I was more not--I, I, didn't--and I've done pieces like I say, that I have--same thing in jazz. The same thing in social stuff, but it's abstract and it has to do with more art than anything else. So--but no I wasn't--I, I remember when the AfriCOBRA group [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists] had some things here [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and stuff like that. But again, it was all about p- you know, politics. I have no quarrel with that, I just never really got heavy into it. I was more interested in refining what, what--aesthetics, you know, than which isn't a big thing these days, but it's always a big thing to me, you know. The form and shape and, or the purity, and the awareness of the material, the beauty of the material and beauty of shape, you know; those are the things that interest me. Story_ID: 613930 Speaker 1: What in terms of sh- materials and shape, I mean what, what woods do you use primarily? Speaker 2: Mostly walnut and cherry, which is, you know Pennsylvania is named for woods; it means Penn's Woods. There's tons of woods around here. But I use mostly walnut and cherry. I've used all--different other types, but those are my favorites. Speaker 1: Okay. So walnut and cherry, and these are easily accessible. You can get a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there's a lot of place--I mean sawmills in, in western Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. So how do you--I mean for instance if you--we've got a piece next to us that's got to be, what, seven feet, eight, maybe six-- Speaker 2: It's about--no, about seven-- Speaker 1: --between six and seven feet tall, yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Yeah. Speaker 1: How much money would a big piece of wood like that run you to begin with? I mean the raw material. Speaker 2: Well I, when I buy logs, I may buy ten logs. So maybe it all depends on the size and whatnot. It may be from--anywhere from two hundred to four hundred or six hundred, eight hundred if they're really big, then, then they might be even more than that. Speaker 1: Okay. So you, you'll pay as much as eight hundred dollars for a set of logs at a time maybe. Speaker 2: Yeah. So I pay--I have paid more, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, for--I did a big commission ['Three Rivers Bench,' Thaddeus Mosley] for the, the center, convention center [David L. Lawrence Convention Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. So it's eighteen foot long. So I have one log was about six foot, six foot high and about twelve foot around. So I paid over a thousand dollars for that because it's hard to find a log, buy a log that size, find one, you know. Even in western--even in western Pennsylvania, you know. Speaker 1: Okay now, now what, what tools do you use? Speaker 2: I use gouges and chisels and mallets. They're all at my studio, but there's--specifically for wood sculpture. Speaker 1: Okay. Gouges, chisels and mallets. Now do you, do you finish the wood after you sculpt a piece? Speaker 2: I use mostly lin- a mixture of linseed oil and, and mineral spirits. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have to sand 'em down after you-- Speaker 2: No I don't, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I use the--if you look, you will see the chisel marks, gouge marks on the wood. And sometimes this accents the shape and gives a sense of where the eye should flow and follow and a sense of rhythm and so forth. And you'll see gouge marks and chisel marks, which is sort of a, a--if you wanna say a lesson from the African tribal arts sculptors 'cause you can see the, the tool marks. And the flow of, of them. That emphasizes the flow of the shape of the sculpture. Speaker 1: Okay. So you, you're trying, you're trying to produce art; you're not trying to replicate life or anything when you do sculpture. Speaker 2: No, no. And I, I really like the--I like the cont- I like to use different tools to contrast, to make the contrast and change the, the line, and to--naturally in the light, it, it gives the, the, the sculpture a little more life, hopefully, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how long does it usually take you to, to complete a piece? Speaker 2: Well on the average, I do maybe eight to ten pieces a year. So all depending on the piece. Usually a month and a half to two months for an average large piece. Sometimes on a great big piece, a big commission may take about three or four months. But on the average, a month, month and a half to two months. Story_ID: 613931 Speaker 1: You retired from the post office [U.S. Postal Service]. It wasn't that long ago, right? That you worked (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So after working forty years at-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So then you just devoted yourself full time to sculpting? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I go in the studio every day. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: From about seven to ten hours, all depending. Speaker 1: Now do you take frequent breaks during the day, or? Speaker 2: No. I don't eat lunch because if you eat, you don't feel like working. No, I go in and I, I--even, even my age, I can stand you know--hot weather, sometimes I sit down. But when it's cool, I can work nonstop four or five hours without stopping, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you work by yourself? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. You don't have any interns or apprentices or-- Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: Okay so you're not supervising a school of guys sculpting? Speaker 2: There's very few, there's very few people doing any type of carving nowadays. A lot of schools don't even teach it. I was at Memphis College of Art [Memphis, Tennessee] for Alonzo Davis, he was a black guy, was a dean down in Memphis [Tennessee] at that time. And these kids thought I was a wizard. They had never seen anyone carve. That's how remote--even at CMU, they don't teach--Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], they don't teach carving. Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] doesn't. No one hardly teach carving. Only the state schools still teach carving, like Indiana--IUP, California [California University of Pennsylvania, California, Pennsylvania]. I mean Indiana PA [Indiana University of Pennsylvania, Indiana, Pennsylvania] is one of the few schools that teach, maybe Slippery Rock [Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania, Slippery Rock, Pennsylvania] might, but there's very few people teaching carving anymore. That's why you can't buy usually hand carving tools at these college bookstores anymore. No one teaches it. Story_ID: 613932 Speaker 1: Just thinking back to what you were saying about African tribal traditions and do you see yourself as part of a continuum of that tradition? There are so many carvers in Africa when you go over here are--we're not allowed to do a lot of carving. I mean back in the slavery days we weren't. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They were kind of--a lot of it I suppose is lost. Speaker 2: Well 05:26:29:28I think African--even, even--well there's a lot of African carving, but it's totally different from the carving I'm interested in because the carving I'm--was interested in was the tribal arts carving, which was for many of 'em, based on religions. So unless you go to Mali where the Dogon are still around because they didn't have anything in the ground much, they were living on the desert mainly. But in all these places that have been Christianized or some other -ize, the, the, that type of the tribal arts is, is gone. So you have contemporary African carvers, some of them who are very good. But, but it's a total--and of course many of 'em are doing assemblages and everything else that they're doing in Western art. But no, I, I just see myself as a contemporary carver that, that, that has used--pretty much like you wanna say I see myself in the same way that maybe Miles Davis and Coltrane [John Coltrane] and people like that saw themselves as playing out, out of the New Orleans [Louisiana] to be (unclear)--Dixieland situation, but not playing that music, you know. But, but naturally still playing it out of that tradition; still playing the jazz tradition, but in a totally different--in a contemporary way, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So do you have any thoughts about black folk art from the South? Like some of the carvings that are starting to emerge now from the South are old and new (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I have, I have a book on--outside. And I have a book on, on, on--but again my situation is--the most sophisticated it is, the more I like it. Like I'll put it like this: I never really got much into the Mississippi blues or Robert Johnson and that--and Ledbetter [Huddie Ledbetter; Lead Belly] and, and that, and, and Lightnin' Hopkins and T-Bone Walker. I--that, that blues doesn't really--. But like Parker's [Charlie Parker] 'Moon' ['How High the Moon'], it knocks me out, you know. Or, or Coltrane's 'Bessie Blues' ['Bessie's Blues'], or Miles Davis' 'Bluing.' You understand what I'm saying? It's--the, the, the, the, the--it's far from the root, but it still has some of the root, but you know that's what I'm saying. Story_ID: 613933 Speaker 1: I was asking you about technique and that sort of thing. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --I was--there's a--when you were talking about the influence of--that you are likening what you do to the music you listen to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --breaking new ground. But I mean with the-- Speaker 2: No, I was saying you-- Speaker 1: --roots in an older form. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But breaking new ground in another sense, or doing something different. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So now, now there was--it's interesting, I don't know--I just wanna get your reaction to this 'cause I was thinking about the kind of work you do. There was a play written by August Wilson called 'The Piano Lesson.' Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember. Speaker 1: And the featured object in the play, the piano, was a piano with legs carved by a man who was an African slave who was the ancestor of these people living in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in the 1930s I guess, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or maybe the '50s [1950s]. Did you have any reaction--did you see that or did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah I saw Charles Dutton [Charles S. Dutton]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Charles Dutton starred in it. August Wilson from Pittsburgh wrote it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I knew August well. I knew him when he was--before he started writing plays. I used to loan him records, do poetry records to listen to, you know. 'Cause August about twenty years younger than me, would have been twenty years young--he was twenty years younger than me. He would only be about, what, sixty-two now, you know. Yeah I know, I know him very well. But no, I didn't have any, any, you know like I enjoyed most of his plays. I enjoyed some of the earlier one, like 'Fences' [August Wilson], 'Joe Turner' ['Joe Turner's Come and Gone,' August Wilson] and things like that, I like. But I saw, what was it--'Gem of the Ocean' [August Wilson] in New York [New York] about a couple years ago, you know, yeah. But no I didn't have a--I didn't relate to that much at all. But I am aware because of [HistoryMaker] David Driskell's book and show of some of the slaves that carved furniture and stuff like that. No, I--that didn't--no I, I had no particular feeling about--other than the play I thought it was an interesting you know, play of August's. I've always loved his language, you know. I always considered him a poet. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact I have a sculpture on the third floor I dedicated to August. He never, he never saw it. I guess about '92 [1992], or ninety--about 1990, I call it 'A Fence for the Poet' [ph.]. Now it doesn't look like a fence, but that's the name (laughter). And it's dedicated to August, yeah. Story_ID: 613934 Speaker 1: Now do you have favorite pieces of sculpture that, that--I mean out of all the hundreds of pieces you've done, do you have a favorite? Speaker 2: No. Anything that comes out pretty much like I imagine it, you know. There, there are, are quite a few that I--that, that I, I, I like somewhat better than others. But I even like the mediocre ones which most people might say most of 'em fit that category (laughter). But I like them--I like something because I try to do something different in one. I tried to do something other--and I learned from them all. So there are pieces that are--in some sense I've gotten wood that I can't get anymore, or the size of the, the size of the log and whatnot. And then some things like stone I don't do anymore 'cause I don't lift two hundred pounds like I did when I was--twenty-five, thirty years ago. So those things have become favorite in the sense that I doubt if I'll do them anymore. I have a piece in the living room. I may not do a piece like that anymore, but it may not any--be any better than this piece or that piece. It's just different, you know. It, it might be like someone say well, it's like your children, which of your children you like the best, or you have a favorite? No I--they're all favorites, you know. You like different ones for different things and, and all 'em are, you know, are beautiful kids, you know. And so I, I have six children, so--and all of 'em are different, and--but I, you know, they're all my favorites, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a--any particular piece that paid the most money? For (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Well the big--the most, paid the most was the piece at the convention center [David L. Lawrence Convention Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and that was fifty thousand dollars. That, that's the one that paid the most money, yeah. Speaker 1: And what was it, what is it? Speaker 2: It's called 'Three Rivers Bench' [Thaddeus Mosley] for the convention center, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was done what, four, five years ago now, yeah. Story_ID: 613935 Speaker 1: Since your career started, there's been a lot written about your work. And I mean we have newspaper articles written about you. And it seems like--was there a certain juncture when the city kind of discovered you? 'Cause as we were coming up the hallway, up the stairwell, you were--we were looking at the pictures of Teenie Harris [Charles "Teenie" Harris] and you were saying that yeah, they discovered him after he's dead, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: And now he's a big star. Everybody knows Teenie Harris' work. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When he was alive, he didn't get a lot of attention. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I mean do you feel that you're getting recognition now that you-- Speaker 2: Well I think once you, once a local has a show at the Carnegie Museum [Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], 'cause you know most museums, they don't really show many local people. In fact, I used to have a piece right on the stairs years ago when the director--there was a director there, liked my work. But after the--he succeeded by someone else, they decided they weren't gonna show any local people that weren't considered international. So that meant my work, and there's only about four or five of us in the whole--on permanent display. But they got rid of all, all that. But no, I think from my first show at the Carnegie, I began to--but also you know I never really pushed hard 'cause I had three kids with me [Martel Mosley, Rochelle Mosley Sisco and Lorna Mosley], and I had a job [at the U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. And so to me art, you know I, I never really you know--like in '68 [1968] I had an opportunity to go to New York [New York]. There was two galleries were sort of interested in me. But you know the--I could--you know when you do that, that means the only person that's important is you. And I had three--you know, a family and I, I just, you know, I wasn't gonna just drop out and become a full-time artist like they wanted me to be, you know. And so I never was--you know it's too much of a rat race on that, in that, in that way. Maybe if I'd been single and no one depending on me, I, I would have done it, you know, why not? You know. 'Cause I love New York and I, you know, would have loved to do it. But I couldn't have done it otherwise, you know. Because with me, of course my children come first, you know. My mother [Helen Fagan Mosley] and fa- father [Thaddeus Mosley, Sr.] divorced when I was seven or eight years old, and I missed my father a great deal. And I always promised myself that no matter what happened in any marriage, I was gonna be there--you know, I was gonna be where my children were, you know. Story_ID: 613936 Speaker 1: So you've been married twice, right (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've been married twice. Speaker 1: And so you've been able to, to stay with your, your children all the way through (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well my second wife [Yvonne Reed Mosley], she had some problems, ends up with the children being with me. So that--when you have, you know the responsibility of children, and then I've always preached education, you know. You, you got--you're the--I'm expecting you to do something. Well as long as you're preaching expectation, if you're not gonna be there to see that something's being done, and, and, and someone wants to do something, if I have a dime and they need a nickel, you got a nickel. You just go ahead and do it, you know. And, and because--one of the sad things to me is see all these kids not doing a thing and no one with no expectation. And they don't even know what a expectation is, you know. And, and all my kids went to some kind of school, you know. Because my one daughter that's an accountant [Lorna Mosley], she said, "Daddy, when we were little, we thought you were mean. But now we see where we are, we see where our friends are." And, and my son's [Martel Mosley] in Chicago [Illinois], he said, "Dad I tell my son the same thing you told me." You know and, and to me, it's all about education and I don't care if no one hires you or not, but if you know something, someone somehow if you really know something, and that's the way I believe. There's no, there's no way you can't have some sort of a life that, that, that makes you feel responsible and gives you a sense of achievement, you know. And I don't mean making all the money in the world (background noise), which I've never done, you know. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: I had some opportunities-- Speaker 2: Okay, well we're getting ready to--go ahead. Speaker 1: --to--I'm saying, you know, I've had opportunities to become better known and stuff like that, but I, I just felt that my children--I had to--I had taken on the responsibility, particularly at a time one was in elementary school. Well that was a different time. But after, after we moved here [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in '85 [1985], you know, and I had to see that you know that they all, you know were getting, at least getting prepared to go to college. And my daughter [Rochelle Mosley Sisco], my oldest daughter of my second marriage, she graduated in '87 [1987] and she went to Drexel [Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And these last two, they went to IUP, University of Pittsb- in Indiana [Indiana University of Pennsylvania, Indiana, Pennsylvania]. And but I've just have always taught and stressed education, you know, learn something. Because I just think that the confidence of knowledge is so important. And, and to me you know, if, if you don't have real confidence, I think the rest of it is just posturing, you know. And, and as the guys say on the street, you're just jiving each other and there's no place you can go at that stop but right where you are, you know. And, and so that's been you know, my focus is that to, to, to see that, that my children got some sort of education. Story_ID: 613937 Speaker 1: Where's your work going next? Are you, I mean what's your future plans (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my next thing I'm doing, I'm--they're building a new hotel downtown and I'm gonna do the sculpture, the sculpture for the entry of the lobby at, for the entry there. And then the Mattress Factory museum [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] which is over here, sort of cutting edge installation place--we're gonna--they're talking to me about doing something in the spring. Usually traditional art is cutting edge sort of stuff. So that's gonna be (laughter) sort of different, yeah. Speaker 1: Now you've exhibited overseas too haven't you, or? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, you never have? I thought you had. Speaker 2: Never, and never--I, I was invited years ago twice to do the second festival in Africa, in Nigeria. Speaker 1: Oh, '77 [1977], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Festival of the Arts [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria]. Speaker 2: But, but my wife didn't want me to go since she couldn't go, so I, so I bowed out of that. But then in, in Gene- in, in the early '90s [1990s] I was invited to be in a show in Geneva, Switzerland. But as they began to round up other people, and I was a lesser known, they said, "Well you know your stuff is so heavy, we have to start cutting expenses. So we're cutting," so I'm, you know, naturally you know, shipping weight is always a problem, you know. No, I've never shown overseas, no. Speaker 1: Okay. You think that's coming up? Speaker 2: Oh, at this stage, you know it doesn't really matter, you know. One, one of my other things I always--students always when I was teaching, they said, "Well what, what's the best piece of advice you can give us?" I said, "Well best piece of advice has nothing to do with art. It's take care of your health," you know. I says, "You know, when you can get up every day and feel good, and you're not aching and paining and you can walk," I says, "until a couple of years ago, I could run these three flights of steps when I was in my seventies, so hey you know." So that's the important thing to me. And being able to go into work, I don't--you know some people said, you know, my girlfriend said, "Oh, people gotta see your work." I said, "Why?" I said, "Art's not very important to very many people," I said, "so I, I don't really care about--what's important to me is being able to do it and wanting to do it, you know." Story_ID: 613938 Speaker 1: Now you're eighty-two years old now? Speaker 2: Yeah, eighty-two, yeah. Speaker 1: I say now, you don't look eighty-two. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: You don't seem to move like eighty-two year old man. Speaker 2: Well that's because I always say I spend so much time trying to be an All-American. You know western Pennsylvania is filled with All-Americans and I grew up in New Castle [Pennsylvania]. When I was coming up, western Pennsylvania was one gigantic athletic field. Every city had, had somebody was all this, all that and all, you know. Speaker 1: Now you were in cross country at Pittsburgh [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My first year at Pitt, yeah. Speaker 1: At Pitt, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, and then I got married, so I, I actually was on the track, went out for track team, you know. Speaker 1: Now I didn't--and you coached basketball and all that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well one thing I didn't ask you about when we were talking about sports was the famous black baseball teams here, the Pittsburgh Crawfords-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Crawfords. Speaker 1: --and the Homestead Grays, yeah. Speaker 2: Well see I--when I came here in '46 [1946] all that was on, on the tail end. But you know there was a story, Joe Harris the drummer, he's a famous drummer, played for Dizzy Gillespie. He, he and Ray Brown went to, went Dizzy at the same time. And Ray, and Joe starts--he's just over--next neighborhood over. So he starts back when--. So when time he asked me, he said, "You know something I can't find out? How Pittsburgh Crawfords got their name." I says I'll find out. So I called Frank Bolden [Frank E. Bolden], I don't know if you ever knew, heard of Frank Bolden. Frank Bolden was a writer for the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] and he knew a great deal about black history, particularly Pittsburgh history. So he said well when Teenie Harris [Charles "Teenie" Harris] had that youth baseball teams, like they, they were, were gonna play in the city championship. So his brother Woogie Harris [William "Woogie" Harris] and Gus Greenlee, they're the ones that brought the numbers to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. Teenie Harris' older brother-- Speaker 1: You mean the, the policy, what they call policy in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --the numbers game, right? Where you pay-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Well they called his brother Woogie. And Woogie and Gus Greenlee had a lot of money 'cause they ran the--and Gus Greenlee--and so, so, so, so Teenie--so Woogie said, "Well let me talk to Gus and see if he'll pay for, see if he'll pay for the uniforms." So he went to Gus, he said, he said, "Everyone has uniforms but us." So Gus said, "Okay, you pay this--pitch in the championship." He says, "I'll, I'll--," said, "what names you want on 'em?" He says, "Well we play down at Crawford field [Crawford Bath House, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], so Pittsburgh Crawfords." (Laughter) So, so then--and so, so, so then the team got so popular. So they called the--I forgot what Greenlee's clubs were called at that time. So they named the Crawford Grill [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] (laughter) and, and the Crawford Grill No. 2 [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. But that's how the Pittsburgh Crawfords--because of Teenie Harris. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the field was named Crawford field--that was where the name actually came from--yeah. Speaker 2: Greenlee Field [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Greenlee Field, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, after Gus Greenlee. He was the first one to put up lights, yeah Greenlee Field. And when they built the projects, they tore, tore, tore it down, you know, they put the projects up on ba- on, on, on Greenlee Field. But he, but he was the first one that had lights, one of the early people to put up lights for night baseball was Gus Greenlee in the--and then when the Craw- when they-- Speaker 1: I'm still kind of mixed up, though. So the name Crawford was, that was-- Speaker 2: Came because Teenie--because of, of, of the park down--the settlement house and ballpark down on Crawford Street-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which called Crawford settle- Crawford Street and Crawford ball field. So, so that's where Teenie and them played all their home games. They didn't have a name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They said so just call us the Pittsburgh Crawfords 'cause we play at Crawford field. And then--(laughter) so then Gus called his bars, it was two of 'em Crawford Grill No. 1 and No. 2. But it was Greenlee Field, his field--when the Crawfords got to be professionals, it was Greenlee, Greenlee Field. Story_ID: 613939 Speaker 1: Now when I came, I knew Josh Gibson, Jr. well. But he was actually a better football player than he was at baseball. They tried to make him to another Josh, you know. Speaker 2: And Gibson played for the Homestead Grays, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he played for, played for the Crawfords [Pittsburgh Crawfords]-- Speaker 2: And the--? Speaker 1: --then for the Grays. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, and now Satchel played for the Crawfords, Satchel Paige, he played for the Crawfords. And but Homestead Grays, I only, I only knew a couple of them and that was Bill Harris, 'cause he ran the Terrace Village [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] semi-pro baseball team. And he had a son that was a fantastic drummer, they call him Beaver Harris. I don't know if you ever heard of Beaver Harris or not. He played for Dolphy and he played with Archie Shepp. You know Archie Shepp? That's Beaver Harris on drums. There's lots of drummers, J.C. Moses played with Eric Dolphy and, and they came out of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] at that time. Beaver and J.C. and, and, and Roger who I go to hear every Thursday, Roger lives up--played with Horace Silver. Ro- Roger Humphries, he lives up the street up here. There was some, there was some guys, man. But yeah, but that, those--but I knew Bill Harris and his brother was really better than him, Vic Harris was one of the big stars at the Grays at the time that Josh Gibson, and I knew the guy that played center field had the bowling alley [Meadow Lanes Bowling Alley, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. What was his--Page, Page [Ted Page], tall guy. You know like you see center fielder 6, 6'2" back in those days, tall guy, you know. But, but when I, you know as, as I came in you know, particularly the Negro Leagues were about dead 'cause it wasn't long before Jackie Robinson you know, was with the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers] you know. Speaker 2: Yeah Jackie Robinson went in '46 [1946] was it? Speaker 1: I think '47 [1947]. Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947], okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, see I come here in '46 [1946], yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. So that was the, that was the last days really of the Negro-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and one of the last guys I knew was, was Clarence Bruce, and he worked, he ended up working in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. But he had played, he was one of the last guys to play for the Homestead Grays. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And his son [Kirk Bruce] coached female basketball for Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] for a while. Story_ID: 613940 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question: when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Well when, when I look back, you know, I think a lot of times you think about, you know when I first got out of school [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] I took the civil service test for information writer for the federal government. So in the early '60s [1960s], you know after Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] got in they began to think about you know, more opportunities for, for blacks. So I got, I was called up to Mechanicsburg [Pennsylvania], which is a big [U.S.] military installation at the time. And I was offered a job--took a test and I was offered the job. It would have been double what I was making in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. In fact, they were gonna double my salary within six months, I would have had a raise if I'd of came. And I thought about it. And I said--and I--at that time I was divorced from my first wife [Ruth Ray], but the kids were here with her. I thought about it all, and I said nah. And sometimes I think well maybe if I'd taken that job and see if they got the kids to come with me. But then too, they wanted to me to just concentrate. They told me that chances of me continuing to be a sculptor would be slight, you know. So, so there's not much I'd do different. There's just--the only thing if you people look back, I try not to have regrets, but the only, only thing I would regret that I didn't have more money to give my children better education. Other than that-- Story_ID: 613941 Speaker 1: In that regard, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well I would like to (unclear)--you know I can remember when I was a kid, when things, which is a long time ago. When, when I, I remember when I graduated out of high school [New Castle Senior High School; New Castle Junior/Senior High School, New Castle, Pennsylvania], I was a honor student. And I'm--course I'm coming from a small town and the people were, you know the whole town, the church was--everyone was saying that's so great, that's so great. And, and they would say, the preachers would say (unclear)--and, and back at that time New Castle [Pennsylvania] had postgraduate courses you know in high school. You could--if you got--graduated from high school, you could still go up in the evening, take post graduate course--I, I, I don't think that exists now. And you didn't have to pay any money. And they would say--preacher would say, "Well if you graduated and you go up and learn some more," you know. But the idea was that--and they'd say, "Even if you can't get a job, they can't take that away from you," you know. And the idea that you can learn something and, and, and that, that learning will, will--there was an achievement. It was, it was, it was something to strive for. Well that's the sort of idea that I would like that, that--I'm sure that there's not an individual in this world that doesn't say I have something special in me and I'd like to see what it is. And I think only way that you can find, discover that, is through some sort of learning. It may be sell, 'cause you know like I said, like, like August Wilson dropped out of school when he was seventeen because he had written something and, and, and the English teacher accused him of plagiarism. And he got so discouraged that he dropped--but, but the thing was August went to the library every day and read every day, you know. And, and, and because he knew that he had something that he wanted to say, something he could hear, something he could see. I remember when he told me that he was moving from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to Minneapolis [Minnesota], he was going to Tyrone Guthrie school of drama [Tyrone Guthrie Theater, Minneapolis, Minnesota]. He says, "I'm tired of writing poem--poems, you don't get anything back from poetry. I'm gonna start writing plays. There's things I want, I want to--plays I wanna write." And, and I remember that just like I'm talking to you, you know, when he told me that. So that's the thing that I would like to see. The, the spark of indi- individuality and creativity exists in everyone. This sort of intellectual curiosity that I don't see. Maybe I'm in the wrong place. Story_ID: 613942 Speaker 1: Sir when you look back from this point, what today--when you look at everything you've done, what today would consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well you know my youngest son [Khari Mosley] and I, we did one of these father/son things they were having this--on NPR [National Public Radio] they had a group of people come through about a year or so ago where they had father and sons, or--we all was talking. And they asked what you look back on, on your legacy. And he had, my son asked me--they had the son asking the father. I said well my legacy of course are my children and what they, you know, more what they've done rather than I've done. But my personal legacy, again is the fact that I found a lifestyle, something that I--a passion, a personal interest. And I think that--and I've been able to in some way pass this on to many people, at least in this part of the world, as, as a point of interest, a point of--for many acquisition. But a point that, that--and for so many, a lot of people, well, particularly when I was teaching that, yeah, you--I can do this. I can do--. And I think the feeling that if you can inspire other people, or make them feel good about what they see, about what you do, I think that in itself is probably worth whatever you've done. Story_ID: 613943 Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't asked you that we need to ask before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Well I guess, I guess no. I, I can't think of anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well again, I think--I have six children, (laughter) so they'll remember me. And I know how they, they, they feel, you know. They all feel Daddy was really tough, but Daddy loved us and he wouldn't do more one--more for one than he would for the other. And I guess I would just like to be remembered just as a father and a sculptor. Speaker 1: Okay. Well thank you very much sir. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 613944 Speaker 1: That's me, 1926 when I was a baby and my oldest sister who was four years old at the time, maybe five, yeah probably five, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. That's my mother Helen Fagan [Helen Fagan Mosley] when she was--1903 when she was a baby. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my mother and father, Thad- Thaddeus Mosley, Sr. and Helen Fagan about 1950. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, next. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's my father Thaddeus Mosley, Sr. in 1901. That's his baby picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: That's my father up in Elbon, PA [Elbon, Pennsylvania], and that's about 1920 or so. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Those are my three sister, elder sisters, and this is in early 1920s, and about 1925 'cause I was, they were still in Elbon, Pennsylvania. That's Orvetta [Orvetta Mosley Ward], Bea [Beatrice Mosley Young] and Margaret [Margaret Mosley Cox]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: At the bottom is my oldest son Martel [Martel Mosley], my daughter Lorna [Lorna Mosley], my mother Helen and my daughter Rochelle [Rochelle Mosley Sisco]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Speaker 1: This is my grandmother and I'm thinking about early 1900s. This is Rosa Lee Graves [Rosa Graves Fagan]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's me, [HistoryMaker] Thaddeus Mosley, third grade at West Side School in New Castle, Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's Thaddeus Mosley, that's me in the [U.S.] Navy at nineteen in New York City [New York, New York] at Floyd Bennett Field. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's my mother Helen Fagan when she was about seventy-five years old. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's my maternal grandmother and grandfather; that's Richard Fagan and, and Rosa Graves. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Thaddeus Mosley, my graduation picture from the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in 1950. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, next. Speaker 1: That's my first group of children. This--in the early 1950s. (Unclear) that's Lorna, Martel and Rochelle Mosley. Speaker 2: These are Mosley--my second set of children, and this, in the late '70s [1970s]. And that's Rochelle--no, I'm sorry, that's Tereneh [Tereneh Mosley], Anire [Anire Mosley] and Khari Mosley. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's me Thaddeus Mosley in 1945 New Castle High School [New Castle Senior High School; New Castle Junior/Senior High School, New Castle, Pennsylvania], graduation picture. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's my sister Margaret Mosley who's passed away. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Now that's twenty, next. Speaker 2: That's my older sister Bea who was a marvelous musician. She passed away year 2000. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Start at the top, go to the bottom. Speaker 2: The top is my mother's Uncle Robert [ph.], the middle was my grandmother. Speaker 1: About what year for Robert? Speaker 2: I'm saying that had to be about 1914 or something like that 'cause that was taken in Elbon. Then my grandmother, and that would have to be somewhere about I guess 1910 or so. Then my father about 1932. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, hold on now. There's two people, who's with her? Speaker 2: My grandmother is on the right standing, and another cousin of hers is sitting, who I don't know. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, that's fine. Speaker 2: Then the bottom is my father at No. 5 Mine [Elbon, Pennsylvania]. And that was about 1933. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: That's University of Pittsburgh magazine when I was on the cover in the '90s [1990s] and I--did a story on my sculpture at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. That's my girlfriend Terry Seya, me in the middle and Ahmad Jamal the pianist on the right where he's signing autograph for after the concert. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's the pianist Horace Silver, now lives in California, and this was in the '90s [1990s] when he came to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to honor his ex-drummer Roger Humphries. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This was a show at the governor's mansion [Pennsylvania Governor's Residence], Governor Rendell [Ed Rendell] in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. And that's the governor, myself and my girlfriend Terry. And the bottom is the governor's wife [Marjorie Osterlund Rendell] and a snapshot of me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good, next. Speaker 1: That is a promotional shot for ProArts of Pittsburgh. That's Jeffrey Pollock [Jeffrey L. Pollock], the attorney for them and me with some, with a gouge and a mallet in my studio. That was two years ago, what, ni- 2006...