 Story_ID: 485283 Speaker 1: --With The HistoryMakers. I [Shawn Wilson] will do, conduct the interview. And this is Neculai Burghelea. He will photograph-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Videotape. Speaker 1: --videotape, the interview. I will have you introduce yourself to me and the camera. Speaker 2: Should I look at the camera, or should I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You'll look at me, but I just meant-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --you'll slate your name and spell it out, your full name, your-- Speaker 2: Let's do this. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And your middle name. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, if you can go ahead and start. Speaker 2: Hello, my name is Donna Maria Ann Mendes-LaMotte [HistoryMaker Dr. Donna M. Mendes]. My last name is LaMotte. That's my married name, but I use my--my professional name is Mendes. Speaker 1: So if you'll spell that out for me. Speaker 2: It's M-E-N-D-E-S, and-- Speaker 1: And is that Spanish? Speaker 2: It's Portuguese. Speaker 1: Portuguese. Speaker 2: My [paternal] grandfather-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was born in Cape, Cape Verdean islands [Cape Verde], off the west coast of Africa and when-- Speaker 1: Okay, so we'll get to that before you tell me too much (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We'll get to that, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, we're gonna start. Okay, your date of birth? Speaker 2: Ten, twenty-five, fifty-one [October 25th, 1951]. Speaker 1: Ten, twenty-five, fifty-one. Your place of birth? Speaker 2: Oceanside, New York. Speaker 1: Oceanside, is that Long Island [New York]? Speaker 2: That's Long Island. Speaker 1: (Unclear) in Oceanside. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Is that on the beach? Speaker 2: No, no, no, it sounds like it's on the beach, but it's not. It's the South Shore. I grew up on the South Shore, Roosevelt [New York], so Long Island. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 28th (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Eighth. Speaker 2: Thank you (laughter). March 28th, 2007. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: This is in my office at 1090 Amsterdam Avenue in Manhattan [New York]. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a vascular surgeon. Story_ID: 485284 Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: Chicken (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: I love the summer, but fall is, is quite lovely, probably because of my birthday. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Caribbean. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phase--phrase or saying, I love that (laughter). Speaker 1: Very nice, okay. Story_ID: 485285 Speaker 1: So let's start. You were born 10/25 [October 25, 1951] Oceanside, New York [Oceanside, New York]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: We're gonna talk about before you were born actually, your mom and your mom's side of the family, your father [Benjamin Mendes], your father's side of the family. So we'll start with your mother, your mother's full-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --name, her date of birth, and place of birth. Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Bernice Mendes. She was born in Goose Creek, South Carolina. And at the age of three she came up to New York, and she went to--she was taken to Long Island [New York] where her mother lived and her father lived. She had been raised prior to that by relatives. My father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You mean prior to being three, when she was three years old? Speaker 2: Prior to coming to Long Island. Speaker 1: Right. Okay, so, Goose Creek, South Carolina. Do you know anything at all about Goose Creek? Speaker 2: I know nothing about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --Goose Creek. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know where, where it's even located-- Speaker 2: It's not--it's-- Speaker 1: --in reference to South Carolina? Speaker 2: It's located near Charleston [South Carolina] I've been told. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother has never gone back. I've thought that I wanted to go back, but I have not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: You know, I was reading something recently, and Charleston had the--Charleston's port had the biggest number of slaves to come through-- Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: --that area. Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: And I was in Charleston recently, and they had this huge waterfront, you know. And you can just imagine all the ships and the boats and the, you know, this market. You can just imagine. So Goose Creek was close to Charleston? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so she--you said she was born in 19-- Speaker 2: She was born in 1928, September 14th (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twenty-eight [1928]. Speaker 2: --nineteen twenty-eight [1928]. Speaker 1: So she was born during the Depression [Great Depression]. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes she was. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know anything at all--we'll get back to your mom, but I wanna just shift a little bit to her parents. Do you know anything at all about them, her mother? Speaker 2: Her, her mother was Henrietta Smith [ph.]. She was born in 1916. She, she died when she was eighty-ish years old. She was in, on, in New York--I'm sorry--yes, in New York, out on Long Island when she died. Speaker 1: So she was a teenage when she had your mother. Speaker 2: Probably, oh, yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --absolutely. Speaker 1: So she was born 1916. Your mom was born 1928, yeah. So then is that why they sent her to the North to live with relatives in the North? Speaker 2: Probably, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --we've never really discussed it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was raised by her godmother, and then she came up to New York. My, my grandfather was here at that time also, so, so-- Speaker 1: Where was your grandfather born? Speaker 2: My grandfather was born on Long Island also, in Freeport, Long Island [Freeport, New York]. Interestingly, both grandfathers were born there. And, and my father--my grandfather, Theo- Theodore Bennett-- Story_ID: 485286 Speaker 1: Okay, so my, my [maternal] grandfather, Theodore Bennett, my mom [Bernice Mendes], my mom's father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Father, yeah. Speaker 1: --he was born in, in Freeport [New York]. And when he died, it was at the funeral that we found out that he wasn't really Theodore Bennett but was really Theodore Leftennant [ph.]. So some of the people who were allegedly my cousins really weren't my cousins (laughter). So anyway, he's-- Speaker 2: So you have a huge extended family. Speaker 1: I have a huge extended family. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And my grand (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So did your mother move up--did, did her mother [Henrietta Smith (ph.)] move to New York with her when she came up from South Carolina at three years old? Speaker 1: No, she had come prior to-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --my mother coming and so had my grandfather. My grandfather and my moth- my grandmother were not married. So they both lived in Freeport. My grand- my mother came up, and then she was raised by-- Speaker 2: Her godmother. Speaker 1: --her godmother, who also came up, and then intermittently she would be with her mom. Speaker 2: But you understand like it's during the Depression [Great Depression], so they're all escaping the South, looking for a much better life. Speaker 1: Um-hm, absolutely. Speaker 2: And Freeport had a history of an African American community, correct? Speaker 1: Absolutely, they did. Speaker 2: What is the history of that community? Speaker 1: I'm not a hundred percent certain, but that we had things called projects, which were all over. And indeed, that's where my grandmother lived, where my, my grandfather lived. And then there was, there was even an extension of that, where we would go to, to, or go to meet my grandmother. It was, it was quite different, and we've come such a long way when you think of it. Speaker 2: Of course. Speaker 1: I mean just such a long way. We would go down there, and we would get fish on Fridays, and-- Speaker 2: And this is in Freeport? Speaker 1: This is in Freeport, yeah, down by the dock. And my sister [Sharon Mendes Poulson] still lives in Freeport. Speaker 2: Nice. My sister still lives in Mississippi. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's very nice. So, my grandfather (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What did he do for a living? Speaker 1: My grandfather worked for the community. Well, he worked for, in Freeport, for public service-type stuff and, and was a, you know, the, the, the various political parties. He worked in the political party that was in favor in Freeport, so he got a lot of favors. So-- Speaker 2: So he always worked for the one that was in favor? Speaker 1: Yes-- Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: --which, which, was interestingly was not the Democrats but was the Republicans. So, that was my grandfather. He--I bought him into Long--into Manhattan [New York] when he got sick. He developed colon cancer, and he, he ended up dying. But he came here and had two procedures, two operations by--at that time I got the chiefs of the department to operate on him. And that was my grandfather. My grandfather married someone other than my grandmother. And through that interaction we now have--I have my further extended family, my first cousins. Speaker 2: Right. So how many siblings did they have together, your mother and father [Benjamin Mendes]? Speaker 1: Just my mom. Speaker 2: Just your, just your mom. Speaker 1: Just my mom. Speaker 2: So she was an only child. Speaker 1: She was an only child through that relationship. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And then, then-- Speaker 2: But did she have any other brothers and sisters that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, she had a half-brother-- Speaker 2: --felt like your uncles or-- Speaker 1: She had a half-brother that my grandfather had with somebody else. And-- Speaker 2: Did he feel like your uncle? Do you grow up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He did. Speaker 2: --around him? Speaker 1: No, he lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and those are my first cousins now. That, that family (laughter), that became my first cousins then, three of them--all of them now live in Florida. Story_ID: 485287 Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up in Ocean City [sic. Oceanside, New York]? Speaker 2: Well, that's where I was born, but I grew up-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --in Roosevelt, Roosevelt, Long Island [Roosevelt, New York]. Speaker 1: --in Roosevelt. Speaker 2: It was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now how did they get from Freeport [New York] to Roosevelt? Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's-- Speaker 1: It's close. Speaker 2: --it's very, very close, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oceanside was simply the hospital where I was born, but I was, I, my first place of residence was Roosevelt. Freeport was the town next door. Speaker 1: Got it. Speaker 2: Roosevelt was a one square mile town. And it was a very--it was the beginning of a community at that time, the beginning of a, of a middle class black community, little houses. Everyone went to, you know, the, the various schools. Roosevelt High School [Roosevelt, New York] at that time was not--was a, was a good school. I did not go to Roosevelt High School. I went to the parochial schools. I went to elementary school at a Catholic school [Queen of the Most Holy Rosary School, Roosevelt, New York] and then to Sacred Heart Academy [Hempstead, New York], which was the high school. And it was a small, a small little town. We, had, we have a few people who came out of that town that we're very proud of. We have Eddie Murphy, Julius Erving. Those are our little, those are the people that we remember, and, and me (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) So what are your, your earliest memories of growing up in Roosevelt? Like as a little girl, what do you remember about where you lived? Speaker 2: I remember that we lived in a brick house. I loved that house. And my father [Benjamin Mendes] was always doing something extra in, to the place. We, we expanded where we had a built-in pool in the backyard. Then he built a, a, a dancing area over the garage, another extension here and there. So he was always doing something. So my--first remem- my, my first memories wouldn't be there. My first memories would be my next door neighbor, she and I were very close friends. They had five children. And the people across the street, she, the, the lady adopted a son. We just--I just loved Roosevelt. It was a nice little town. It was a nice house. I'd always try to sing. I'd be standing on the front porch trying to sing, but I was afraid height. But you got closer and closer to the edge of step, would fall (laughter), kind of crazy, but I, I loved to sing. And my brother [Damon Mendes] is a drummer and would always tell me not to sing because I could not carry a tune. I always remember the next door neighbors on the right-hand side because there were three guys, and my, my sister [Sharon Mendes Poulson] was in love with one of them always. So she was always trying to go out with them. My sister is five years older than I am. So she--it was, it was nice 'cause you had the three guys over there and my other friends on the other side. Story_ID: 485288 Speaker 1: And we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's your father's full name? Speaker 1: Benjamin Andrew Sans Mendes [Benjamin Mendes]. Speaker 2: And he grew up in? Speaker 1: Freeport [New York]. Speaker 2: In Freeport. But you were telling me early on that, about your, the name being Portuguese, and so your father was-- Speaker 1: My grandfather was born in Cape Verdean islands [Cape Verde]. He must have gotten on some boat and came over to Long Island [New York]. My, my grandmother had my father, named him Ben, stayed there for a while. Then my grandfather left and went to Providence, Rhode Island, where most Cape Verdeans went, and had another family, the first child, and that relationship was Benjamin also. It's a very--you know, and when, now that you say it out loud, it's kind of, it's a very interesting family history. Speaker 2: Right. So, in Providence there is also a middle class black community that was starting up like the one in Freeport? Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. But much more-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --so in Providence. Speaker 2: But much more so, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there's a big, big Cape Verdean population there or Cape Verde, whichever way they say, Cape-- Speaker 2: Do they speak the language? Do they speak Portuguese? Speaker 1: No, they, there's, I think it's a dialect of Portuguese. But my, and my grandfather did, but I never did. Yeah, I--the only lang- the only word that I know, I got when I went to, to South America to Rio [Rio de Janeiro, Brazil]. It's (speaking Portuguese) obrigado, which is thank you (laughter). Speaker 2: (Speaking Portuguese) Obrigado, obrigado. Speaker 1: But I don't--I am--I don't know it. Speaker 2: Did you see that grandfather? Did he seem like a foreigner when you were growing up? I mean did he have an accent? Did he-- Speaker 1: He was not around because he, he-- Speaker 2: He wasn't around. Okay, because he was in Providence (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, because he was Providence. Speaker 2: Got it. Speaker 1: And when I was a child we, we visited once, when I was a very small child. I don't remember him at all. Speaker 2: You don't remember him at all. Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He did have other children who would come and visit, but that, but the rela- but the families never became very close. Story_ID: 485289 Speaker 1: So what, when you were in the little house in, on, in Roosevelt [New York]-- Speaker 2: Madison Avenue. Speaker 1: --Mad- Madison Avenue-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what were the Christmases like? Speaker 2: Christmases were great. My parents [Bernice Mendes and Benjamin Mendes] would always go out Christmas Eve to buy the Christmas tree. So we'd have all these little boxes around, but there was no tree. Then Christmas Eve they'd put all the stuff up on the tree, and then we'd have to go to bed for a couple of hours before we could open anything. And then we would open our gifts on Christmas morning. My mother was a great cook. And my, my grandmother lived with us also, my father's mother. So she lived with us. Nana is what we would call her, and she would cook great food. We'd have stollens. We'd have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's stollens? Speaker 2: It's, it's a, it's, it's a bread that you mix with raisins and nuts, and we would have that for breakfast. Speaker 1: Is it a traditional (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --I think a lot of-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --people have it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And my mom would make so much food that we were all overweight. My, my mother would make apple dumplings and, for, for dinner, apple dumplings and apple pie and, and pie--'cause I'm having the dessert first. We'd have beef; we'd have chicken; we'd have turkey. For breakfast we would have eggs; we would have pancakes. I was sort of a little bit overweight (laughter). Well, 'cause eating was a big thing. My father probably wanted to show that he worked hard, and he could provide his family with stuff. My father worked three jobs. And, and I, I was always under the impression that we were rich. And, and my, I never saw my father though. I was always able to shop at nice stores. We always had a lot of food, but he was always, always working, and that's how he did it. And he's still alive, and he's just a hard, hard working guy. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Speaker 2: So Christmases, what, what my first memory of, of Christmas would be Christmas, the Christmas tree would be up, beautiful, lots of gifts underneath it. Then we would have relatives who would come by and give us gifts, and we would exchange gifts. And they would stay, and they would have a little something to eat. We would go to church usually in the morning (background noise). Speaker 1: What type of, what denomination were you? Speaker 2: Catholic. Story_ID: 485290 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your mom [Bernice Mendes] and dad [Benjamin Mendes]. They married sixty years ago. Speaker 2: My--they, they married sixty years ago. They have three children. My sister [Sharon Mendes Poulson] is five years older than I am. My brother [Damon Mendes] is two years younger than I am. And they are still together. Ten years ago I got this call from my father that, "I'm moving to Florida." Now they had already gotten a small place down there where they were, you know, wintering. And I said what do you mean? He said, "It's too cold here [New York]. I'm moving to Florida." I said well, I know you have a house down there. He said, "Nope, I'm down there full time now." So he went down to Florida, bought a home in, in Orlando [Florida] in a gated community. In addition to their bedroom, got three bedrooms, so they wanted--anytime any of their children wanted to come down, we could. So they've lived down there now for ten years. I was just down there this weekend. My mother is what, seventy-seven. My father is eighty-two. Speaker 1: Good for them. They like it then, huh (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my father's driving his little S-- Speaker 1: He's still driving? Speaker 2: --SLK Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz SLK-Class]-- Speaker 1: Nice. Speaker 2: --it's his little doggie. My mother has her, her SUV. Speaker 1: What do they--how do they socialize down there? Speaker 2: There's a group down there called the New York Floridians. That's a club that my father (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) African Americans or everybody? Speaker 2: African American, yeah, and my father was president at one time. I, when I go down there I try to speak, 'cause they, they meet once a month. And there's always questions about cardiovascular disease. So they had a luncheon this past Saturday when I was there, so I went and I answered all the questions and then left (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'll be your dad is just beaming (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and I left them there, but that was--we--he started inviting, having the children of the members come down and speak because we'd be visiting. So what, whatever specialty that person had, they would talk about. Speaker 1: So generally, who are the children of the parents that are in the-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --the, that community? Speaker 2: --attorneys, physicians, teachers, any number of things. And so it's--well, someone, one guy came down to speak about insurance, which was good. And so that's, that's what they do. Also, during the holidays they, they, they act; they--what's the word that I want? They pretend that they're someone else. Like one woman played Tina Turner one day. She got a wig. She had a short dress. It was so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They do talent shows. Speaker 2: Yeah, they do the talent shows. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: My, my sister-in-law [Elisabeth Withers-Mendes] is a, she's an actress. She's in 'The Color Purple.' So my mother played Shug [Shug Avery] last Christmas, because that's, that's the, that's the position my sister-in-law plays. It was-- Speaker 1: I saw that show. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was really good. Speaker 1: Okay, and she's great. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, that's what they do. It's, it's a nice little organization, and it keeps them connected. As a matter of fact, I think they have more friends there than they do--than they would have here, because people move, and you don't, you don't start to make new friends in the place where you, where you've grown up, but down there they all got together. It was, was very nice, was very nice (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's awesome that he's the president of the New York Floridians. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, he was. I'm, I don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, he was, okay. Speaker 2: --I think he--I don't think he is right now, right now. They go to plays. Story_ID: 485291 Speaker 1: You said he [Mendes' father, Benjamin Mendes] worked three jobs when he was young. One was at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. Speaker 2: Post office, Grumman [Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation; Northrop Grumman Corporation], and then there was a electronic store called Vem [ph.], and he was working there too. He was all over the place. And, and my father always exercised. At one time he was into bowling, so he would, after work, something at maybe three or four hours he would go bowling. And he got into jogging. And he was dra--jogging along Meadowbrook Parkway [Meadowbrook State Parkway], which is out in Roosevelt [New York], Freeport [New York], and someone tried to run him off the road, yeah. So he stopped jogging, and then he got, he now has a exercise bicycle. And he, at the age of eighty-two, is on it every day, every day, lifts weights, so he's, he's pretty good, yeah. That's where, that's where his children get it from I'm certain (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --'cause my mother [Bernice Mendes] is not a big exerciser, even though she's in good shape. Story_ID: 485292 Speaker 1: So do you remember your first school in Roosevelt [New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, my first school was Queen of the Most Holy Rosary [Queen of the Most Holy Rosary School, Roosevelt, New York], which was a Catholic-- Speaker 1: Say that again. Speaker 2: Queen of the Most Holy Rosary School, elementary school. I went there from kindergarten to eighth grade. It was, it was mostly white and-- Speaker 1: Where was it located? Speaker 2: It was in Roosevelt. It was in Roosevelt. It is, it was the, right next to the church that we went to, and it was the church (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which was Catholic. Speaker 2: Which, which is Catholic. Speaker 1: Was it the church mostly white also? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And from there, I--it would, it was always one's goal to go to Sacred Heart Academy [Hempstead, New York], which was one of the premier girl high schools. So my--initially I did not get in, but then I got in. So I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why was it always one's goal? Speaker 2: Because it was the best. It was the best Catholic high school, and so that's where I wanted to go. So, and I-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --went there. And it was, the nuns were our teachers and-- Speaker 1: Were there any African American nuns? Speaker 2: No, no, but in high school I had another girlfriend, and there were, there were a few more black, black women in the Sacred Heart Academy. And there may have been more, more students. My brother [Damon Mendes] went to, to Queen of the Most Holy Rosary, so there clearly were more African Americans in the elementary school, too. But there were, there's just a few. Story_ID: 485293 Speaker 1: So did you ever think about race, or when were you conscious of race as a child? Speaker 2: I was conscious of race from the very beginning. I knew that I was different. And however, at that time, I was hoping that I would have more white traits, clearly, you know, because I was going to this school. And-- Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: Well, one, one girl--it's kind of interesting. It was kind of stupid too. One girl was pigeon-toed, and I was wishing that I was pigeon-toed like her--kind of really nuts--and blue eyes, you know, straight hair, that kind of thing, and could wish I could get it wet. When we'd--we would go to CYO [Catholic Youth Organization] camp, and things that my mother [Bernice Mendes] would say when we were going to camp would be, "Don't get your hair wet, Donna [HistoryMaker Dr. Donna M. Mendes]. Don't get in the sun." So I'm thinking, I'm going to camp (laughter), so what am I gonna do when I'm there? Anyway, I was not then part of the real community, the Roosevelt [New York] community, as I was growing up because everyone else was going to Roosevelt High School [Roosevelt, New York], and I wasn't. So that made me feel a little bit uncomfortable, and that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what-- Speaker 2: --probably-- Speaker 1: Go ahead, and that's probably-- Speaker 2: That's probably why I wanted to go to Sacred Heart Academy [Hempstead, New York], because to leave Queen of the Most Holy Rosary elementary school [Queen of the Most Holy Rosary School, Roosevelt, New York] and then go to Roosevelt High School would have been a huge transition. And I wasn't as close to everybody as I wanted to be, so-- Speaker 1: Who went to Roosevelt High School? Speaker 2: My brother [Damon Mendes] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But-- Speaker 2: --and my sister [Sharon Mendes Poulson]. Speaker 1: But I'm talking about collectively the type of, were they mainly black, mainly-- Speaker 2: I'd say it was fifty-fifty then. Speaker 1: Fifty-fifty. Speaker 2: And, and everyone was cool. Everybody was having a good time, but I was going to school where I was wearing a uniform and black and white-- Speaker 1: Why did your family send you to the Catholic school? Speaker 2: Because they thought that the education might be a little bit better. Speaker 1: Now were they good Catholics? Speaker 2: Fair Catholics, you know (laughter). I, I don't think we ate meat on Fridays and-- Speaker 1: That's good. Speaker 2: --they try to go to church on Sundays, so-- Speaker 1: That's good. Speaker 2: --my mother anyway; my father [Benjamin Mendes], maybe not. But that's, that's what we tried to do. Story_ID: 485294 Speaker 1: What type of a student were you in elementary (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was pretty good. Speaker 1: --in, at, at the, that Rosary? What was it called? Speaker 2: Queen, Queen- Speaker 1: Queen-- Speaker 2: --of the Most Holy Rosary (laughter). Speaker 1: Queen of the Most Holy Rosary [Queen of the Most Holy Rosary School, Roosevelt, New York] (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I was good. I was a pretty good student. I had A, B. My brother [Damon Mendes] would come home sometimes, and I'd say, "Oh, Daddy, I got an A; oh, Daddy, I got an A; oh, Daddy, I got a hundred." And my brother would say, "Daddy, I got a thousand," you know, I think he got tired of me, really tired--I got a thousand today, so (laughter). So, I was fairly good. And high school [Sacred Heart Academy, Hempstead, New York] came along, and interestingly, between eleventh and twelfth grade we had a, a school trip. No, it was more than a trip but a idea to go to Europe. So we--so my father [Benjamin Mendes] said to me, "Do you want to go?" And I was think--I was a little bit torn because I would have preferred at that time to stay home and be with my new, you know, the friends I was trying to become friendly with in high school. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because this is over the summer. Speaker 2: This was over the summer. So, but I said okay, so I went to Europe between my eleventh and twelfth grade. It was great, and I had two weeks in Paris [France], two weeks in Florence [Italy], and two weeks in Rome [Italy]. Speaker 1: How did that open your eyes? Speaker 2: That opened my eyes to--it was, it was also very interesting because I, I was in a group that had a nun as the ma--you know, the teacher-- Speaker 1: Chaperone. Speaker 2: --the, the chaperone. She left the nunnery when she came back. There was, there were four women: there was myself; there was a woman who looked like she was purely from California, and she was; another one who looked kind of Norwegian; and a Chinese woman. So it was the four us very ethnic, and we just had a great time. And being, being over there you could, it was nice to see the differences. In Italy, when you'd get on a bus, a woman would raise their hands so that they, you know, they could hold on to the strap. They'd have all this axillary hair and all of this hair on their legs. And you're like, I don't get that, but that's just the way it was there. And they just loved--they just, they were not as--they were just freer, and it was just nice--it was nice; it was very nice. We would go out to dinner, and the, the nun would come with us. And I guess when she went home, she just said you know, (laughter) maybe this is, maybe living that way is a little bit more interesting. So that's--she left when we came back. And we stayed friends for a while, but now, now I don't any of them. I don't know where anyone is. But that was definitely, definitely nice. We felt that we were like the United Nations [UN] because we were all so different. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that stood out for you at that first school that may have-- Speaker 2: Queen of the Most Holy Rosary? Yeah, there was a sister, Sister Mary David [ph.] or something like that. She was, she was, she, she was very tall. She was strong. And I just, I just liked her attitude, the way she was teach, you know, the way she would teach. I don't know if she really took me under her wing, but I liked her. In, in high school, I can't really say that any of them truly stick out in my mind. In college [Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York]-- Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) well, we'll, we'll get there. Speaker 1: --before you get to college- Story_ID: 485295 Speaker 1: When you were growing up, you mentioned Julius Erving and Eddie Murphy. Did you know any of them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I knew Julius, not very well, but you know, we, we hung out a little bit at parties, and, and a couple of times he came by. Eddie Murphy, it was younger, but so, so I didn't know him too well. And so it, it was just the fact that it's this one square mile town [Roosevelt, New York] that had-- Speaker 1: That they--right. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and the person who lived next door, they were the Mackeys. And Johnny Mackey [John Mackey] I think was in the first, first Super Bowl [sic. Super Bowl V]. You know, he was the, in the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts] and you know, the Jets [New York Jets] and Joe Namath and the whole thing. So, that was, it was, it was a cute little town, you know. We had a lot of stuff going on. But I understand now that it's just not doing so well-- Story_ID: 485296 Speaker 1: In 1968, when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, where were you? Speaker 2: Oh, I was in the car with my mom [Bernice Mendes], and we were driving home someplace, and then we heard it on the radio. It was, it was just devastating, so devastating. But that's where I was. And I, I don't really know if I appreciated the impact of it as much as I should have at that time. But you know, my father [Benjamin Mendes] was not--how can I put it? We--I, I don't think I really understood the impact of it as, as much as I probably should have, because now, when you think about it, when you go back over it, it was just such a devastating thing. It was devastating at the time too, but it was still-- Speaker 1: Were you--how aware of the Civil Rights Movement were you during that time as a teenager? Speaker 2: Well, I was very much aware because we had the two factions in a way. You know, we had the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]; we had Martin Luther King; we had, we had some, some riots; we had--I went to Hofstra University [Hempstead, New York], which was also out on Long Island [New York]. And I know you're not there, but-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but we, we can be there-- Speaker 2: --but, but we had a boycott at the school, where we, where all the black students were advised--suggested we were not going to go to school one day. And I lived at home, so I was torn between how can I not go to school one day, 'cause I don't think my father would really appreciate it since he was paying for me to go to school. So (laughter) I was kind of torn with that. But I handled it, and, and, and we did, and I didn't. So I was, I was, I was, I could say not really within the middle of it, more on the periphery of it, because I was probably what you could call--I don't know if I want this on tape--a good girl, but (laughter). Story_ID: 485297 Speaker 1: We're going to talk about your senior year at Sacred Heart [Sacred Heart Academy, Hempstead, New York], getting and, and applying the process of getting into college. Speaker 2: My senior year at Sacred Heart was, was fun. I mean what, what was interesting is that when you have to go to the prom, you had to invite somebody to go with you. So it was very traumatic for me to even thinking about calling up someone to ask them to go out with me. So I remember I was in the kitchen, and I told no one they could--I told everyone that you can't come in, turned off the lights, closed my eyes, and called a guy. Oh, boy, boy, what memories, but that's how--that was the prom. And-- Speaker 1: Did he say yes? Speaker 2: He did, he did. We had a good time. And then getting into school, my father [Benjamin Mendes] said to me, "Okay, babe, you can have any car you want, if you go to Hofstra [Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York]." So, I mean, I went--I was going from Sacred Heart Academy where I didn't have any interaction with anybody to I could get this car. So I didn't, I, interestingly, I didn't apply to other, other schools. I just went to Hofstra. And it was interesting, but I, I felt that I really wanted to get away a little bit more after that. While in Hofstra, I wanted to be a premed stu- not a premed student. I'm sorry. I wanted to be a speech therapy major. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And why speech therapy? Speaker 2: Because I'd found out that they, they worked in hospitals. And for some reason I was interested in working in a hospital, probably because my sister [Sharon Mendes Poulson] was sick when I was younger, and my fa- mother [Bernice Mendes] and father would go to the hospital quite a bit, and I would go. And it was such a clean, sterile, open, big place. And I thought I wanted to work there and just probably felt that I could not be a doctor. So I found out--I don't know how--about speech therapy, so I was on a, I was on this speech therapy track. While and--at Hofstra though I found out that a lot of premed students were also taking the same courses that I was taking. And so I said well, maybe I could do that too, particularly since I was getting pretty good grades. So I switched at that time. Speaker 1: And at what point did you decide, I'm actually going to pursue this and try to become a doctor? Speaker 2: It was probably second year. Story_ID: 485298 Speaker 1: What challenges were--did you think that you'd be challenged in any way? Speaker 2: Well, I figured that I was already taking the courses that the premed students were taking, and I was doing all right, so I'd just have to apply to medical school. Speaker 1: So what about the counselor at Hofstra [Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York], Beatryce Nivens? Speaker 2: Beatryce became a very good friend. She still is. And, and she was suggesting to--she was very in support of me going to med school, wanted me to go to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], because at that time, what did we think of? Well, you're gonna get married, so you go to Meharry and get yourself a doctor husband. So I didn't want to. I wanted to go to (laughter)--yeah, I said well, let me look at all the schools. And, and I wanted to go to Manhattan [New York]. I loved Manhattan. And I wanted to be away from home but be close to home, and there were so many good schools in Manhattan. So I applied to Cornell [Cornell University Graduate School of Medical Sciences; Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences, New York, New York], Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York], NYU [New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York]. And that was during a period of time where I was accepted at just about all of them. And I applied to Har- to Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], but Harvard still seemed a little bit--you know, I was a little bit afraid of--you know, it seemed like when I walked in for the interview, this big gate slammed behind me. I said I don't think I'm gonna be in Boston [Massachusetts]. So, so I got into those three, and I--probably more--and I, and I went to Columbia, because at that time, from Roosevelt [New York] there were other people who were going to med school, and they were going to Columbia. And-- Speaker 1: And they were black as well? Speaker 2: And they were black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were they at de- there? Speaker 2: Michelle Clark is the psychiatrist. Chuck Williams [Charles T. Williams] is an ENT [ear, nose, and throat] specialist. He's in Arizona. And there was another physician who lived there. His daughter and I became friends, Stephanie Scott [ph.]. Her, her father was a doctor. She didn't become a physician though. But, so then I went off to Columbia. Michelle was a year ahead of me, and Chuck was two or three years ahead of me. It was great. I loved it. That, that's where my best friends come from, still. Speaker 1: At the time you spent at Columbia? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 485299 Speaker 1: Now, being a premed student [at Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York], were you always good in the sciences and chemistry, biology, all of those math, I mean-- Speaker 2: I was fairly good, not great. Organic chemistry made sense, so I could remember that biology was--it also made sense because you could see the, the insect--you could, you know, dissect things as you could see it, and you could understand it, remember it. But, so I was, I was pretty good; I wasn't bad. I was, I was president of one of our organizations and decided that I was going to take all the premed students to Nassau County Medical Center [Nassau University Medical Center, East Meadow, New York] to see an autopsy. And I remember that day so well because it was, it was at, it was, it was a holiday that we were doing it on. And so that night before you didn't have to study and like, get to bed early. So when we went there, goodness, the first person they showed us was a woman who had fallen down the stairs. And we got there around eleven, and she, she fell down the stairs like at five or six o'clock in the morning, so it was just like she had just died. So they're about to do this autopsy, and you just, it was hard to imagine that this woman was alive just twelve hours earlier. And so that was, that was a hard thing for me to see. And, and it was at that time that I thought well, maybe this is not the direction I'm going in. But you know, I think all of us felt similarly. We got over it. And that, that I remember very well. So, so then from then we just, I went on. Story_ID: 485300 Speaker 1: So at Hofstra [Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York], you said your father [Benjamin Mendes] paid for your-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --was paying for you to go to school. So you didn't receive any scholarships or you-- Speaker 2: If I did, it was minor. Speaker 1: Minimal. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear) and then, at Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] he did the same thing? Speaker 2: No, at Columbia I took out loans, took out lots of loans, but they were, it was okay 'cause they were 3 percent, you know, (laughter) loans at the time. And he would help me with various things. I remember he bought my--when I got my first apartment, which was my second year, he, he got great furniture for me. And I lived in a five-floor walkup, so he and a friend took it all the way up, and I'll never forget that. Speaker 1: Who were your other friends at Columbia? You said some of them are friends today. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Who are the people that you met there that you stated-- Speaker 2: Ingrid Fitz-James. She's a pediatric anesthesiologist critical care specialist. Speaker 1: Is she black? Speaker 2: She's black. Well, half-black (laughter). She's, she's from Suriname; then there is Ron Lindsey [Ronald Lindsey], he's a orthopedic surgeon out of Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas]; there is Zell Phillips [HistoryMaker Rogsbert Phillips], she's a breast surgeon, general and breast surgeon in Atlanta [Georgia], just--Marinda [ph.], she's a pediatrician in Atlanta; Glenda [ph.], family practitioner. It's just, they're all over. It was just so happens that that year we entered, there were twelve of us. Five other guys from the year before had to stay in our class because they didn't, you know, they didn't graduate. And so we started out with-- Speaker 1: So that made the group seventeen? Speaker 2: Seventeen. Speaker 1: African American? Speaker 2: African American. Speaker 1: Now was Columbia doing something special to attract that many? Speaker 2: Probably, yeah, I think at that time that they were doing something special. And just, we had twelve, but then we became that. They were doing something special well, all the, all the way, you know (laughter). Yeah, you got, you got in, and then you didn't graduate. So, out of that, out of the seventeen, one was asked to leave, and so there were sixteen of us. And, and we did--and we're friends. Story_ID: 485301 Speaker 1: Create the world for me that existed amongst you during that time. Did you study together? Did you--were there-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) study groups? Speaker 2: --we, we-- Speaker 1: Did you-- Speaker 2: --we studied together. We played hard together, and, and it was, it was a, it was a fun time. I was very nervous about being where I was because I just couldn't imagine that I was at Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] in med school. So I, whenever there was a party like I think--what football, what football game happens in the fall? Every fall there's a great big--can't remember. Speaker 1: Homecoming? No-- Speaker 2: No, there's a great big football game. It's--I can't remember the, the two teams that play--Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so-- Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: --this was in September. And here, you know, we just started, and everyone wants to go to that game. And I said, "Ah, I don't think so. There's a test on Monday." So some of them went, and I was, in fact, I think I was the only one that stayed back and didn't go. But it was, it was a time where we would really, we just hung out together. And we, we hung out together so much that I remember one, one woman called me one night around two o'clock in the morning. She wanted me to come help her out with something. I said, "I can't do that now, Toni." But it was--Toni Williams [ph.] was her name. But we were just, we were all really close. So it's, it's almost as if now if I got a phone call from any of them, I would stop just to see what it was, if I could help them, if they needed anything at the time. So, that's how close we were, so much so when we, when we finally did graduate, we had this great (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year did you-- Speaker 2: --big party. Speaker 1: --graduate Columbia? Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]. Speaker 1: So go ahead. That-- Speaker 2: So we had this-- Speaker 1: --nineteen seventy-seven [1977]-- Speaker 2: --yeah, we had this great big party. And we rented this place down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], and we just had a good time. And one, one incident that occurred was when we--I mean the Village was clearly not, you know, what it is now. So one guy walked out and with his girlfriend, and some guys and started following both of them. So he took off running, and she took off running, and luckily and nothing happened. So it was just, it was just a scary time, but we were having a good time. Story_ID: 485302 Speaker 1: So in 1977 New York [New York], what was the city itself like? Speaker 2: Oh, the city was not quite what it is now. Remember, Columbia med school [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] is up near, in Washington Heights [New York, New York], right along the river [Hudson River]. So it was beautiful during the day, but you try not to do anything there in the evening. And as a matter of fact, one guy got killed. He was a year ahead of us. His name is John Woods [ph.]. His wife was pregnant. And they now--and he was a great, I think it was a rugby player. And so you couldn't walk along in Riverside, Riverside Park [New York, New York], that--then. We had, we lived in, in the dorm, which was on 169th Street. And to go over to the gross anatomy lab, if you wanted to go over some things before your test, you would have to make certain you walked over there with somebody. So Columbia was quite different. It was a great school. It was still a good school, but you didn't want to be out there in the evening. Now if you go up there it's bustling. You've got all this stuff going on. It's great. So the city was different. You had the, the A train, which would take you from 125th Street all the way up to 168th Street. You had the AA train, which would stop all the way, and the number 1. So it was, it was nice, but you didn't necessarily want to be above 96th Street, yeah. Speaker 1: How often did you go back to Roosevelt [New York]? Speaker 2: Oh, frequently because I was driving. My parents [Bernice Mendes and Benjamin Mendes], you know, they would, they would come in. I'd take their car and I'd, you know, but I would go back and see them often. Story_ID: 485303 Speaker 1: So how did you decide where you wanted to do your internship? Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to be a infectious disease specialist because Harold Neu [Harold C. Neu], who was at Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] at the time--he's since passed--I thought that when we called him to come and give us help with a patient that was sick, he would always come and know the right antibiotics to give, tell us what to do, and the patient would get better the next day. So that's what I wanted to do. So my girlfriend, who is now in Atlanta [Georgia] and who is from Atlanta, she and I went to the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia]. It was one of our sub-internships. And so I was thinking that, you know, let me get some more information. And when I came back, we both had sub-internships in surgery. Surgery was not high on my mind, because when I did my regular rotation as a, as a surgical medical student, I was scared. It was very, it was just like a lot of white men, and what am I doing here? (Laughter) And so, so when I came back, we did sub-internships here at St. Luke's [St. Luke's Hospital; Mount Sinai St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, New York], and we both loved it. And I was told that, "You've got good hands, Donna [HistoryMaker Dr. Donna M. Mendes]. You should think about surgery." Speaker 1: What does that mean, having good hands? Speaker 2: That, you know, you, you, you know how to, you know how to help dissect. You could see the tissue planes. You saw tissue planes that it's hard to really define, but you could see it. When, when, when you're sewing something you can really see which line of, of tissue you want to get. So, with that information and because I felt so comfortable here, I, I, I thought that I would switch to surgery, and I, I did. I was thinking that I would wanted to go to various hospitals where I could feel comfortable, so I put down St. Luke's first. Speaker 1: Why would St. Luke's be a place you could feel comfortable? Speaker 2: Because I had already done the sub-internship here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because they knew me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You'd done a summer internship here? Speaker 2: I had done the third, what we called the third year-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --sub-internship when I came back from the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] with my girlfriend, and because it was, it was just, it was great, it was a good environment, and it was, there were good people that I was working with. And at that I really didn't know the difference between an academic, academic surgeon versus a clinical surgeon. I just didn't know quite what the differences were, thought I wanted to be an academic clinical surgeon. And what do I mean by that? I wanted to teach residents; I wanted to be involved with clinical research; and I wanted to be a busy clinician. So, so this place, it worked well. It was separate from a medical school. I retrospectively would have had wanted to be near a medical school, possibly because I do, I do like to teach. But we, we have medical students that rotate through now, so that's, that's helpful. It's really good. And I, and I, I just--so it worked out well, and clearly I'm still here, so. Story_ID: 485304 Speaker 1: So you said it, when you looked at it, initially there were all white men in sur- surgeons. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Has that changed much? Speaker 2: It's changed, and even here, at that time, they were. But it just so happens that the residency had women in this, in this hospital [St. Luke's Hospital; Mount Sinai St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, New York]. There were, I think I had about four women who were above me when I was a, a resident. And it just seemed to be a more friendly place than upper Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York], where, where--when I was doing my medical school surgical rotation. So, and, and yeah, it was, it was still a lot of older white men. But I just knew had to fig--work my way into at that time. Speaker 1: And were you the only African American female in this surg- that was a surgical-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --intern-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --or surgery intern? Speaker 2: At, at this hospital, yeah. Speaker 1: At this hospital. Speaker 2: Um-hm, when I was doing my, my interviews, when I went to NYU [New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York] there was another black woman who was applying for surgical sub-internship, a Barbara Justice [Barbara J. Justice]. She ended up finishing. I don't remember where she finished, and then she left surgery to do psychiatry, yeah, interesting, so. Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And there's another woman when my medical--and well, the, the woman in my medical school who went to Atlanta [Georgia] who's a general surgeon and a breast surgeon, Zell [HistoryMaker Rogsbert Phillips]. And there's another woman who was in school with us, Hill--Hillding Webb [ph.]. She's out in Brooklyn [New York]. Story_ID: 485305 Speaker 1: In 19- like '80 [1980], you said you were around thirty when you completed-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: --the, the residency [at Mount Sinai St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, New York]. And then from that step, you have to then do-- Speaker 2: Fellowship. Speaker 1: Fellowship. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And where did you do your fellowship? Speaker 2: In, in Jersey, New Jersey at Englewood Hospital [Englewood Hospital and Medical Center, Englewood, New Jersey]. And it was--I, I really wanted to do cardiac surgery because I, I just liked working with blood vessels. But at that time I just really thought that doing cardiac surgery would have been a little too difficult. I didn't think that I would probably--that I would get into any programs. And with vascular surgery, not only could you do, deal with blood vessels, but you're dealing with blood vessels throughout the body as opposed to just the heart. So I, I then decided to do vascular surgery. And Dr. Dardik's [Herbert Dardik] program was one of the approved programs. So I went, and it was a nice little private hospital, so that's where I did it. It was great. Speaker 1: Who exposed you, would you say, to this vascular science? Speaker 2: Well, when you're a, a resident, you have to, you know, you're rotating through general surgery. And what I liked about vascular was that we, say we had a ruptured aneurism, it was everybody just showed up to help the surgeon get this patient off the table alive. And, and just being able to open the abdomen, put a clamp on, stop the bleeding, I thought was just so great. To be able to get blood flow to a leg to prevent the amputation, I thought was just wonderful. So that's why, that's why I got interested in it. Speaker 1: Well, well, when you--like it if it were an onion, and you were peeling away the layers, what do you think that comes from in you to, you know-- Speaker 2: To do that? Speaker 1: To do that, yeah, to-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I like things exact. I like things neat. And, and if you're opening an abdomen there's a lot of blood. And you can put the clamp on, and all of a sudden there's no more blood, but you can then fix the whole. That's, that's neat. So I, I, I don't know where it came from, but I just liked to do that (laughter). So, and, and the other thing about medi- about surgery versus medicine is that when you operate, you can get--things are better; as opposed to being a, a medical physician, you have--you give them medicine, things will get better, but it will take some time. You know, you just have to given, give the right dose, check the blood pressure again, give the right dose, check the blood tests. But with surgery, put in the bypass, it's either gonna work, or it's not. Story_ID: 485306 Speaker 1: So I would imagine during the time you were in college you didn't have time to pledge a, a sorority. Speaker 2: Oh no, didn't. Speaker 1: And you had very little time for anything I'm assuming during those years. Speaker 2: Yeah, during those years you didn't have a whole lot of time for anything, but-- Speaker 1: What do you consider to be your first professional job as a, a doc- I mean as a doctor, after you do your fellowship [at Englewood Hospital; Englewood Hospital and Medical Center, Englewood, New Jersey], what happens? Speaker 2: Then, then, then I, I opened my own practice. Speaker 1: And what year did you open your own practice? Speaker 2: I opened my own practice in August of 1984. I stopped, I was no longer a fellow in June 30th, 1984, so I took a six-week vacation. Speaker 1: Where did you go? Speaker 2: I went out to Long Island [New York]. I liked Fire Island [New York] and, and you know, Southampton [New York] and that area. But I loved Fire Island, 'cause what, what's, what's nice about Fire Island is you can get the boat. You go over and well, as soon as you get on the boat your vacation starts, see ya. You know, no, no beepers; nothing can happen 'cause you're (laughter) (unclear) so I, and I would go there sometimes when I was a resident. We, my, my friend and I, were able to have, have summer rentals, so I love Fire Island. So that's what I did. And then when I opened my practice, I asked a girlfriend if I could have some space in her office. So I remember August 15th--maybe that wasn't quite the day, but it was approximate--that we started having our first office hours. So I'm sitting there waiting for the phone to ring. And I had hired this woman to be a part-time secretary, so we're sitting there. It was just like, I had cards; I had stationery; I just needed some patients. But because I had already taken my vacation, I didn't take vacation during that next holiday. I was covering enough doctors, so I started getting busy at that time. If I could go back, I probably would take a longer period of time off (laughter). But, but it was, it was kind of interesting to be sitting there just waiting. What do you do your first day? (Laughter) You have to be there, so wait for the phone to ring. Speaker 1: Did you have any patients the first day? Speaker 2: No, no, not at all, so that was an issue. Then, then after what I did was, you have to network. The, the three A's are, are what you're told: affability, ability, and availability. So you've got to let everyone know that you're around, that you are able, and that you are available. So that's what happens in the first couple of years when you're in private practice because that's what I did. I was in private practice probably for either, either eighteen or nineteen years, and then I became a faculty. Speaker 1: And in private practice, all of the patients were your own. They were people that were recommended to you that you-- Speaker 2: That were referred. Speaker 1: --that were referred. Speaker 2: Same, it's, it's really the same right now because this is still the office that I was in. But now I'm, I'm part of what we call the faculty, so I'm part of a division. Story_ID: 485307 Speaker 1: --The division (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So if you go back through like some of doing, when you were doing your fellowship at Englewood Hospital [Englewood Hospital and Medical Center, Englewood, New Jersey], are there other physicians there that played a major role-- Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 2: --in helping to make you who you are? Speaker 1: Dr. Dardik [Herbert Dardik]-- Speaker 2: Who are they? Speaker 1: --is the, he's now chief--well, he was then, chief of surgery at Englewood Hospital. He's older, but he's a great guy, great motivator, always wanted me to present, always wanted me to publish. I just saw him last weekend at, at a group that he started, the Society of Clinical Vascular Surgeons [sic. Society for Clinical Vascular Surgery]. Well, he helped start it. It's a national organization of vascular physicians. And, and he was, he was, he was always a big motivator, always wanted Donna [HistoryMaker Dr. Donna M. Mendes] to publish. But Donna was a little bit--she, I, I, I am much better. I've, I've really matured. But at one point, it was difficult for me to present in front of, in front of an audience because I just felt a little nervous. But with his motivation and with his pushing, that, I really got out of that. And so now I'm president of the medical board here [Mount Sinai St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, New York], so. Speaker 2: Nice. Speaker 1: But he's, he's, he's been a big motivator for me. He was in a group called Dardik, Ibrahim, Sussman, and Kahn. So I was a fellow with, with a group of four Jewish men who were very supportive of me. Story_ID: 485308 Speaker 1: Were you their first African American woman to-- Speaker 2: I was their first woman period. Yeah, they have, now have--he was just discussing this. He's [Herbert Dardik] had four women since me, and now there is a woman in his group, so interesting, yeah. They talked about having Donna [HistoryMaker Dr. Donna M. Mendes] as their first woman, as their first female. But it's--I--they, they handled it okay. They got used to me. Speaker 1: Is there a different--did you see--did you feel you were entering and old boy's network or club (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and still is, still is; it really is. So you know who you're friends with, and it definitely is; there's no question about it. I, and, and I don't feel uncomfortable saying that at all. I, I, I think that most men nowadays realize that they had started, you know, the old boy's network. Whether or not they want to remain a part of it is something else. But I think that they know that that's what they started. And I'm not--I know that changing that is difficult, and I don't wanna--you know, you don't--I'm not going out with a banner and, and a waiving of flags saying you gotta change it. It just has to be pointed out to them, and either they see, accept it, rather, or don't. But it's, it be--it gets old trying to change people. So, what, what I've noticed is that once you start to like yourself, it doesn't really matter if others like you or not. If you, if you've done a good job, if you do good work, and, and you know that that's what you do, even if there's the old boy network around that won't accept you, then I'm okay; my, my ego is intact. So when, when I do want something though, and that network won't allow me in, rather than continuously trying to get in through the avenues that most would, you just have to go someplace else, either above them or elsewhere, so. Speaker 1: So the, there have been challenges in that arena that you've have to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --overcome? Okay. Speaker 2: No question, no quest- and, and sometimes it's just a matter of, of how much you're, you're, you're going to ask for, and what the response will be, and then whether or not you're going to challenge that response with fact or move on someplace else. Speaker 1: So is there a challenge also? And, and, well, we'll, we'll come back. Story_ID: 485309 Speaker 1: Chronologically, yeah, it's 1986. You marry after you finish your fellowship [at Englewood Hospital; Englewood Hospital and Medical Center, Englewood, New Jersey] and start your private practice. You marry a couple of years later. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Your husband's full name? Speaker 2: Ronald E. LaMotte. Speaker 1: And his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Eleven, twelve, forty-nine [November 12, 1949]. Speaker 1: His place of birth? He's from? Speaker 2: He was born in Brooklyn [New York]. He just yesterday closed on selling the house that he was raised in. His father died a year ago, at the age of ninety-three. And he, his mother died when he was a freshman at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. He went to Columbia undergrad. And it's interesting that, that same house that he grew up in was just, just sold. Speaker 1: How did the two of you meet? Speaker 2: An old boyfriend introduced us. And when, when I broke up with that gentleman, he--I remember him saying how wonderful Ron was, so I just--so we got together that way. It was, it was nice. Story_ID: 485310 Speaker 1: Now what year did you become certified by the American Board of Surgery [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Probably, it was probably about '86 [1986]. It was probably about--by the American Board of Surgery? I, I--let me see, if I finished my fellowship [at Englewood Hospital; Englewood Hospital and Medical Center, Englewood, New Jersey] in '84 [1984], probably around '86 [1986]. And then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you became the first African American woman to receive that certification. Speaker 2: In vascular surgery. Speaker 1: In vascular surgery, yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did--you did--I did general surgery first, and then after that, because, because at that time you had to be certified in, in general surgery before you became certified in vascular, so I did general surgery and then, and then vascular. It was separated by about two years. I've recertified in both of them now, so. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Every ten years you have to recertify. Speaker 1: Have to recertify. Was that shocking for you that you'd become the first? Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting because I thought I was, because I'd go to all of these meetings, there'd always be all these white guys, some wom- well, some women, but few. And so after I took and passed the exam, I called the American Board of Surgery to find out if I was, and because it was just interesting. I didn't see anyone else around. And I--he said he couldn't tell me at the time because he didn't really know. Then he called me back and told me that yeah, you are. I didn't want some woman in Kansas saying, "No, she's not, I was," you know (laughter), some little old woman; a black woman coming out saying, "I'm sorry, honey, but--." (Laughter) No, truly, I, truly I am. I've since had the honor of, of being able to help some other women get that, including one black woman and another woman now who's in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 485311 Speaker 1: Getting to your private practice, what was the greater challenge, your race or your sex? Speaker 2: Well, because of where my practice is located, I was referred a lot of people. I mean I have a Hispanic last name, so I got referred Hispanics. I'm a, I'm a woman, so a, a lot of women would refer women to me. Say for--because in the beginning I did do general surgery also for breasts. But interestingly, I would occasionally be referred an older white man, who may or may not feel comfortable staying with me; many did, some didn't. So I think that the, the biggest challenge was probably race at that time. And now, my practice is predominantly minority, even though I will have young women, some young women of ever gen--of every ethnicity come in for lower leg problems, say for, if I'm treating varicose veins. But if I had to come up with a percentage right now, I'd say that it's primarily Hispanic-black, black-Hispanic. I'm not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you speak Spanish? Speaker 2: Un peu--no, that's French (laughter) (speaking Spanish) poquito. I'm a trilinguist now, poquito. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Poquito, poquito, yeah. Speaker 2: But I basically, luckily, my staff is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The staff, staff speaks, okay-- Speaker 2: --is Spanish, yeah. Story_ID: 485312 Speaker 1: So I want to talk about some, and then like some of your, the research and some of your specialties. You specialize in limb salvage surgery? Speaker 2: Right. So when there's not enough blood flow to the legs, you can develop a sore that won't heal unless you have increased blood flow. If you're a diabetic, you're, in addition to poor circulation, your nerves don't work as well, so you have numb feet. So patients come to me who have numb feet, sores, gangrene, and I've got to see what is causing the problem and then try to fix it. Oftentimes, if the patient is appropriately referred, it's because they have poor circulation. So, so the workup would include, we, we do blood pressure, not testing just to see what someone blood is, but we can also do blood pressure testing on the leg to find out exactly where the blockage might be. And then we take it to the next step, which would be an x-ray of the arteries. We used to have the radiologist do that, but now we, we get some sort of testing to see exactly where the blockage might be and then go in and get the arteriogram ourselves so that we can treat the problem, be it with a balloon, a stint, or with a bypass. Sometimes patients come to me too late, and, and they need a primary amputation. There's nothing I can do to salvage the foot. And so what I noticed was that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How, when, when does it get to be too late? And then you can tell me what you noticed. Speaker 2: Well, it gets to be too late when the entire foot is gangrenous. That's by the time they come in. Speaker 1: But couldn't they see that? Can't you see it? You can't see it? Speaker 2: Sure you can. Speaker 1: Oh, you can see it. Speaker 2: But, but sometimes patients are slow. They don't--they keep (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mentally slow you mean. Speaker 2: Mentally slow. And again, if you have diabetes, you may not-- Speaker 1: It happens rapidly? Speaker 2: Well, if you have diabetes you may not see the ulcer or you may not feel the ulcer because your nerves are not working so well, particularly if you have it on the heel. So by the time they come in it might be such a deep ulcer that's gone into the heel that there's nothing I can do to salvage the foot. It's not frequent, but it can happen. So, so what I do is when someone comes in, and they have a small ulcer or they just have a little toe, tip of a toe that gangrenous, get an arteriogram, see what you can do to augment the flow, and then once you've done that, you've got to then treat the sore, treat the wound. So in addition to in- increasing the blood flow to the leg, you then have the wound that you've got to deal with to get it to heal. So what I noticed was that if you, if you look at the, the rates of success for these procedures, they were 95 percent one-year patency in, at the, at Mass General [Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Hospital], at the Deaconess [Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]. So if you look at that, you say to yourself, well, then I should be able to do this bypass, and the patient's bypass should stay open for a year. I'm board certified; I'm trained; I know how to do it. I get the completion arteriogram, but for some reason, the patency rates just didn't seem to be the same. So at that time, there was an article that had been written by someone else about how the lower extremity vessels in African American patients just seem to be a little bit worse. The blood--the blockages seem to be more severe. And, and the amputation rates, when you started looking at amputation rates, were two to two and a half times higher in that population than in the regular, the general population. So why does that happen? And it's because, I believe--I--that hasn't really been proven, but it's because if you look at the risk factors that cause it, the risk factors in African Americans are much more severe. Diabetes is much more out of control. The hemoglobin A2 is out--it's too high. Cigarette smoking still persists. Hypertension is not controlled. So therefore, you've got risk factors that are controllable risk factors and are controlled. And then you have risk factors that aren't controlled at all. So I think that the reason is that we have to get people to control risk factors a little bit more. Story_ID: 485313 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How to control it? Well, first of all, there are those that you can completely control by not doing them, like cigarette smoking. Speaker 2: Don't smoke, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. A lot of times your increased lipids, your hypercholesterolemia could be what you're eating. Your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So an African American--I mean and, and just talk about African--the diet you're, you feel then generally is not appropriate? Speaker 1: Not always appropriate. Speaker 2: Not, not always appropriate. Speaker 1: Not always appropriate. I mean, I mean the, the, the going to--I, I shouldn't talk about any particular-- Speaker 2: But let's talk about it-- Speaker 1: --fast food place. Speaker 2: --but, but just even to get beyond the problem, let's talk about what the problem is. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The problem is too much fat. Speaker 2: Too much fat. Speaker 1: Too much fat, which, which, if you think about what the blood vessel is like, the blood vessel is, has two layers. You've got the inside; you've got the outside. You're born with a nice circle like that. Then what happens when you have risk factors that are out of control when you have too much grease in your diet that inside layer goes closer and closer to the middle, which causes that circle to get smaller and smaller and smaller 'cause the wall is getting thicker. And it's getting thicker because of plaque buildup. So, if you can somehow not have your cholesterol out of control, which you can do now by eating right and by taking the, the lipid medications that, that are available, then you can cau- then you're helping that inside wall stay closer to the outside wall and not compress down on the lumen. You know, if you don't smoke, that's another reason why that lumen will stay open. If your hypertension is controlled because you don't put that much salt on your food, you know, then you don't cause that, that vessel to become so noncompliant. You can't control your family history, but you can control those other things. And so if you exercise more, you know--I don't know really the, the pathophysiology of why exercise would not cause that to go in, but anyone who's that involved with how they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you exercise, yeah, you feel good, you-- Speaker 1: You feel good so that you're not going to sit there and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --eat a bag of potato chips, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, it just works in all areas, exactly, yeah. Speaker 1: Exactly. Now the, the real question could be, well, what about someone who doesn't have any risk factors, who feels good, sees their doctor? They have a little stress every now and then. What, well, how is stress, yeah, affecting us? And, and I don't really have the answer for that, but I do know that stress is going to cause the blood vessel to be a little bit less compliant. And, and that's why we, we just have to do more things besides--through eating right and exercise. We just have to try to be--I won't say that we have to study yoga. But I do say we have to balance ourselves a little bit more, which we don't do. You know, we're always, we're always going at this fast pace. Now, I'm saying this because I'm, I'm at a pace right now where I'm trying to, to balance it, but it's hard. It's really hard, and we all know that, but we have to try. Story_ID: 485314 Speaker 1: So you became a, a member of the Association of Black Cardiologists [Association of Black Cardiologists, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: I'm not a hundred percent certain, but it was probably in the mid-'90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: And do--and meeting with that organization, are these some of the things you talk about? Speaker 2: Um-hm-- Speaker 1: Do you talk about-- Speaker 2: --absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: --the studies that have been done? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, and where do you see studies that are done on African Americans? Like, do--is there a black journal of, of medicine? Speaker 2: No, there isn't. But now, now I, I--now people are trying to be specific about who they're studying because if you remember, women were never studied so much for heart disease. But once they started separating out, you know, the, the population, men and women, they realized that heart disease really is one of the biggest killers for women. So in addition to separating gender out, ethnicity is now also being separated. So you can't really go to a, a book of black medicine, but you go the journal, and you're hoping that they do talk about what the population of the study comprises and that that population then is broken down into Hispanic, black, white. Story_ID: 485315 Speaker 1: Why do you think minority women are suffering at higher rates than the general population for heart disease? Speaker 2: Because risk factors are not controlled as much, because the younger black woman is exercising a lot more. Just, for instance, what I used to say is when I'm in my car, and I'm driving along say Park Avenue [New York, New York]. And I used to be at Lenox Hill Hospital [New York, New York], which is on 74th Street [sic. 77th Street]. So you're, you're passing Lenox, so you see all the women that were about this big. Then you get to 96th Street, and all of a sudden the body habit just changes. Now that's genes, but a lot of it changes also because--and I don't mean jeans with they put on. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's genes, but it's also-- Speaker 1: --the DNA, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). But it's also what is, what is eaten. And so we have got to just be a little bit better about that too. So why does it affect black women more? Well, we're, we're not real complainers. So therefore, you might have a heart attack you think something else is going on as, as opposed to it really being an MI [myocardial infarction] and, and, and stress. Those are the reasons. Speaker 1: And stress plays a much greater role than people have believed in the past? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. And I, I don't know the pathophysiolog- physiological answer, but it does, it does play a role. The other reason why black women or African Americans period are affected more is that if, indeed, there is less blood flow to the heart muscle, the heart muscle will no longer pump effectively. It'll develop a, it will, it will develop a cardiomyopathy. So the muscle doesn't--when your, when, when your heart pumps, it's supposed--vigorously pump and get the blood out. But if you have heart disease or you've had some evidence of muscle damage, the heart doesn't, doesn't pump vigorously, so there's a lot of heart failure because of that. So it's--hopefully, hopefully, the message will get out. Story_ID: 485316 Speaker 1: What else have you discovered, given the clinical research you've done on race and vascular disease? Speaker 2: Except for the fact that the amputation rates are two to two and half times higher, what we also have seen is that carn- carotid artery disease, which is when you develop blood--when there, there's a plaque buildup in the arteries in the neck, it's not as prominent in African Americans as it is in the general population; yet, we do suffer from strokes more. And the reason we suffer from strokes more is because we tend to have more hypertension, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what--and hypertension is high blood pressure? Speaker 2: High blood pressure. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, okay. Speaker 2: So you then can have, you can have what we call an ischemic stroke because the blood vessels in the heart--in the brain rather, in the brain, all of a sudden, there could be a plaque that goes up from the heart, from anywhere. And you have an embolus that goes to the small blood vessel in the brain, and that area in the brain doesn't get blood flow. And so you have what, what we call an ischemic stroke. And that is the predominant stroke. The second, the second prevalent stroke would be a hemorrhagic stroke because, again, high blood pressure. So you, you know, the pressure is so high you can pop a blood vessel, and you can bleed in your brain. So we have an increased incidence of stroke, but we have less of a, of an incidence of carotid artery disease, which was, previous to this, one of the most commonly performed procedures by vascular surgeons that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On African Americans? Speaker 2: Right, no, no-- Speaker 1: No, just-- Speaker 2: --on the general populous. Speaker 1: --on the general population. Speaker 2: But it was not performed as often in, on, on, in the minority population because the incidence of having the-- Speaker 1: This-- Speaker 2: --vessels blocked was much less. Speaker 1: Was much less. Speaker 2: So, but now the treatment is not even surgery. The treatment is an angioplasty and a stint. But that's, you know, that's still--in answer to your question what else have we seen. We've seen that, and we've seen that and what the incidence of stroke is. Story_ID: 485317 Speaker 1: Just say the black organizations that you belong to, do you belong to more than just the black cardiologists? Speaker 2: The Association of Black Cardiologists [Association of Black Cardiologists, Inc.]. I also belong to the Society of Black Academic Surgeons. I have not been as involved with them, but they are also investigating things like that. But they are, it's a general surgical group, so they, they look at a lot of different areas not--more so than just vascular disease. But those are the two black organizations that I belong to. Oh, well, the NMA [National Medical Association] of course. Speaker 1: Do you feel like--and collectively when you're together and you're meeting, and say you go to seminars, do you talk--is there, are black or minorities receiving different care than the general population? Speaker 2: I, I-- Speaker 1: Is it believed? Speaker 2: It's believed and, and, and it's been documented, but I think that if you're in a major city--say you're in Manhattan [New York], and you think that you're having a stroke, if you go to the emergency room at any of the hospitals here, you're going to be treated, I believe, equally. There was even an article. I can't remember where this was. But this young black guy wasn't feeling so good, said all I know is I have got to get into, to a cab and ask them to take me to some emergency room, because here in Manhattan you probably will be treated--and I'll, I'll say probably will be treated the same because who's on call for the emergency but a board certified whatever. So, but however, are there going to be differences when that emergency room doc goes into the room and sees a black patient as opposed to seeing that white patient? Well and proved--they have proved that sometimes carotid angioplasties or, or coronary angioplasties are not offered as frequently in the black population as they are in the white population. I just think that in Manhattan, in the, in the year 2007, that hopefully is not true, in Manhattan (laughter). I'm not certain where--in, in other places (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But in Manhattan you feel we've got--come--it's not the case? Speaker 2: I think so. I think so. Do you feel that way? As, as it would be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean I feel that, I feel pretty good about being in Manhattan, and, and the care I get is good-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and, but I think I have been to, you know, white doctors to whereas I--and it could be my own going in thinking that race has something to do with it. But I thought, oh, I won't go to him again. He didn't make me-- Speaker 2: Feel comfortable (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) feel good, yeah, yeah. And-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I guess I'm, I guess I'm thinking of an emergency situation, when someone is in the emergency-- Speaker 1: In an emergency-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I would say absolutely we're treated-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, I'm thinking of the emergency-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --situation. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: I think that you're probably right about just going in for your, you know, your general-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --and that sort of you're being dismissed. Speaker 1: Yeah, and like, okay, this isn't--yeah-- Speaker 2: This is the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) this, this is the guy wanted to-- Speaker 2: --you did, you--there was no real connection. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 485318 Speaker 1: I think that's why my practice is, is pretty good, because people come to me 'cause they know they're going to get that connection. Speaker 2: And what do you do to ensure that? Speaker 1: Talk, you know, and just have more to say than just the why are you here? And you, you can start out with why are you here? And then before you know it, you're talking about something else that's going on. I mean sometimes people come in to see me (unclear) women will come in to see me 'cause their ankles are swollen, thinking that it's a circulation problem, you know, there's no circulation problem that I can see. But it might be because the two hundred pounds, you know, and all the weight that's--and the feet have to get back to the heart, and should I tell them that. But they like the honesty, most of them (laughter), I think. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Now, and, and at some point in, in the '90s [1990s] you were, you were nominated an outstanding woman of the year or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what was, what-- Speaker 2: --I-- Speaker 1: --what-- Speaker 2: --I think that that was for the, it might be the New York County Medical Society. I can't remember it 'cause it's--I can't remember which organization that was for. But yeah, something happened along those lines. Story_ID: 485319 Speaker 1: Well, what year did you go back to the classroom? When did you start teaching [at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Well, it was not in the classroom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The teaching that occurs is in the operating room, and it's on the floor. So, and, and you, you admit a patient, just like the patient that I thought I was going to operate on today, but clearly looked like she had every cardiac, you know, risk factor in the world, and she's having open surgery tomorrow instead. It's a matter of letting the residents know that this patient has a re- risk factor. This patient does have pre-gangrenous lesions on her feet. This woman will have to have cardiac evaluation beforehand. So, so they know this; they know that, but when you start doing it in front of them, they see it. And in the operating room when you're doing a bypass--but say when I, when I do her bypass next week hopefully, when we do the dissection, we take them through it. As they become more senior, we let them do a certain amount of it. So that's the teaching that's done. With the medical students, it would be them working with you in your office so that they can see the presentations and how you would work it up. Speaker 1: But in 1992 you did receive Teacher of the Year award from the Department (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From, from-- Speaker 1: --of Surgery-- Speaker 2: --the residents, yeah. Speaker 1: --from St. Luke's [Mount Sinai St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, New York] the residents. Speaker 2: From the residents because they felt that I was an outstanding teacher. And it's probably because I take my time. I, I, I was gonna say used to be patient, but I'm still patient and explain things to them. And it's probably why I got the award. Speaker 1: Well, you, you, you come across as someone who'd be a good, a good teacher and-- Speaker 2: Oh, thank you. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Thanks, I-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: I had a couple of women--in the mid-'90s [1990s] vascular was very popular with the residents. And they wanted to go into it, so I have had three women from my program, maybe four, go on to do vascular surgery. It was very--it was kind of nice to know that they thought enough of, of me, and what I did, and the results that they wanted to pursue that also. Story_ID: 485320 Speaker 1: Are you ever shocked by what you can do in the operating room? Speaker 2: Sometimes when someone is really going down the tubes, and say you have the ruptured aneurism. And you get in there and were able to get control, and you're able to sew in a graft, yeah, it's nice when you can do that. And then the next day you see the patient and is reading a paper. And now, and now what's nice is that we have an increased minimally invasive ways to do procedures. So in the old days I'd have to do, say a long bypass, so you'd make an incision in the groin and go all the way down to the mid-calf. Now what we do is we make a--we percutaneously go in with a needle, and then we, we get pictures fluoroscopically that we look at on the screen. And then we take deflated stints and balloons and go down into the area, try to get across the blockage and open it that way versus doing the bypass. So it's kind of interesting to see the evolution of it. Another thing that we've done that's different: we used to take out varicose veins, you know, make an incision in the groin and incision down by the ankle and pull them all out. And now we just put a laser in them and burn them. So it's, it's, it's amazing to see the evolution. What was in, very interesting was like in '91 [1991] at one of the vascular meetings, one of the, one of the vascular surgeons from Buenos Aires [Argentina]--his name was Dr. Parody [ph.]--he came up and he, he described taking care of a ruptured aneurism with an endovascular, in an endovascular way, you know, going into the artery, going in with a deflated balloon. And on the screen you could see how they would put in the graft for this ruptured aneurism. And we all felt that was unbelievable. How could that possibly be? And yet that's the way we do--taking care of all that stuff now. It's great. Speaker 1: What else have you see changed from the time you started to practice that, that is, that you recognize as a big change? Speaker 2: Well, the--as I said before, what we used to do is we used to send our patients to the radiologist to get x-rays performed. And we do them ourselves now. We get some sort of diagnostic test ahead of time. But then we'll go to the operating room with the patient and do the arteriogram in the, in the operating room and then treat the patient right away ourselves. We didn't do that before--again, the, the way we treat, treating varicose veins, and the fact that an aneurism used to stay in the hospital for seven days. And now, you take the patient in; you do it the minimally invasive way; they go home the next day, what a difference. Again, the difference is that you do have, you have follow-up x-rays, follow-up MRIs, et cetera, but it, I think that it's worth it, no question. Story_ID: 485321 Speaker 1: So when you look back up to that, this point in your career, who stands out as people who helped you get to where you are today? Speaker 2: Dr. Dardik [Herbert Dardik]. Probably, I'd say he was a big, big person. And then when I look at some of the endovascular things that I do, I would say there was a young guy who used to be here, Dr. Burke [ph.], who helped me a lot with that, with those--and he's younger, but you know, they--he was, he was trained that way, and I wasn't. And those, the, that would be, those would be the people. There, there are other people in my vascular organization who have helped me quite a bit, a Dr. Frank Vee [ph.]. He's been very helpful in helping my career. So, so off the top, those are the people I think of right away. Story_ID: 485322 Speaker 1: I read something about you being a part of Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] to help them attract more African American students. Speaker 2: Right, I'm in, I'm on a diversity council. We have not been meeting of late, but we do want to attract more minority students to the hospital [Mount Sinai St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, New York]. And we are getting more now, if you, if you look at what the (unclear) what the population is on the various groups that are coming in, the various years that are coming in. So we're, we are improving it, yeah, improving it nicely. Speaker 1: So do you think it's--I mean are the numbers higher than what they were when you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: They're much higher, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Well, because at the point--at the, the year that I came in, they were trying to increase the numbers, and then the numbers went back down precipitously. And now they're, it's now back up on the incline, which is good. Speaker 1: Why do you think the numbers go down? Speaker 2: The numbers went down because Columbia wasn't having as much of an outreach at one period of time, you know, after me, prior to now. I think that the numbers are going up now also because medicine in it, in itself is not--I hate to say it, but medicine is not as attractive as it used to be, because you--and you're, if you're four years in med school and then your residency years, owing a big debt. So it's--and then you're--the, the medicine, healthcare in the United States is quite different now. So it's not as attractive a field as it used to be. And what we're trying to do now is start out and get medical students and residents early. Speaker 1: What type of outreach are you doing with [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou? Speaker 2: Oh, well, that was very nice. That was, that was through the American--the Association of Black Cardiologists [Association of Black Cardiologists, Inc.] (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well-- Story_ID: 485323 Speaker 1: My outreach with [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou is not really my outreach. It was more the Association of Black Cardiologists [Association of Black Cardiologists, Inc.]. And they did a tape on emphasizing the risk factors for heart disease, and they had Maya Angelou speak. It was, it was a cut and paste. They had, they did an interview with, and Sylvia [Sylvia Woods] was a patient of mine, Sylvia of the renowned restaurant [Sylvia's Restaurant, New York, New York]. And she was such a great patient that as soon as we were able to do the angioplasty, she was able to, 'cause it was affecting her leg, she was able to walk really well. And so they, they interviewed me with, with Sylvia. They interviewed Maya. They interviewed Dr. Ann Brown [ph.], who's a professor of medicine at, up in Washington [D.C.] I believe. I could be wrong about where exactly she is. But she helped prove that not--that women who have heart attacks, black women who have heart attacks, have an increased risk of heart failure from this cardiomyopathy that I was discussing before. So that's certainly somebody that you should, that you should try to interview. But Maya spoke about what the risk factors were. And in the tape we have five generations of women who get together for this one Thanksgiving Day, and, and what we, what we strongly push in it is that rather than having Thanksgiving Day and eating the entire day and not getting up and walking around doing some exercise too, during the tape, they had their dinner, and then they went out. And this, and the older woman was with the young--with her god--with her grandchild, great-grandchildren. It was just wonderful. It was just that we--the, the emphasis again is on living and not just sitting. You know, it's like being participatory. Story_ID: 485324 Speaker 1: Two areas I want you to talk about things that need to be done. What do we still need to do to reach more women about what we know? And what do we need to do to attract more students to your field, to the field of surgery? Speaker 2: Well, what we need to do is what we are doing I hope with, with magazines and with talking and with letting people know that being healthy and strong is much more important than just trying to, you know, get into your size six dress. Be strong, be healthy, eat right, sleep right, because we're, we're so busy running around that we don't take the time to also, to reju--rejuvenate ourselves. So be healthy that way. So, I think that the only thing that we, we can do are things that we're doing, talking, magazines, the hairdressers, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you see a greater outreach to minorities now than when you started-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --your practice? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And who's responsible for the bigger push? Is it because more minorities themselves are providing the care? Speaker 2: Probably, but more of us still need to provide the care, because as far as vascular surgeons in Manhattan [New York], I'm not certain how many black women there are. I could probably count it on one hand. So I think that we have to get more involved with--this is, this is an ethnic--ethnic city. And we have to make certain that we are all--that we are equal in every way, that you have black women and black men doing everything that everybody is, or minorities doing everything. The reach out, the--and I think that after a while it gets--it goes beyond race, because every--because we're so eclectic here that we all have to be encompassing a healthier way of living. To get, to attract more women to vascular surgery it's--well, now we have in surgery, in all med- in all fields really right now, residents have an eighty-hour workweek. So when I--we won't go back to exactly when, but when I was a resident [at St. Luke's Hospital; Mount Sinai St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, New York]--and I guess we already did--I'd come in on Friday mornings, and I wouldn't go home until Monday evening 'cause I was on call for the weekend, and that's tough. So now they have eighty hour workweeks, so they only work eighty hours in that one week, which is probably better because they can then rejuvenate. Story_ID: 485325 Speaker 1: How can we get more black kids interested in medicine (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mentors. Speaker 1: Mentors. Speaker 2: Mentors-- Speaker 1: Did you have a mentor? Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't have one, but I'm trying now to be a mentor to, to younger kids. When my article came out in Ebony, I got so many letters written to me by young black women. It was so nice. And young--one, there was one who was a, she was at Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], and she wanted to go into surgery. And so I made suggestions to her, and she got in, and she wrote me when she got in. It was such a good experience. It, it's just nice. Just, I'm very frank. I just tell them that you got to work hard, just like that Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] bat- football game I couldn't go to, and that was that. You know, so I didn't go, but I studied, and maybe I passed a test because I put that extra work in. You have to work hard to get what you want. And then when you get what you want, you'll be happy then, so your ego can be okay. And so I think it's a mat- matter of us directing the younger children and to be a mentor, to let them know exactly what it's like. I had two young women come who had read the article that wanted to meet me. They came. I took them to the OR [operating room] with me, and gave them some scrubs, took them over there, said that they were, you know, med students. They clearly were not; they looked so young, but they were so happy to be in the operating room (laughter). So I think it's, I think it's that kind of exposure, and they, they have access to me; at any time they can call or email me, 'cause that's what kids do, text message. So that's what I think we have to do, just reach out that way, you know, and hopefully we'll be able to get more. And we, we now in, in the vascular society have an outreach to medical students, because in order to become a vascular surgeon now, you don't have to do five years of general surgery, then two years. You can go from medical school straight into vascular surgery. I'm not a hundred percent certain I think that's the way to do it. But we have started this new paradigm so that they can do it that way if they truly have that interest and want to pursue it. I, I think that they need to be exposed to a lot more before they make that decision. Story_ID: 485326 Speaker 1: There's a big emphasis put on women now. And women are exceeding men as far as, you know, black women that--as far as becoming college graduates and becoming professionals. Do you have--I mean what do you think? I mean just look (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think, think that women weren't given that much, as much of an opportunity before. And they are now, they are being given it, and they're excelling. And I just think that (laughter), I'm sorry, but we just do it well (laughter). We do it pretty good, we, we, we just do, and, and I'm not really certain why it's that way, but-- Speaker 1: How many black vascular surgeon men are there in the city? You said you could count the women on your hand. Are there any men? Speaker 2: Maybe, maybe, in Manhattan [New York], proba- probably, but I just don't know how many. As far as the numbers of, in, in, in the Society of Vascular Surgery [sic. Society for Vascular Surgery], the minority division, I'd say there's only about forty, fifty of us. That's not a lot, 'cause there probably are about 2600 in the country, and there are about forty, fifty of us, so, yeah. Speaker 1: And that's spread out all over the country, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, and you can see that the impact that vascular disease has on us (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You--okay, wait a minute. And, but can you see the direct correlation to what you've been able to do for minorities? And did, does, does that make any sense? Like, is there a direct correlation if the numbers of vascular African American surgeons grow, then the--we will (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then may-- Speaker 1: --benefit from it? Speaker 2: --then-- Speaker 1: That-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, we will. Speaker 1: Yeah, we will, okay, we will. Speaker 2: Absolutely, we will because, because, because when we do procedures to salvage limbs, sometimes we know that's going to be a long operation, and you then have the wound to heal. And I, I, I know that possibly a primary amputation might offered versus that effort. Now, maybe it will end up, end, end up as a primary--as an amputation anyway, and maybe the effort wasn't worth it. But you have to have someone who's going to give you that, give you that chance. Story_ID: 485327 Speaker 1: So when you look back over your, like the, the research you've done, the things you've been involved in, what's your, the things you're, you are most proud of at this moment? 'Cause you still have a long career ahead of you. Speaker 2: I'm most proud of the fact that I was able to get some other women involved. I'm most proud of the fact that I brought attention to the fact that, or helped bring--I wasn't the only one--that I helped bring attention to the fact that the amputation rate is higher, and that I do have more work to do, do to, to really prove why that's true. But the fact (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you feel it's true because? Speaker 2: Because the, the numbers show it, because when you look at, when you look at the literature and when you look at just--if I added up the number of amputations at St. Luke's-Roosevelt [Mount Sinai St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, New York], and I use ethnicity, you know, also as a, as a factor, I'm certain that the numbers would prove it. I haven't done it here, but when you look at the literature throughout the country, that's what it is, and, and that's bad. Speaker 1: And it's, and you think it's because also we don't come into care as soon. Speaker 2: As soon, and-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: But I also think that it's because our risk factors are so severe and, and, and-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --taken to the nth degree. So instead of smoking a half a pack a day, it's a pack a day, or instead of having hemoglobin, you know, A1C that's off the wall, you have one, the one that's, you know, that's mild, that's better controlled. So I think that, that, that part of it is the fact that you've got to really--to understand that your risk factors are there but that you can control some of them, you can, you can pull some of them down, make them better. And so that's what it is. Speaker 1: What does your father [Benjamin Mendes] think about what you do now? Speaker 2: Oh, very proud. Yeah-- Speaker 1: Your mother [Bernice Mendes]? Speaker 2: --my mother and father are very proud. You know, whenever there's an article they want to, they want me to send them, you know, copies. Whenever-- Speaker 1: And when people are writing about you, are they mainly writing about who you are or what you do? Speaker 2: Both, both. But I think the, the--who I am is a big one. What I do comes up. I mean-- Speaker 1: Who you are because it's so rare? Speaker 2: Because it's so rare, and what I do because, again, it's, it's rare. But the fact that I'm trying to emphasize the, the, the amputation rate, that's the part that really gets me. It's--I have friends who, even if I go to--like I have a friend in Bermuda. And I visited her in the hospital. We go to the hospital, and you sit there. People who are sitting out front smoking cigarettes are those in wheelchairs, you know, a limb is missing, limb is missing. And, and it's, it's very similar around here, and we don't want that anymore. You know, we want people to get to the point where they're not going to cause that inner circle to go closer to the middle. So, that's what we have to do. So that's what I'm proud of, the fact that I brought attention to that. It's hard to do though. It's hard to continue to bring attention to that as you have a busy practice, because you have in your brain all the things that you want to, to bring out, but then you're, you know, you're, you have to go to the OR [operating room] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What have you-- Speaker 2: And I, I don't, and I'm-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and I'm not being up-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --I'm not upset about that-- Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: --because I like having a busy practice. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But it's just that it takes time to really document it all. Story_ID: 485328 Speaker 1: Where are you going from here? What else do you see yourself being involved in? You're still saying this is something else I'm not doing now, but I will do that also. Speaker 2: Well, I would like to really, what I would like to do is to devote more time to, to finding out the reasons why. And, and, and even though I love to operate, pull back from that. That's what I could see myself doing. Speaker 1: More research, then. Speaker 2: Yeah, more research, getting a younger person working with me and doing a little bit more research along those lines. That's what I could see. I would love to do that. Speaker 1: What is it you want to be remembered for at the-- Speaker 2: I want to be remembered for being nice, for being caring, and for, and for taking care of people who are sick. Story_ID: 485329 Speaker 1: We didn't talk about--and with the last six minutes on this tape, we will talk about your, some of the personal organizations that you're involved with. You're in Links [The Links, Incorporated]. Speaker 2: I'm a member of The Links, and that was a good organization to join. I, I didn't know anything about Links because I'm not a soror, a soror, so to speak. This was sent to me, and it was during a busy time in my life. I was, I was at that time chief of vascular at a small hospital in Harlem [New York, New York]. And this thing came in the mail, and, and I said yes and didn't really, I didn't attend the first meeting, didn't attend the second meeting. So I got a call saying if you don't come to the third, you're not gonna be a Link. And so that's when I became involved with, with the a lot of women who live in Bergen County [New Jersey] and, and close by. And whenever you are brought into this organization, you're brought in with some other women. There were four others with me, and we became very close because there's a project that you have to do when you become a Link. And so we have all became very close, and now we're a part of this organization. And, and we've got where we believe in friendship, international trends, so we, we, we develop an internat- there's an international side to us, a national side. We talk about violence in our community, how so many of the young kids are now joining these gangs. We have a, a program where we're trying to teach young black men who get stopped by the police how you're supposed to act so that something bad doesn't happen to you, at least be prepared (laughter), you know. You know, you, you don't keep your hands down; let's say you put your hands on the wheel, things like that--so, so national trends, international trends, friendship, and, and our various projects. And we meet once, once a month for the entire organization. And we meet once a month for the group, the program that we're involved in. Story_ID: 485330 Speaker 1: Just as, as sort of a footnote, because this comes up, you know, not that often, but it's come up a few times for, for me with people saying that we run these programs to teach, you know, African American young men how to respond to the police. And it, it's just so, it's sad-- Speaker 2: It's sad-- Speaker 1: --that-- Speaker 2: --it has (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that, yeah-- Speaker 2: --a program has to be-- Speaker 1: --have programs-- Speaker 2: --developed for that. Speaker 1: --has to be developed. And I was wondering whose idea, or do you know how the program came about that some said you know, we've got to do this? Speaker 2: Well, my, my husband [Ronald E. LaMotte] is a, is a fraternity guy, an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] guy, and one of his brother's children was stopped by the police. And I can't remember the specifics of it, but what, why are they bothering us? And, and it's true, you know, well, well, well, why? But unfortunately, we know that there can be a Sean Bell. We know there can be an overreaction simply because of color. And so, in an attempt to prevent an overreaction, the Omegas thought that they needed to develop this program. And my group--as a matter of fact, it's today in Teaneck High School [Teaneck, New Jersey], how, you know, violence in our community--it's a shame that we have to develop it, but what it's true. I think it's necessary. Don't you? Speaker 1: I do, but just one more question about it. How do you devel- how do you-- Speaker 2: How do you develop that? Speaker 1: Right, teach that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I-- Speaker 1: --and also, though, allow them to remain some level of dignity about their own manhood and just their right to be who they are? Speaker 2: Well, I think it's, I think it's simply, it's like every time a cop stops me, black, white, whatever, I get nervous, 'cause I don't want to go wherever. So, so I think what it is, is it's letting them know, young men, probably, mostly, that if you get pulled over, that rather than--you, you don't, you don't want to give any impression of, of wanting to attack. So you, you, you're calmly there, be calm, be a man, and you just let them walk up and then ask you a question. Then, depending on what they ask and how they are, you might want to react one way or the other. So, I know when I'm, when I get pulled over, it's usually around here 'cause I'm speeding, and they say show me your whatever. So I, I just think that one has to be prepared for it. I don't think you need to lose your manhood because of it, but I think you just have to be prepared for it. And I think that these kinds of seminars would prepare them for at least the first encounter, which is show me your license. Then-- Speaker 1: Then I can think about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) then after that (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 485331 Speaker 1: --What do you consider to be your crowning effort up to this point? Speaker 2: My crowing effort up to this point, just trying to, with dignity, become a respected vascular surgeon in my community. And my crowning moment would be the fact that I probably have done that, and I'm happy about that. Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter), well, thank you...