 Story_ID: 316661 Speaker 1: I am Shawn Wilson, the interviewer, and this is Neculai [Neculai Burghelea]-- Speaker 2: Richmond? Is it Richmond? Speaker 1: Shawn Wilson. Speaker 2: Wilson. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: See? I'm having-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's okay. If I need to speak louder, just say so. Speaker 2: Yeah, you do, you need to speak a little bit louder. Speaker 1: Okay. And then this is Neculai Burghelea. He's the videographer and we work in a team with The HistoryMakers, and if I can just have you state your name and spell it out for me, including your middle name. Speaker 2: Okay. Littleton Purnell Mitchell [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell]. L-I-T-T-L-E-T-O-N, Purnell, P, capital P-U-R-N-E-L-L, and Mitchell, capital M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L. Speaker 1: So, Mr. Mitchell, what's your date of birth, and you don't have to give me the year, just the month and date. Speaker 2: All right, I was born in November. Speaker 1: Okay, and your place of birth-- Speaker 2: Was 216 Southeast 2nd Street, Sussex County, Milford, Delaware; however, I was raised all my life in the other part of Milford, North Milford, at 418 North Street. Speaker 1: So, today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is December 19, and it's 2005. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: You're talking to me in the home of Littleton and Jane Mitchell [Jane Watson Mitchell], located to 203 Polktown Place, Delaware City, Delaware, 19706. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a retired individual. Story_ID: 316662 Speaker 1: I'm going to start with five basic questions and you can (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --just very, very simple questions. Your favorite food-- Speaker 2: My favorite food--that's very difficult. I have a number of favorite foods. Speaker 1: I'll take one. Speaker 2: I always enjoy, I always had a cake on my birthday, three layer, yellow cake with coconut icing, and the coconut was not the artificial coconut, it came from the real coconut, and that was done by my mother [Helen Purnell Mitchell] until she passed, and then that was done by my wife [Jane Watson Mitchell], and then she's passed, so my birthday last year and this year, I missed my favorite cake and that is what I, that is the one thing that I really did have sticking out for me, the cake. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of year has always been Christmas until now. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably, I guess it's tan. I use it to--I have more tan than anything else. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh, golly. I used to ski all the time, so that my favorite destination was Vermont. Speaker 1: And then lastly, your favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: Favorite phrase, a man's most precious possession is his integrity. Speaker 1: And where did you get that from? Speaker 2: Well, many, many years ago when I was in junior high school, there was a poem that was called, 'A Man's Most Precious Possession' [ph.]. It was written by a naturalist who lived out in the Nevada area and at that time, I was involved in track and a lot of the things happened that were not just right, and as I read that poem, all of a sudden it came to me; everybody has something that's very important, but the most important thing is one's integrity and I had to think it over, because you have family, you have God, and you have other things. But if your integrity is lost, everything else is lost, and so that is my phrase. There were two of them. That was, a man's most precious possession is his integrity. The other is an Italian one, pensa (unclear) and that means think before acting. So, I've used those two. Story_ID: 316663 Speaker 1: So you mentioned two things, and you mentioned, sort of, God and family, and I will start with family. Can you give me your mother's name, and your mother's-- Speaker 2: My mother was Helen Ann Mitchell and her home was Milford, Delaware--Helen Ann Purnell--her maiden name was Purnell. You see, all of us, the male, the first male, there was never a junior. We took the name of our mother, maiden name, in the middle. I'm Littleton Purnell Mitchell [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell], my father was Littleton Van Mitchell, my grandfather was Littleton Hagnell Mitchell so, no, we had (unclear). Speaker 1: Now, your mother's date of birth? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where was your mother born? Speaker 2: Milford. My mother was born in Milford. My father was born in Milford. Speaker 1: Now, was your mother raised in Milford, also? Speaker 2: Milford, also. Speaker 1: Do you remember any stories your mother related to you about her youth? About her having grown up in Milford? Speaker 2: Other than the school that she went to, and that's about all, she was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did she say about the school? Speaker 2: --my mother had a lot of stories that she did tell, but, and we gave her an audio tape to do it on, and she started with my children wanting me to record on this tape some historic things that happened to me. The doorbell rang. She went to the door. She came back from the door and started to collapse on the floor, had an aneurysm and my mother died; we never got it, but she was telling me things that had happened about her grandmother and what she remembered about it. Speaker 1: What did she remember about her grandmother? Speaker 2: Well, her most poignant story was the one in which her grandmother, when she was very young was living in, I believe, she said the Milton [Delaware] area and something happened and they were looking for young, female blacks to sell, and they wanted to get my grandmother out of that area and they only way they could do it was to put her in a barrel and in a cart and wagon and drive her from Milton, which is about twelve, eleven, twelve miles from Milford, and bring her up from there and when she got in the barrel, she was definitely afraid of spiders, and in that barrel, spiders were crawling around and she couldn't holler, she couldn't do anything. She had to stay in that barrel, and we didn't get any further than that with mother, but that was one of the ones that she had told us many times. Story_ID: 316664 Speaker 1: Are there any stories that your father [Littleton Van Mitchell] related to you? What was, where was your father born (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father, I don't know his birth date right off now, but my father enlisted in World War I [WWI]. I have a diary that he wrote from the day he left New York [New York] until he got back to New York, daily, and he came back. He had contracted TB [tuberculosis], he had been shot, and, of course, you do know that then black soldiers were not fighting under the American flag, so he could not get a purple heart like all the other soldiers, but he was sent back here to OT [ph.], North Carolina. We didn't have veterans' hospitals then, we had Red Cross [American Red Cross] hospitals, so he was sent down to OT North Carolina to a Red Cross hospital, and then he was brought home and when he came home, we were told, my mother [Helen Purnell Mitchell], I have the letter, that the government was going to send him up to Saranac Lake, New York, moving the whole family up there for him to live there. That's where the veterans were going to be and we had a list of clothing that we would have to get and one month before we were gonna be shipped out, my father died and I was very young. My sister, there were four of us. I had, I was the first born, I had a brother [Kenneth Mitchell], he died when he was in infancy, I had a sister, two sisters [Phyllis Mitchell and Angelina Mitchell], and so my youngest sister was born after he died, and I did not get a chance to know my father. But, his diary was very interesting to us. Speaker 1: Do you remember just a story, an interesting story that was in his diary from his travels? Speaker 2: Yeah, he, it was amazing one of the things that he told was going to sick call and he was in France and it said that we were waiting--when we say we, you must understand that he's talking about black soldiers. He said we were waiting in sick call for a half hour, and then the white boys came in and they immediately took them in and took care of them first. We had to wait until all of those were taken of before they could take care of any of us; very significant, very significant to me, anyhow. Story_ID: 316665 Speaker 1: So, after your father [Littleton Van Mitchell] passed away, that left your mom [Helen Purnell Mitchell] to take care of you and your two siblings (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three of us. Speaker 1: The three of you. Speaker 2: Two sisters. Speaker 1: How did she do it? What did she do for a living? Speaker 2: My mother was a--she worked as a day worker in private homes and then she also had a job at Bell Telephone [Bell Telephone Company] as one of their janitors in there, and that's how she took care of us. Speaker 1: So, she actually worked for the city. Speaker 2: Beg your pardon-- Speaker 1: She worked for the city. Speaker 2: No, she, it wasn't the city. Speaker 1: That was not the city job, the telephone job was not the city? Speaker 2: No, no. Bell Telephone was the private telephone that, you know, it's corporate, the corporate Bell Telephone, and she worked in private homes serving dinner or serving parties that she would have, and if later she went out for a party we all waited for her to come home, because she also brought some goody-goodies home with her from that party. Speaker 1: What do you remember most about your mother in those days? Speaker 2: She was a darn dictator and she was a mean woman, and she was a woman I wished was not my mother, and she was a woman I would give to anybody at night. She was a woman I used to, we used to always say, "Why does mom have to be our mother?" We had to have the house cleaned up when she was there, we could not go off the porch, we had to stay on the porch and to meet us on the porch. If anybody in the neighborhood told my mother that we went off the porch, front porch, and she came home, we were in trouble. She was always asking the teachers what I was doing in school and what I wasn't doing, not just me but my sisters [Phyllis Mitchell and Angelina Mitchell], and she was always teaching us how to act, and the one thing that was most appropriate was my mother allowed each one of us to have a certain amount of money and then we had to plan and carry out the meal. That was the dinner. She would allot the money. I don't remember how much it was then, it couldn't have been a lot, and then we had to figure out what we want to eat, cook it, get it ready, set the table, set it correctly, and then be the host or hostess when we sat down to the table. And, that mean woman, when I got to be thirty, it seemed that all of a sudden she got smart. She wasn't so dumb when I got thirty, but when I was young that was one mean, dumb woman. She didn't know how to do things and I used to say I wished I had somebody else's mother that lets them do what they want to do, and this mother won't. When I look at those who I said that to, one of two things--they either dead or in jail and I've been very fortunate. She was a very shrewd, very smart woman. She bought homes with just her measly account. She was able to buy a couple of homes. Speaker 1: How many? Speaker 2: Three. She lived in 'em and rented 'em out and she taught us how to save and what to save and, of course, we were poor but it used to be at one time when we went to school, everybody was poor. We didn't see anybody who had a car in our neighborhood. That wasn't possible. I went to one school one time and I had cardboard in my shoes, and our friend next door, Bill Van, he had blue cardboard in his shoes and I come back, "Hey, where'd you get your blue cardboard?" He said, "I don't know, my mom got it." I come home and I wanted to know why my mother couldn't get me blue cardboard to put in my shoes so I could have 'em like Bill. But, we were all the same. We didn't have any sleds, we didn't have any of those things, but we were happy because we knew what we were doing and our mothers took care of us. Story_ID: 316666 Speaker 1: As you were growing up as a child, what are some of your earliest historical memories about life? I mean, do you remember, like what are your earliest memories of historical events? Speaker 2: You mean what happened to me-- Speaker 1: That you were-- Speaker 2: That I remember-- Speaker 1: That you remember that you are able to-- Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, the most poignant thing would be-- Speaker 1: The earliest. Speaker 2: The earliest is when I would go downtown in Milford [Delaware]. I couldn't get waited on unless I said, "Sir" to the man in the store. I'd have to go in the store and I'd say, "Can I have a half-pound of pork chops, sir, please?" I wouldn't do it. I'd go down and say, "Can I get a half-pound of pork chops?" And he'd say, "Boy, what are you supposed to say?" And I'd say, "Half-a-pound of pork chops." He said, "You better say a half-a-pound of pork chops, sir, please." And I said, "I don't have to say sir." This was the general attitude of that, and I never--the thing of it is I never discussed it with my mother [Helen Purnell Mitchell], but I was just hostile towards that. I didn't like it and I can't--mom and I used to sit down and figure out why I was so hostile to many things that other people accepted. There were other boys downtown and they accepted that, yes sir and no sir. No, not for me. I hate the word sir now. I don't want people saying sir to me. You can say yes, and you can say no. You don't have to say yes, sir, and when I was in the [U.S. military] service as an officer, I used to tell the guys, "When you're not around another officer, don't say sir to me. Just say 'Lieutenant' or anything, but don't say sir." But, I remember that very much. I used to, there used to be a store called Jim Robinson's meat market, and this Robinson man would demand that when I go in there, "Boy, you know how to say sir don't you?" And I'd say "No." And he'd say, "Well say sir, and you'll get what you want." In the first place, we didn't get waited on until after he waited on all the white, and then they'd wait on when they're there. One day, he insisted I say sir, and I said sir, and the next day everybody said all the windows in his shop were broken. I wonder how that happened. It's just amazing. Every window he had in that store was broken, and I wonder how that happened. It was just one of those things. Speaker 1: It reminds me of another story about you playing marbles with friends. Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) where'd you get that one from? Story_ID: 316667 Speaker 1: Oh (laugher) yeah, that was, that, that--oh golly-- Speaker 2: What was the mayor's name at the time? Speaker 1: His name was Prettyman [ph.]. He was the Mayor Prettyman. He had a drugstore. See, it used to be called North Milford [Milford, Delaware] and South Milford [Milford, Delaware], and it's a Mispillion creek [Mispillion River] that separates the two. Speaker 2: Now, was one black and one white? Speaker 1: Oh no, no, no, no. No. You see, then, if you lived in a black neighborhood, you lived in Jimtown. That was, if you went in Milford [Delaware] and you said, "We want to look for Litt Mitchell [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell]." "Well, he lives up in Jimtown." That's where all black people live, when they say Jimtown. That was after Jim Crow, of course. Jimtown. And that didn't just happen in Milford; it was all over the state in that area. Jimtown was where all the blacks were gonna be. And, this mayor, I didn't know him, I didn't have any idea who it was, but all of my five friends, we used to go down to a milk place, Silver Hill milk place [Silver Hill Dairy, Milford, Delaware], to unload milk bottles, and we got twenty-five cents an hour. Well, twenty-five cents an hour then, to us, and we were just in the sixth and seventh grades, was quite a bit. So, we were waiting for the milk truck to come in and we started putting in marbles and it was right in the driveway and this car came up and just came right in there and blew his horn and man put his head out the window and said, "Niggers, get out of the way." And, I just said now see that man, see that man, now see if he says how to get 'em, I'll get him. So, my friends there said--is there one alive. Yeah, there was one alive. He was up in New York--and he said, "Oh, man. Let's get these things out of the way." So, we didn't move fast enough. I said, get the marbles 'cause they'll run away, marbles. He said, "Nigger, did you hear what I said? Get out of the way." I said, "You call me a nigger again, I'm gonna ram a brick right straight through your windshield." And he said, "I said niggers." I picked up a brick right there and rammed it hard and it went right through that windshield and I said, "Now, didn't we do that to him boys?" And I looked around there wasn't a soul there. (Laughter) I looked down the street and they were going around the corner, so I couldn't (laughter) and went up and when I looked up nobody was stopping and I went by one of my friends' houses, and I said, "Hey, Dick. Let me talk with you." He said, "No, I'll see ya." I went home and I said now what am I gonna tell mom [Helen Purnell Mitchell]? So, I decided I wasn't gonna tell her nothing, and I just was holding my breath. I know things are gonna happen, I don't know what I'm gonna say. I'm just gonna say, "Well mom, he called me a nigger and I threw the brick in his face." And, nothing happened. Nothing ever happened on it. Speaker 2: But he never forgot it. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: He never forgot who you were. Speaker 1: No, oh no, no. He never forgot it. He saw me, oh good gravy, many years after. Where were we? I had come back to Milford because a youngster had been fighting in the theater and some things had happened. I came back and he said, "Are you Littleton Mitchell?" And I said to him, "Well, that depends on who's asking the question, whether I'm Littleton or not." He said, "Well, my name is--," I think he said, "George Prettyman [ph.]." I said, "Oh." It didn't make any sense to me. He said, "I used to be the mayor here." He said, "Do you remember throwing a brick through my windshield?" And I said, "Oh, it wasn't me. I don't remember anything like that. No." I wasn't going to tell that man who did it. Heck no. (Laughter) I told him, "Unh-uh. No, I know I didn't. I know you had yourself mixed up with someone else instead of me," but when I told that to my friends, called 'em up and said just who had told them that, they said, "I knew you wasn't going to admit it." I said, "Would I be crazy to admit something like that? No, no, heck no. I didn't say I didn't do it. I said I don't remember doing it. That was all." Speaker 2: So, about what year was that that you threw that brick through his window? Speaker 1: Oh, it was about-- Speaker 2: The '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s]? Speaker 1: Oh, no. I was about--I wasn't in the eighth grade. I was probably in about the seventh grade, sixth or seventh grade. Story_ID: 316668 Speaker 1: But things like that had been spotted throughout my life. My sisters [Phyllis Mitchell and Angelina Mitchell] and I were playing in the street and in our neighborhood there wasn't sidewalks. It was dirt. And, we were playing sand in front of the house and mailman came down, named Lynch [ph.], and he looked up and said, "Oh, you're playing with little girls. You're a little sissy." I took a handful of dirt and threw it in his face and then ran in the house and he came in and told my mother [Helen Purnell Mitchell] and she did not say anything except, "You don't throw dirt in peoples' faces. Don't ever do that again." But, I think mom understood what the problem was. He had called me that and I didn't like it and I wouldn't take it. I don't why I couldn't take things that others would take. It just wasn't there. I would always be a little hostile and always got beat up. I never wanted to-- Speaker 2: Well, for example, when Emmett Till was killed for supposedly whistling at a white woman or whatever he said to her, how did that affect you and the way you were reacting towards white people and the things they were doing to you when this little boy in Mississippi had been killed simply for whistling to a white woman (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Whistling. That didn't affect me until I went into college [West Chester State Teachers College; West Chester University of Pennsylvania, West Chester, Pennsylvania]. It really did not, because in Milford [Delaware], we weren't associating with right. There wasn't any way you're gonna associate. The only thing, every other association with white youngsters was white males and it was always a fight. Once in a while, we might be on a baseball diamond and we'd start playing, but even there, funny, now we played baseball at our school. Next to our school, the fence. That was a group of houses that happened to be inhabited by white. Now, those two boys that lived right over the fence would come to play with us because they didn't have anybody else to play with. They'd bring a baseball, bat, and a glove. We didn't have anything. We'd come home and play baseball just at night until it was time to go home, then we'd say okay, hit the fence, and get a bunch of stones and run 'em home. The next day, you're right back again, and we'd play and the next day we'd run 'em over the fence again, throwing stones at 'em 'til they got over the fence, and they had to get over the fence, but that was the way it was, or it was snowballs. We'd have snowball fights, running each other right straight home with snowballs. That wasn't anything that brought 'em together to, we couldn't compete with white in anyway here in the state. When I got into high school [Howard High School; Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware], the only time we competed, and that's why I'm a Penn Relay [Penn Relay Carnival] fan was the Penn Relays. We'd have to go out of state to compete with white. The only way we've had track was going to the schools in Baltimore [Maryland], like Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School], black school; in Washington [D.C.], Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School], and Armstrong [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.], these schools there, that's where we competed. But Emmett Till there had no effect upon me, but it did have an effect when I went into college, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, you said you were, you were not allowed to compete with white people when you were in elementary and high school in sports; so, were you able to see other black people compete with, against white people. I mean, for example, when Joe Louis fought Max [Max Schmeling], the German, in '38 [1938], were you able to hear that on the radio and-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. We hear it on the radio. Yes, I'd, we'd follow Joe Louis like everything. Speaker 2: Why did you follow Joe Louis? Speaker 1: We followed Joe Louis because it, to me, it represented a black person who could beat a white person. That's what it represented. And no need in me trying to use a euphemism to say it, the only thing I wanted to do was to beat the hell out of them people. See, when he'd do that, I was happy. We just waiting--don't let him hit you too much--hit and knock the hell out of him and let's get this over with. That was it. That was a hostility that was within all of us, and I think that hostility was rougher with me than anyone else. I don't know why. It was just a part of me. I had a hostile way and would not take anything from anybody. Story_ID: 316669 Speaker 1: So, can you remember going to first grade when you arrived in school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I--my first years, I had asthma and my first years in elementary school I was mostly sick with asthma most of the time. I was at a school that was, of course, a black school. Everything we got was the throwaway from the white school; even pencils. They would bring pencils that were wrapped up with a string that they had used and used them down to a certain layer and then they brought them over to us to use. Books--I never had a book new until I got into college [West Chester State Teachers College; West Chester University of Pennsylvania, West Chester, Pennsylvania]. That would happen through all the areas of the State of Delaware. Everything--we were the throwaway. We got everything that was thrown away. We didn't have a playground. We could only do what we had, and in our playground on the drill, we had--the girls went in one door at the school, the boys went in another. On the girls' side of that playground, there was nothing for them to play with. On the boys' side, they had what is known as a giant swing. It was a pole and you had about six chains coming down with handles on it and you could hold on this and run around and swing out and go around. That's all we had there. The girls had nothing and that was our school. Speaker 1: So, do you remember if there were any teachers in elementary school that had a favorable impression upon you? Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, if it hadn't been for a teacher in elementary school, I had directions from my elementary school teachers who impressed me like everything; especially one, Mrs. Polk [ph.]. Oh man, she was something. She, I know now she didn't teach. She made you learn by what you wanted to know. One of the things that she did, I used to enjoy reading the encyclopedia and I used to like my desk to sit near the encyclopedia so I could reach over and grab one and read it. And I read as much as I could about everything, and one day I looked at it and I was in the, I was in the fifth grade, and I looked and I saw this bull, had a bull fight on there, so I raised my hand and said, "Mrs. Polk"--she wasn't Mrs. Polk then, she was Miss Dennis [ph.]--"Miss Dennis, would you look at this? What is a bull fight?" And she said, "Well, you want to know what bull fight is?" I said, "Yes, I would." She said, "All right. Let me see. I'll be back in a minute." She went up to the desk and she went out of the room and she came back and she called me up to her desk and she said, "Here's something. Read this." It was called 'Death in the Afternoon' by Hemingway [Ernest Hemingway]. I read it in the fifth grade, and from that point on, I became interested in the bull fight. That bull fight I learned, I studied, and I went, I was over in Spain in 1970, and every day I was there, I went to the plaza de toros, where they fought the bull, and I'd go in and I knew right where to go because the library that we had, I could get the bull, you see the bull fight in Spain is fought according to rules. It's a law of bullfight. You have to do it according to that. And it's a book that thick, and it tells about everything and I had read that page from page all the way through, not just once but a couple of times, and in the Wilmington Library [Wilmington Public Library, Wilmington, Delaware] I did, so when I went to the plaza de toros, I was in the center of the ring one day and the guide was talking to some Americans and he said that the first stone was laid at the plaza de toros and I think he said, 1738. Story_ID: 316670 Speaker 1: So you were speaking about 17-- Speaker 2: Seventeen thirty-eight [1738]. Now, I'm in the center of the ring, the plaza de toros, where they have their corridas, bullfights, and the guide had a family. There was a father, mother, and two kids there. You can always tell Americans when you're overseas. I understand now. You can always tell them so, he is talking to them and he said 1730 is when he put them in. And like this, I said, "No, you're wrong. It was seventeen-" then I thought where I was. I said, "Oh, my God. What have I done?" He looked at me and he said, "Who are you?" I said, "I'm sorry. I wasn't thinking. Please. Forgive me. I really didn't mean to interject myself into--." He said, "Who are you?" I said, "I'm an American." He said, "Oh, you know." Well, don't back me up against the wall. You back me up against the wall, I come out. I said, "Yes, I know." He said, "You know when plaza de toros was put here and plaza de toros. I said, "Yes, I do" and you are wrong. He said, "How do you know I'm wrong?" I said, "You can go to the third floor in the library," and, how God ever let me know this, and I think I said, "Look on page 1789 of the rules and you'll see." And he said, "Oh, you've been there." I said, "No, I've never been there." He said, "How do you know?" I said, "Because I've studied it. I had all--I know how to go there." He said, "All right, you lead me." So I led him right straight through where the picadors go, right on up the steps and I swear, of course, he can't do it, as he went by one of the rooms there where there were making the picks for the next day, they were shortening him up. The man was in there when we were down. I swear he said something in Spanish to him, and I swear he must have said, "I got a nigger here from America and he thinks he knows everything." So I thought that, I went right on up to the room. He said, "Where's the library?" "See here's the library right here." I studied this right here in West Chester [West Chester State Teachers College; West Chester University of Pennsylvania, West Chester, Pennsylvania], and I studied here. I had all the diagrams and everything. I knew right where to go. So, he said, "All right." He went in, told the lady to pay. She put the page out and he looked at me and he frowned like this, he took off his hat and he said, "Senor, I take my hat off to you. How you know something, you American, you know and I been saying wrong for years." I said, "I can't answer that, but I know when I'm right and I won't back down." He said, "You're right. You are right. What can I do for you?" And then I said, "I can't get any tickets for the corrida on Sunday." "I'll get you tickets." I said, "I'd like to see them lag the bulls when they do that tomorrow." This was Friday, tomorrow. He said, "All right." I said, "You have the head of the bull that killed Manolete. Can I see it?" He said, "You can. I'll take you see it." These people now, here they are, they tried to--, "Can we go?" "Wait a minute. No, no. No, I'll get somebody to take you where you want to go." So, we went through. I saw the lagging of the bulls the next morning at nine--lagging of the bulls is where the agents of the matadors come and they put numbers of each bull in a little leather bottle. They shake it up and then they, if you're the agent for me you reach in and you pull out a number. That number is the bull you will fight and that's called lagging of the bulls. Story_ID: 316671 Speaker 1: And then the next day--now, my family, we didn't know what this was about. My wife and my son, and my son was so enthralled at that time with The Beatles that he didn't want anything but Beatles. So, I'm over in Spain and when I get back to the hotel, my tickets are there waiting for Sunday's corrida. We went there and when we sat him down, I told him I wanted to sit right in back of the matador. We were sitting in matadors and that is right above, where the highest official of the government sits, and at the bullfight, the highest elected official is the one who controls the bullfight, and they have different types of handkerchiefs green, red, black; black means get him out of there, and red and yellow, and he'd tell the matador when he can cape, when he can kill the bull by the handkerchief. So, we're sitting right down here and right behind them, so I forgot to tell Jane [Jane Watson Mitchell] what, but when the matadors came in, they came right in front where we were, did a (unclear), they came in front of Jane and took his hat off until I said, "Stand up and bow." She said "What for?" I said, "Jane, just stand up and bow. That's all. Just stand up." So, she got up and did like this, sat down and went back, so I told her, I said, "They are acknowledging you. This is something, Jane." I said, "You don't understand this. What they're doing is honoring us right here, and it would be the same as if the president of the United States had us coming to his house for dinner. This is an honor, please, just do that." My son was saying, "Well, I want to listen to The Beatles." I said, "You say that one more time, I'm gonna knock your head off." My son, Philip [Philip Mitchell], he remembers it now. (Laughter) I said, "I'm gonna knock your head off. You sit down here and I don't care what you do, when you hear everybody else saying ole, you say ole. You understand me?" "I don't wanna be here anyhow." I said, "You're here and you better smile. I'm telling you, I'll knock your head off in a minute. We are being honored," in the meantime, as (unclear) announcer said in Spanish something, then he said, "The first bull will be fought for the Mitchell family of the U.S.A." And I said, "Did you hear that Jane? This is the first bull (unclear)." I got my camera. I was taking slides and they're right in front of us, and that was really it for me. Speaker 2: And all of this started-- Speaker 1: It started with Ms. Polk [ph.] when she forced me by suggesting that I read this book ['Death in the Afternoon' Ernest Hemingway] and then I read all of Hemingway's books and I read everything I could read about the corrida and when I went to Mexico, I knew about it but, you see, Mexico fights bulls, not under a law. They fight cows down there. The bull has to weigh at least eighteen hundred pounds. That's a big thing over in there, and if they do it, if in Spain you don't have it and they find it out, you committed a crime. I mean, this, the bull fight in Spain is nothing for fun. It is serious and I like that. Speaker 2: Okay. There you go. Speaker 1: So, it's something that really goes but down in Mexico, they have unions that do it, but getting back to the bullfight, that's how I, that's how that teacher influenced me. I've had other teachers to influence me very good in high school and in college. Story_ID: 316672 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about, let's talk about high school for a moment. When you--what type of student were you in high school? Were you rambunctious, were you quiet? Were you smart? Speaker 2: Well, when I went to, you see I'm coming from the country going to the city and I went into the city. I had come from the eighth grade, but evidently they didn't believe I had come from the eighth grade so they put me back in the eighth grade. Speaker 1: Now, just tell me what country and city you're referring to. Speaker 2: Okay. I'm coming from Milford [Delaware], going to Wilmington [Delaware] to go to Howard High School [Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware]. Howard High School is the only school in this state where, if you were black, you'd go to high school. Now they did have it at Delaware State College [State College for Colored Students; Delaware State University, Dover, Delaware], but you would pay them if you were able to get there and I had an uncle and aunt living in Wilmington, and I stayed with them to go to high school there. Speaker 1: So let me just quiz you on that for a moment. Out of the entire state of Delaware, there was only one school, high school for black students? Speaker 2: There is only, when you finish your elementary education outside of Wilmington, black youngsters after they finished the eighth grade, their education was finished unless they could get to State College, or they could get to Wilmington to go to the high school. Out of my class in Milford, there were thirteen. Only three of us made it. The rest could not go. They couldn't afford, and automobiles, you just talking through your head. We didn't have automobiles then to, in families like we do now. So, going to Delaware State College, there were some who were fortunate enough to have a car that they could ride to Delaware to State College and come back every night fueled. Speaker 1: Well, once you arrived at Delaware High School-- Speaker 2: You mean Delaware State--or Wilmington--Howard High School. Speaker 1: Howard High School. Once you arrived on campus at Howard High School, the atmosphere was one of pride because there were all black students who were actually getting to achieve something greater than (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that wasn't it. There was no pride in anything. They were going to school. This was the only thing they had, so they were going to school here. They knew that when they walked to school, they went by Wilmington High School [Wilmington, Delaware], where they could have easily gone or they walked by Brown School [H. Fletcher Brown Vocational High School, Wilmington, Delaware] and couldn't go there, but they came from a couple of miles way out of Wilmington on the hill into Wilmington. They walked it day--through snow or rain, that's what they walked down to Howard High School, and that was the only place that we could get high school. Speaker 1: Now, at Howard High School, did you have a football team, baseball team? Speaker 2: Had a football team, had a basketball team. There weren't any girl sports, but football and basketball were really the only real two sports that we had there. Speaker 1: Who did you play against? Who did those teams play against? Speaker 2: Well, we had to play, again, against the black high schools in Baltimore [Maryland], Washington [D.C.], and Manassas, Virginia. We got to play one school that played us out of what used to be Darby Township, that would play us at Howard but we didn't have the opportunity to play against any other of the white schools, so that was it. Story_ID: 316673 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school, what were your aspirations? Did you want to be a pilot at that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--no, I always, again here we go with my teachers again, and this again is Mrs. Polk [ph.]. I got interested in airplanes and she did not teach me about airplanes. She would always put something in front of me that was challenging me and I didn't know that then. I thought Mrs. Polk just gave me a book and said see what you think about this, and I read it and I read about airplanes and I got to studying the airplanes and I could hear a plane over and tell you what type of plane it was by the sound of the engine. Can't do that now, but you could then. And, when I got to Howard High [Howard High School; Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware], I wanted to go to become a commercial airline pilot and when I finished Howard with Mr. Johnson [George Anderson Johnson], the principal of the school, and Mrs. Taylor [ph.], who was the assistant principal and the guidance counselor, we wrote to about twenty-eight different aeronautical schools, West Coast, East Coast, and down, and each one of them said, specificity. I don't know it got the letters, "If you are a Negro, we will not accept you. We guarantee our graduates jobs and we cannot place Negroes in aviation." But one school of aviation did. It was called the Flying Dutchman school in Latrobe, Pennsylvania, and they had it, they had it written on lined paper, like it came out of a tablet and said that they would be glad to take me at twenty-eight dollars an hour. Now, twenty-eight dollars an hour to become a commercial pilot, and it cost around three hundred dollars to do it, so you know what that would have been to me. Couldn't have done it at all. So, the next thing you do was to go to college, and my mother [Helen Purnell Mitchell] had a college that she wanted me to go to. Speaker 1: Which college was that? Speaker 2: I don't wish to tell you that, but I refused to go to it. I said no, I want to go to a college where I can compete against white boys, and I did that because Roy Wilkins in our leadership classes, Roy Wilkins told us we need to know what the white boys know so we can compete against 'em and we need to go to school with 'em and we need to be in competition with 'em; so, when you can you learn what they learn so you can be on a foot equal with them. So, I said I want to go to a white school. Speaker 1: So, I'm assuming your mother was pushing you towards a historically black school [HBCU], probably Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] (laughter). Speaker 2: I have no comment. Speaker 1: So you accepted Mr. Wilkins' challenge to go to a white school? Speaker 2: Well, I had that in my mind and I believe that-- Speaker 1: Before we get to--go ahead--you believe that. Speaker 2: Because I just believed that I was as good as anybody else. I believe that. I didn't believe that because I was this complexion, that I wasn't as good as somebody else, I wasn't as smart as somebody else, but segregation made me believe it. It had us believing that, but we couldn't get a chance to prove it. Every time we wanted to compete, boy, yeah, we wanted to. We wanted to see just how good they are and wanted to see how good I am. But, that was not it. So, Mr. Johnson, the principal at Howard, he was an Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] man. He graduated from Indiana University and everything he could get, he directed to Indiana University. I didn't wanna go that far, because there was only three of us in the family then, my mother, my sister, and I, and I didn't wanna go there. I wanted to be home but I wanted to go to a school where I could compete and my track coach, Mr. Fleming, Daniel Fleming [ph.], said to me you ever thought about West Chester State College [West Chester State Teachers College; West Chester University of Pennsylvania, West Chester, Pennsylvania]. I never heard of West Chester State College, and Mr. Johnson, the principal said, "Oh yes, that's a very good school, I understand." I don't know about West Chester, so Mr. Fleming said, "Well, let me see something." Story_ID: 316674 Speaker 1: Well, the thing of it was he [Mr. Fleming (ph.)] went to West Chester [West Chester State Teachers College; West Chester University of Pennsylvania, West Chester, Pennsylvania] with me and I ended up going to West Chester State College, and ended up in my class of five hundred as the only black, and it was terrible. I mean, that's where the Emmett Till thing came in because here I am in a class with a lot of white girls and I'm afraid somebody is gonna look at me the way they did Emmett Till. So, the first day I'm in class, this is segregation. The first day I'm in class I get there ahead of time so I can sit in the back of the class; after all, we sit in the back of the bus. I'll sit in the back of the class. I got to the back of the room, sat there when the people come in, and right next to me came a very pretty white girl. On the other side was another white girl, and I'm sitting here worried to death. What the heck am I gonna do? I had no book. The teacher starts talking about a book and the girl on this side says, "You can look at my book." And I said, "Oh no, that's all right. I don't wanna look. I'm gonna get a book." She said, "Oh, no. You can look at my book." And she took her chair and moved it over closer to me. And I said, "Oh no. No, no, no." I took my chair and moved it away from her. She said, "What's the matter?" I said, "Nothing the matter. I just, I don't wanna look at the book." She said, "Well, come on, then, here." And she got her chair and pushed it right up against mine and I took my chair and moved it way over. I said, "Look. I don't wanna see it." She said, "What is wrong with you?" I said, "Nothing wrong with me." That's segregation. That's what it had done to me. I didn't want to be close to that girl because I was afraid of what, something might happen and my first year in college was horrible. That was my fear. I didn't go to the dances. I was in the room studying. I was doing things, and then one day, one evening, I'm the smaller, here I weigh 120 pounds and my friends, I'm in physical education and I'm 5'8", and everything there was six foot and 185 [pounds], and I'm right in the class and I had no problem with that class. My class in physical education, those guys were, it was just as if they didn't know what my complexion was. That's the way it went. One day they came in and said, they called me Yogi and said, "Hey, Yogi. You going over to the dance tonight?" I said, "No, I'm not going." They said, "Why aren't you going to the dance?" I said, "I don't wanna go." They said, "Well, we want you to go." I said, "I don't wanna go to the dance." I hadn't gone. I think this was about in January. I hadn't gone anywhere. I really didn't feel right. And he said, "Yogi, you're going to the dance tonight whether you want to or not." So, I didn't, I looked up at him and said, "That's what you think. I'm gonna be right here." So, I said okay. They left, came back, and after supper, they, 8:00, the dance was from 8:00-12:00, about a quarter to 8:00, they came in and said, "Okay, Yog, let's go." I said, "Look, I told you all" his name was Bing. I said, "Bing, I told you all I'm not going to that dance." He said, "Well, if you tell us why you're not going, you haven't been out here to anything. You didn't come to college here to sit in your room all the time. Come on and go." I said, "I'll tell you what. I'll think about it next week." "You ain't gonna think about a damn thing. You gonna put your behind over there to that gym tonight and you're gonna dance." I looked up then and he had these (laughter). I said, "You all are gonna have to carry me out and you can't do that." Said, "No kidding. Well, let's show him. Let's show this SOB we can get him." And they grabbed ahold of me and I'm kicking and carried me over to the gym and they had this all planned out, carried me over to the gym, took me, carried me in over their head into the center of the floor of the gym, put me in the center, and along come a girl that I got to know, Jan. Jan Greensburg [ph.] came over and said, "Well, Litt [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell], you asked me to the dance tonight and here I am." I said, "I can't dance." He said, "Well, if you can't, you're gonna learn tonight." The outcome was they made me stay there and dance, and when I went to the bathroom, they went to the bathroom with me. I tried to say, "You know, I don't feel good. I think I'm gonna have to go away." "If you want to sit out, you can sit out here, but unless you throw up, you're not gonna leave this dance." And I had to stay at that dance that night. Well the outcome was I began to see and enjoy it. And then I enjoyed it too much. Story_ID: 316675 Speaker 1: Because I almost got threw out of college. Speaker 2: For what? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, you see we had to wear regulations. We had to wear a purple hat with a little brim to it. I had a button on that said, "I am Dog Mitchell [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell] and will give you the definition of a kiss when you ask me;" and I had to wear a dress skirt with a sign on the front of me saying I am Mr. Mitchell from Delaware. Now, if the football team would beat East Stroudsburg [East Stroudsburg State Teachers College; East Stroudsburg University, East Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania], who they wanted to always beat and couldn't beat, the rays come off. If you had a purple tie, and you had to wear it all the time, I wouldn't wear it. I said, I ain't gonna wear that mess. So, these upperclassmen got me one day and took me down and blindfolded me and beat my tail until I was gonna wear it. Then they came and they said, "Look. If you all were going to a girl's dorm and bring us out three girls' books and, see, we weren't looking for panties and all that, man, they'd looking for books. Bringing out three girls' books up on the fifth floor where the freshmen are, we take the regs off." "Well, how we gonna go in the doors?" "Oh, no. There is a tunnel. You can go into the girls' dorm." It was. West Chester [West Chester State Teachers College; West Chester University of Pennsylvania, West Chester, Pennsylvania], when it was a normal school, had tunnels that ran underneath from the Recitation Hall where they had their classes underneath to the girls' dorm. They had blocked it up, but there was some very energetic upper classman that had opened it up and were sneaking through there. So they said, "Look. Here's how you can do it." So we started to get through. So I found (unclear) I'm gonna do it. And there were five of us, went in there and we're, one o'clock at night, we went up, went in there, the girls, they were giggling. We got in there and giggling, and went up to the fifth floor, went on the stairs. They had an elevator. The elevator squeaks as it goes up. Stairs, you can walk on the side and get up. No one told us about anything else. We didn't know about anything else there, so we got up there and the girls were laughing and we saw him with the girls and he gave us the books and all of a sudden, somebody said, "Dean King's [ph.] on her way up. The elevator's squeaking." We listened. The elevator was squeaking and we tore out the fire door and the alarm went off, the lights went on, and we got to down the five floors and we got down to the bottom and there stood the guards waiting for us. And we had to appear into the president's office and that next morning, the president said, "I have your ticket to home." And I said, "To home?" And he said, "Yes, we don't have (unclear) people in this school. You're here to learn how to associate with people, not to do what you're not supposed to do and we're not gonna let you get away with it. You are on your way home." "President, please, please don't do this. Please give me a chance." Man, I begged him and of course he didn't know that he wasn't gonna send me home. He said, "Look, we can't stand this. Now we've got to have your solemn promise that you're gonna follow the rules and regulations of this administration--this school--or else," and finally we talked and he said, "All right now, you're on probation for the rest of the year. Don't get in any trouble." Man, I didn't get in any trouble the rest of the year either. I was there. But that, that's what segregation did to me. When I went in there, I was afraid. I was afraid, afraid to--and then the thing that was astounding when I went home to my mother [Helen Purnell Mitchell], I said, "Mother, there was five hundred of us in the freshmen class. Over half the freshmen class is failing, and I'm not failing. There's something wrong. Something wrong. I'm the one that's supposed to be failing." She said, "No you're not. You're not a failure. You fail because you don't do what you're supposed to do. It has nothing to do with complexion. You're there to learn; not to want to do what somebody else is doing." And she was right. That was right. Story_ID: 316676 Speaker 1: Before you graduate college, when you were at West Chester State College [West Chester State Teachers College; West Chester University of Pennsylvania, West Chester, Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --did you have any mentors or professors at the university that would serve your life in a meaningful way? Speaker 2: Yeah. Dr. Heathcote [Charles W. Heathcote]. He was really something. He taught--well, the background this man had was marvelous. He had gone to be a doctor, got in it three years, and decided he didn't wanna be, and he went and got his Ph.D. in education and, for some reason, we had a very good relationship and he was--throughout. But, in my second year they opened up the [U.S.] Air Force. See, the Air Force had been closed to black citizens. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: You're telling me about this, the mentor that-- Speaker 1: Oh, Dr. Heathcote. Speaker 2: Dr. Heathcote, yeah. Speaker 1: He had a background in, he had become, three years in medicine, quit, and then went and got a Ph.D. in education and then left that and went and got a Ph.D. in divinity. So he had a couple of Ph.D.s and he was teaching history of mankind, and in there he was in an archaeological area and he could look at you and tell you what your cultural background was, and he picked out a couple of kids in the class and told a girl you have this background, Irish, Welsh, and so I raised my hand. He wouldn't call on me. (Laughter) He wouldn't call on me. So, I kept raising my hand. He called on all around there, so all the time I said, "Why didn't you call on me? I want you to tell me." He said, "Well, I don't think I want to tell everybody what your background is right in that class." I said, "You gonna tell me?" He said, "One day I'll tell you." And we became friends then. But you see, my second year they opened up the Air Force, and I left immediately. I wanted to fly so I quit college and went on and enlisted in the Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps] and went to New York [New York], took the exam, and so forth, and went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Story_ID: 316677 Speaker 1: Well, up until this point, had the [U.S.] Air Force not been open to-- Speaker 2: The Air Force was not open to Negroes, to blacks. The Air Force was an elite, even the poor white boys couldn't get in. So that was nothing unusual. You had to be pretty smart. You had to be, perhaps, in one of the Ivy Schools, and you would get in. When I took my exam, it was at 90 Church Street in New York [New York]. I was the only black there. There was a room full of white males and they were all big, well-developed football players. Here, this little puny rascal like me was sitting in there with them, and as they went in, you could see 'em come back out with a white piece of paper and go on out the door, and I said "Oh, shucks. These guys are making it. I hope they send me to Lackland Air Force Base [Bexar County, Texas], and if I get there what I'm gonna do while they were talking around Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I didn't say anything, nothing, and just not far from me was another little skinny fella. We didn't know each other, and we didn't talk to each other. But it seemed that at the end, we were the two who were accepted. These other guys with the white papers were flunking whatever it was. So, I was accepted and he was accepted, and we come to find out he was from Dover [Delaware], right here in Delaware, and we didn't never see each other. We rode back on the train together, and he was saying he didn't want to go to Lackland Air Base. He'll stay somewhere on the West Coast so he could fly over California. And, I said well I'm going to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama], if that's where you're gonna send me. So, that was my starting, that was the end of my career in college for a while, and I left to go to Tuskegee. Story_ID: 316678 Speaker 1: Dr. Heathcote [Charles W. Heathcote] promised to tell you your--the history of your origins. Speaker 2: Are you talking for real now, or just going-- Speaker 1: I'm talking for real now. Yeah, we're on tape now. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, all right, okay. Speaker 1: So he promised to tell you-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Now, what are we doing now? Are we running-- Speaker 2: We're rolling and you're gonna tell me what he said to you. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Dr. Heathcote did not tell me; then, in the class he said, "No, I don't wanna tell you now. I'll tell you at a later date." But the later date never appeared. He was there when I came back from service and he was really my good mentor, but he left. But, I got a little background on that by being down in San Antonio [Texas] and I went over to the, an exhibit by the University of Texas [University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas], and the exhibit was one in which they were showing the different families that had helped to develop San Antonio, and I got to the Indian [Native American] exhibit and it was very good. The Indians had been involved there, and there was a lady back there, a short lady and she had on a very beautiful amulet right here. It was, it looked like gold but it was something I had never seen before and she said to me, "Are you enjoying the exhibit?" And I said, "Yes" and I said, "That amulet. What is that? It's beautiful." And she was a member, this was what they had given her as a member of the Choctaw Indians and the congress had done something. She had it on. And then she looked at me and she said, "Well, you know, you're part also aren't you?" I said, "Part what?" She said, "Your background." And I said, "No." She said, "Oh, yes. Has anybody told you?" And I said, "Well, no, why?" She said, "Well, I'm an archaeologist and I'm here at the University of Texas and you definitely have Pawnee." I said, "I have?" She said, "Yes." "Do you have ponies around I can get on and ride? They tell me the Pawnees rode ponies." (Laughter) We laughed and we talked and the lady told me about my cheekbones, that she could tell then, being archaeologist. Well, my wife [Jane Watson Mitchell] was there as a delegate for an organization and I went to get her. I said, "You're not gonna believe me, but I just want you to know that you're in a hierarchy of great wealth, so come on back." We went through it but we never could find her again on there, but that's the only time I ever got on that. And I don't, I don't exude about it. It's just something that that lady saw, and said it was. Speaker 2: So you are familiar with different Indian tribes that are in this area also, right? Speaker 1: I'm familiar with people who are with the Nanticokes, yes. Speaker 2: The Nanticokes. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. With individuals who are of the Nanticokes. You see, at one time when you couldn't go anywhere, the Nanticokes had to go when they couldn't go west to the Indian schools out there, some of them left there and went west. They had to go to Delaware State College [State College for Colored Students; Delaware State University, Dover, Delaware]. There wasn't any place else for 'em to go. They did have a small school down in Millsboro [Delaware] that was made for the Nanticoke Indians that went to the eighth grade. Speaker 2: So, could the Nanticokes have gone to the-- Speaker 1: No. University of Delaware [Newark, Delaware]? No, no, no. Speaker 2: No, I meant could they have gone to the black high school [Howard High School; Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware]? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah they--black? Where? In Wilmington [Delaware]? Speaker 2: In Wilmington. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Yeah, they could have gone there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, but they didn't want to go there. Speaker 2: So, they had the same two options that you had. They could either go to Delaware State College to graduate high school, or they could go to Wilmington to the black school. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Or some of 'em were sent out. Those who could afford it were sent to the West to some of those Indian schools in the West. There were a few that went there. You see, the Nanticokes down in the lower end of the state, they had large farms and they did very well on them, very well. So, they could afford to send their children west to those schools out there. Story_ID: 316679 Speaker 1: So, you arrived at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] in what year? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. It was in December 1941, and I stepped out nine o'clock at night into two-and-a-half inches of mud because we were disillusioned. You see, when I was in West Chester [West Chester State Teachers College; West Chester University of Pennsylvania, West Chester, Pennsylvania] and I saw the add about volunteer and serve, there were tennis courts and swimming pools, and more than that, they had some pretty women in there with 'em and they said Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] was just shortly a little distance from it and, man, that was all good so I wanted to fly but it was good that I was gonna be down there with these women in the tennis courts and (unclear) swimming. And we got out there and we were twenty-five miles back in the woods from Tuskegee, and there wasn't nothing there but red, red, red clay. And I stepped down into this clay up to my ankles nine o'clock at night, no lights, no nothing, and got into a truck and rode to me. To me, it seemed like ten miles on those four-by-fours that the [U.S.] Army has, all rough, and we were all talking about I want to see what Tuskegee Airfield looks like, and so when we got out of the trucks and looked around, there wasn't any air field. They hadn't built it. They were building it. And we had to sleep in tents. They were tents that were built with a wooden floor that came up to about that high, about three feet high, boarded around, then the rest of it was a tent and in the center was a stove that you could put wooden coal in to keep you warm. That's what we had. And if you didn't have that, then you had to sleep out on the ground. I wasn't one of those lucky people who slept on the ground. I was in the first car, so I slept in the tent. There were some of the guys that had to sleep in pup tents on the ground out that night. But we were in that for about, I would say, about three weeks, three or four weeks, just in that. They were building the Tuskegee, I saw 'em build the runway. To landscape they brought grass in. This was all red mud. They didn't have water there. We had to get the water out of the water trucks that the Army would bring in, and we'd get our water. And we washed ourselves like the guys do when they're out in combat. They gave us a helmet and we'd wash--the helmet--wash our face in the helmet and do it, and we did that for about three weeks until they built it up, and we saw Tuskegee built by the first of us, I mean the most of us--were from the North in that group that I went down with, and we had never seen black craftsmen. This base was built in every way by all black craftsmen. It was McKissack & McKissack, out of Memphis, Tennessee. And it was amazing to see this, and they built it and they had it done in about three months. Then we were there. Story_ID: 316680 Speaker 1: Who were the instructors at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] that taught you? Speaker 2: The instructors were white, formerly airline pilots. You see, the only thing that the [U.S.] Air Force could look back on was to get airline pilots and give 'em commissions; captains and majors and bring them in. But, what had happened at Tuskegee was an experiment. You see, the [U.S.] Army had said a long time ago that Negroes were not intelligent enough to fly or to be soldiers. Therefore, that's what they did with us in World War I [WWI]. They sent the soldiers, I mean they put the soldiers under French domination, because we were too dumb to be under the American administration. So, they said--are you familiar with the tests that they did? Very, very intelligent tests. They, at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], they took two skulls, a white skull and a black skull. You're familiar with that? And then they filled them with beans, these skulls, filled them with beans, and then after they filled them with beans they counted the beans of each one. Well, they found that the beans from the white skull, male skull, there were more beans in that than within the black, and it was bigger, larger circumference than the black; so therefore, the black, as they stated and I remember this, was not filthy, was filthy and was not good enough to even serve to the lowest white people. That's what this government said about us. So therefore, we couldn't do anything. Therefore, when they take you in the Air Force now to Tuskegee, had to either have two years of college, or more-- Speaker 1: Which you had. Speaker 2: I had. But when I got there, I was not only the youngest, but I was the most illiterate that they had. Those guys there had master's [degrees] and bachelor's [degrees], and some of them had more flying hours than the instructors who were teaching them. These were the guys who came from San Antonio, Texas. They could fly. We had Chief Anderson [Charles Alfred Anderson], who had wanted to be an instructor. They wouldn't give him like they did the white pilots. He had thirty-six hundred hours of flying The Hump [Himalayan Mountains]. Now, none of them had ever done it. To fly The Hump, you're going over fourteen thousand feet and he had thirty-six thousand hours of doing just that. They would not give him anything. They said, "We'll give you a warrant officer." Well, this is below a lieutenant, and he said, "No. You've given all of those. They don't have as much flying time as I did, captains and majors," and they wouldn't do it. So he stayed over at the primary field [Moton Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] at Tuskegee and taught them how. He said I think I can do better over here, because they're going to wash out a lot of 'em who are real smart. And he did. A lot of the guys who came in there from Tuskegee, I mean from Texas, had as many as four hundred hours flying time, and the instructors, some of them didn't even have two hundred. So, here they are, they're angry because of this, and of course, like everybody else, when the instructor would say one thing, the guy knew he was wrong. He'd say, "Well, I think you're wrong sir. You have to do this." He'd say, "Dammit, don't tell me what is wrong. I'll tell you." So, we were what is known as washed out for any reason, they could wash you out for anything. And this seems difficult to believe. If you went through high school for four years, and you get a diploma, now you're in the line to get your diploma, and suppose the principal comes to you and pulls you out of the lines and says, "I'm sorry, you're not gonna graduate." And doesn't tell you why, but they pull you out of there. It's fair, isn't it? Fair, that's what you call fairness. American fairness. They had men who had finished a year-and-a-half of flying in line to get their wings and were pulled from there. They didn't have to give any reason. They didn't have to. It's like the Army can prosecute you for spitting on the fence or anything. They were pulled. There was prejudice, much prejudice there, yeah. Story_ID: 316681 Speaker 1: Did you ever see any combat action? Speaker 2: No, no. I was in instrument flying, and I taught them how to fly instruments. They thought that somebody like me might tear up the plane a little bit more than the others (laughter). One of the things that the guys used to do was do what is known as countdown. See who can knock the most cows down out in the pasture. So, we take our planes and go out and see cows in the pasture and get out alone and take the plane and hit him on the head and knock him down, and then come down and you'd see a little mark above your bed so that you'd knocked down this many cows. But, the people around there seem to have gotten a little smart. Somebody smarted 'em and told 'em get the number of the plane, time of day, and you can tell who's doing that. And, so when they did that there were some of us that had been doing that, had to leave the [U.S. military] service because the service didn't seem to want many of us who were not following the procedure as it was supposed to be. Speaker 1: So you were discharged for-- Speaker 2: No, not discharged. They call it washed. Speaker 1: So you were washed for leaving, for doing the cow thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. So it was interesting. So then, I was sent to Link Trainer school. Now Link Trainer is an instrument in which you are teaching pilots how to fly synthetic instrument to teach instrument flying, and they are rudiments of what to do when you're instrument flying, but I first was sent to an instrument flying school in Binghamton, New York, and then from there we went to the instrument flying school [at Biggs Army Airfield, El Paso County, Texas] down in Biggs, Texas, and they were very, very bragged. They said, "We fly when the birds can't fly. It's so foggy the birds won't out, we fly." Now, that didn't bother that they'd had several accidents in which the students did not recover from, from flying in the fog and landing and didn't do it, but we did. We went up when it was really foggy to learn how to instrument fly to do that from them. So then, from then on I taught instruments at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama], I did not go. Speaker 1: So what, from what years to what years were you at Tuskegee? Speaker 2: From 19--I got there January of 1942 'til February of 1946. I lacked about, I think it was two days, two or three days of not being there, of being there four years; three years, eleven months, twenty-eight days. I don't know the hours, but give me time, I could tell you the hours. That was the finest time of my life, just to get out of Alabama. Story_ID: 316682 Speaker 1: That was, that was--I had never seen human beings treated with such inhuman treatment as blacks were treated in Alabama. Speaker 2: What are some of the things you witnessed? Speaker 1: Well, I guess one of the worst things I witnessed was a young lady who was pregnant on a bus, and of course, when you get on the bus you can't buy your ticket and get on the bus. You can't go in the station and buy your ticket. You have a little window in the back and which they opened when they were ready and you tell them where you want to go, they sell you the ticket and then close the window. The window's about as big as--maybe big as that picture there--and then they close the window and you would then wait out there with it raining, snow, whatever it is. You wait out there until the bus came, then you stood around the bus until everybody who was white got on the bus. Now, after every white person was on the bus, they'd make sure that there were no others, then you were permitted to go on the bus and go all the way to the back of the bus. So, while we were on the back of bus and if there weren't any seats in the back where you sat back, then you stood in the aisle, but you stood in the aisle in the back, and a pregnant lady got on; young lady was pregnant, very pregnant, got on the bus this day. Now, I'm the shortest and the smallest of the group I was in. They were all bigger than me. My buddies, they were six feet and 190 [pounds]. We were on the bus and I'm in the back and this girl got on there and I heard her say, "I want to get off." And she said, "Where--." And the bus driver didn't say anything, so the next thing I know she was saying, "That's where I want to get off. I want to get off right there." And he said, "Aw, Nigger, I'll let you off when I'm ready." I said, Burbridge [ph.], my best friend, he was six feet two. I said, "Did you hear that, Burbridge, did you hear what they said to her? She's pregnant and he won't let her off." After a while, he slammed on the brakes and she flew like this, and he said, "Get off, God damn it, get off," and he pushed her. I said, "I'm gonna hit that man in his mouth. I'm gonna hit him in his mouth, so help me." Burbridge was saying, "Well, you're black here now, let's don't worry about it." I said, "I'm gonna get this man. You don't let somebody do that to a woman who's pregnant like that. That don't make sense." And, we were going to Montgomery, Alabama. Now, you know Montgomery is the cradle of the Confederacy. So, you got there, the bus went out and I made sure I was--I was gonna hit him. I didn't know what--I'm too crazy, too young and stupid to think of what's gonna happen to me, I'm just mad when a man does--so, everybody was getting off and I moved to the back and got off, got ready to get off. I come down to the end and I wanted to get right on that last step and I was gonna swing and hit him, but when I got to the last step, Burbridge pulls me down. He grabbed me. He was standing at the door and pulled me down. And when he pulled me, the man's foot went by me, went right by here, and as it went by I grabbed his foot and pulled him down and, well, there was a lot of things that happened after that point, and we had to get--it was hectic because then we realized what we had done, and the best thing was God was with us, and I say that because there wasn't anybody around that saw what we did to the man. We left there and ran down to the railroad station that was three blocks away, and hoped we could get on a train, because we were in trouble. We knew that. When we got down there, the MPs [military police] were from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama], that we knew and we told them what had happened. They said, "Man, we can't help you." Now, MPs, now the black MPs in Alabama could have guns but they could have no bullets in their guns. That was arranged by the governor of Alabama. Any black soldier in Alabama will not have any bullets in their guns, and that's great. So we had MPs down there, and they said we can't do anything to you guys. You guys don't have--we'll put you in the men's toilet area and when the train comes, we'll try to hold you over, but man, if they come and grab you, man, there ain't nothing we can do. And we knew we had had it, so we went into one of the most filthy places I've ever been in my life, the stench was, oh it was terrible. And we stood there. I said train should be here in five minutes. In five minutes the train came, and they said the door is gonna be open. We've called back to Tuskegee and told 'em about what happened, and they're gonna be waiting for you with an MP truck at Chehaw [Alabama]. That's where we got off at Tuskegee, and you all are not to do anything but get in that truck and go back. So, when the train came, they said, "We're not gonna let you get on while the train is stopped. You're gonna have to run and catch that train, so that we know nobody else will get on it." They said, "Well, we'll do it, we'll do it." So they had the doors open all the way back, and when the train started off they said, "Now." So then all four of us, we took off for there and all four of us got on the train and went back and we were scared when we got back there, but when we got back to Tuskegee, Captain Marshall [ph.], he was from Washington, D.C.; he was the captain of the MPs. He was in his little jeep and he said, "What the hell are you SOBs doing? What have you done?" I said, "We can tell you, sir." He said, "Wait 'til we get back to base." So we got back and we told him, they stripped us down of our clothes, burned our clothes, took our passes, and arranged that we had not been off the base and we were confined to the base for the next six months. Story_ID: 316683 Speaker 1: That was just, that was just--there are so many things like that, that I could tell you about Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] and the treatment of people, that it, for instance, my buddies and I were standing at one of the places where we can catch the bus in Tuskegee and we just, on the outside there, right across from it was a fire hall and it was about nine o'clock at night and the bell rang, the fire bell rang, so we said let's look and see what this fire, what this old fire truck will look like when it comes out here. And no fire truck come out. But we looked around and people were running and I said, "Look, these people are running. They must be running to the fire." So I said--all of us--it's amazing. That bell range and no fire truck. I bet it was up in the Negro section. They're gonna go up there and do it. So, when we got back to the base we were talking about it, and I said, "Don't you know what that bell is." "No, what is it?" When that bell rings at nine o'clock, it means all Negroes get off the street and go into your own neighborhood, and that's what was happening, yes. That's exactly what was happening. But, I made one big mistake. When my wife [Jane Watson Mitchell] was coming down, she had finished, she was gonna get a job at Tuskegee Institute hospital [John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama]-- Speaker 2: As a psychiatric nurse? Speaker 1: No, she'd be a real nurse then. She was a psychiatric nurse, but she was taking that to get in Tuskegee Institute hospital just to be down there and they needed nurses, so she was coming down and I wanted to meet her and the train she was gonna take would not stop at Opelika [Alabama]--I mean, at Chehaw [Alabama]. Chehaw was really the one. It was gonna stop at Opelika; that's thirty miles up from Chehaw. So, a friend of ours who was a physician that she knew in Baltimore [Maryland], and I knew, said, "You take my car and go over and pick her up." So, I did that, went over and picked her up and when I got there, like anybody would do, you want to know when the train is gonna be coming in. So, I parked the car and walked around and went in and went up to the desk and said, "Can you tell me when the train from Atlanta [Georgia] will be in?" And nobody paid me no mind. I said, "Excuse me, excuse me." All of a sudden, a hand came down on my shoulder. I mean, it knocked me straight down to the floor and a man grabbed me by both my shoulders and drug me to the doorway and said, "Nigger, if you ever come in here again, I'll kill you." I had gone in the station to ask about it. I was supposed to go around back to that little window and knock. I said, "Well, where do I go?" He said, "I don't know. Find someplace to go." I mean, that man looked like he was eight feet tall. He was a sheriff, had his guns on and hat, and I mean he drugged me with ease and threw me right out there on the dirt right outside the door, so I, you know, I must go around back. I went around back and I knocked on that place and they took a while and the man said, "What you want?" And I told him, and he said, "Oh, it'll be here in about fifteen minutes." And, I stayed back there 'til I heard the train coming. I didn't go out front. Story_ID: 316684 Speaker 1: Tuskegee [Alabama], I mean, those people that, the blacks in Tuskegee, I had nothing but admiration for 'em. I mean, we used to say I'd rather die here 'cause this is a foreign country, than to go over and fight some Germans that haven't done this to us. We were in Birmingham [Alabama] one time, the football team was gonna play there. Now, there's four of us who were pretty close. Speaker 2: Can you name those four? Because you've talked about them, the four of them. Speaker 1: I'd rather not, because I'm gonna tell you something that, I'm not so sure whether-- Speaker 2: Okay, that's fair enough. Speaker 1: Just let me--one was from Washington, one was from New York, and the other was from Leesburg, Va [Leesburg, Virginia]. I can say Burbridge [ph.], I can name 'em. You won't find 'em. There was Hackett [Ogden Hackett], Gilliard [ph.], and Burbridge and I. So, you don't know them anyhow, so that's fine, perhaps, oh yeah, Mitchell [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell]. Hackett was from Washington. Burbridge, Leesburg, Virginia, Gilliard was from New York. Mitchell was from Delaware. And we were walking down the street in Birmingham. Well, as we were walking down--I don't remember the name of the street--the black people were getting out and when they'd meet white, they'd get out in the gutter and walk around 'em and come around. I saw this. Burbridge said, "Mitchell, you see that?" I said, "Yeah. Let me tell 'ya. I'm gonna die, we're gonna die in this war [World War II, WWII] so I may as well die right here. I ain't moving for no son of a bitch. I'm gonna die here. That's it." So Burbridge said, "Well Mitchell, if you're gonna do it, I'm gonna do it." Gilliard says, "Hey, now look. You know, we're in the heart of Birmingham. Let's stop and think this thing over." I said, "Gilliard, you think it over. I've thought it over. I'm going down. Come on, Burbridge, let's go." So we got, Burbridge and I walked and the next thing you know, Gilliard was on one side, Hackett's on the other, he said, "Maybe the Almighty wants us to die together." So we decided to walk down and not move for no one. We walked one block and Hackett says, "Hell, we only did it one block. Let's take it for another block just to make sure they understand what we're doing." And we could have been shot and killed and nobody'd have known anything about it. We went the next block. We got the next block, and Gilliard says, "Oh, well. We ain't dead yet. Let's take another one." So, we walked down three blocks and came back three blocks, walking shoulder to shoulder, walked among white people, didn't say a thing. Just looked straight ahead and then kept right on walking and I said now, "See, we did that. They probably did it because we're soldiers. If it had been civilians, they would have taken him away. But here we are, down there." So, Alabama didn't have anything but bad memories with me. Story_ID: 316685 Speaker 1: On the base [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama], it was fine. But then, we had a major that worked in G-2. That's intelligence on the base, and if he found anything--for instance, if you had done something in town, in Tuskegee [Alabama], and he knew about it, you were on the base, he'd tell them who you are and when you were on your way into Tuskegee he would go on back and they'd get you. Speaker 2: They'd get you? Speaker 1: We almost had, come close to a riot in Tuskegee when I first got there. They had, we were there about three days and a man was named Kimball [Frederick von Kimball]. He was the commanding officer of the Tuskegee base, a very racist man, and one of the sergeants was in town. Now I have no idea, I don't remember exactly what the sergeant did, but there was some roughing up of him and it was heard by those of us back on the base, and the guys who came back come said, "Let's get a bunch and go into town and take it over. It just don't make sense. We're down here. We didn't come down here to be run over by some white cracker that's gonna do this," and we were not, I wasn't, but the rest were getting ready to do that and there was some interceding on it and Colonel Kimball eventually was released from down there. They got another colonel who was very much different, very different than Kimball, yeah. It wasn't--the people in Alabama were nice. I'm talking about black people were very nice, but-- Speaker 2: What years were we talking about? Speaker 1: I'm talking about from '42 [1942] to '46 [1946], that's where I'm talking, '42 [1942] to '46 [1946]. Speaker 2: So this is before people started to stand up and really fight collectively? Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yes. It was before then. Another experience--I, before I came out I had a hernia and they wanted me to get the hernia repaired before I left, so I went into the hospital and what amazed me was there was a white officer who was in a room right across from me, and I couldn't understand why he was in there. So, I said, I spoke to him one morning and said, "How are you? Where do you live?" He said, "My home is Opelika [Alabama]." I said, "Opelika?" He said, "Yeah." I said, "Well, how did you come here?" He said, "Well, I told before I discharged, I want to be discharged from a hospital that was right near me, and they told me this hospital was near me. I didn't know it was an all-black, all Negro hospital." I said, "And you live in--." Yeah, he went to school in Opelika. Went to--what's in Opelika, Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama] isn't it? It's in Opelika [sic.]. He went to Auburn and we got to talking and he said in his conversation that he had a gardener there in his home, at his house his father and mother had, and he liked him very much but he wouldn't sit down and discuss the time of day or problems with the gardener, because he kept talking. I said, "Well what do you think about here? How'd you come to these people here? You let these Negro doctors take care of you." He said, "I didn't have any other choice. I had to come here, 'cause if I didn't go here, I'd have to go on the West Coast." And I said, "Well, how did you find him?" He said, "I didn't find any different." He said, "But it's just that I couldn't go back to my home and sit down and talk with Negroes about what's happening in the world 'cause I don't think they know about it." I said, "You'd be surprised. They probably know more than you know, because they are kept up with what's happening, just like I am. Do you think I'm good enough to talk with you?" He said, "Well you're different." I said, "That's what makes me mad with people like you; because I can articulate things, I'm different. I am no different than any other Negro. Any Negro who reads a newspaper can talk to you." Story_ID: 316686 Speaker 1: --Just something I wanted to throw in about your, about the early part of your life and your early adulthood, when you think about those times, what sort of sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up in the areas in which you grew up, including having spent the time in Tuskegee [Alabama]? What sights, sounds, smells remind you of, of that period in your life? Speaker 2: I'm assuming you wanted to ask me about the most significant period of my life. The most significant time of my life is the time when I was sixteen years old and my friend and I were looking for work. I had, I was in high school [Howard High School; Howard High School of Technology, Wilmington, Delaware]. We were looking for work in Milford [Delaware]. He had a motorcycle. We got on the motorcycle and went out of Milford, down to what's known as Slaughter Neck [Delaware] at a factory, trying to get a job. When we got to the factory, there wasn't a job for us. We couldn't get any job, but I happened to look and there was a lady in a chicken yard, and she had a branch of a tree and she was sweeping it out like this, so I said to him, "Dick [ph.], look at this woman sweeping out that chicken yard over there." Why'd I say the chicken yard? Because there was fence around it, and there was the house that I recognized. And he said, "I'll be darned. I wonder why she's doing that." I said--I'm inquisitive--I said, "I'm gonna go over there and look and see." So, when I went over there to look and see, this lady was sweeping out that chicken house because she and her family were being housed in that chicken house. She was a migrant laborer and she was on a farm called John Isaacs [John S. Isaacs & Sons Farms]. Now, we should never use the word hate, but this is one man that I hated, and I know, maybe I'm not a Christian but I hated the name John Isaacs [John S. Isaacs]. He had a lot of farms around. All his farms were painted a particular color and how do I know this was John Isaacs? When I went there, I said, "Lady, do you have to sweep this out?" And she said in her little dialect, "Well, we's here and he told us that we have to stay here for a while, while 'til we got someplace else." I said, "Are you in this house?" She said, "Yes, sir. I am." And I went to look. It was a chicken house and she had used a limb from a tree to sweep it out, sweep out all that brush that was in there. They gonna stay in that house. Man, I'm telling you, I did not--I had never had, felt hatred in my heart as I did then. I mean, real hatred. I got on the bike with Dick and I said, "Dick, I'm gonna get that man. I'm gonna do something to get that man to help people like that." So, we went back to Milford and my mother [Helen Purnell Mitchell] was working then in the factory where you pick beans. White beans and green beans, and get 'em clean. My mother was working there and I went back to tell her and I told her what I had seen. I said, "Mother, I can't stand that. Something's gotta be done." So, when we went out on the street, I was telling some of the old men out there, men that I respected very well, I said--Mr. Bill Sharp [William H. Sharp]--"Mr. Bill, that low down sun of a bitch, if I ever see him, I'm gonna tell him about it and Lord knows if I ever get my chance, I'm going at him. I think he's a low thing," and somebody said, "Who is that?" And I said, "His name is John Isaacs." And I didn't say it easily nor quietly; I said it loud. Hey, a sixteen year old, I ain't got good sense anyhow. John Isaacs. Somebody said, "That's John Isaacs right there." I said, "Where, where?" There he is. I proceeded to walk right over there to him, and I said, "You are a low sun of a bitch, and I can't get you now, but one of these days I'm gonna get you. I'm gonna get you. You are a no good son of a bitch." He said, "Nobody calls me a son of a bitch." I said, "I called you a son of a bitch." By that time, Mr. Bill Sharp grabbed me and he pulled me back (laughter) and he pulled me back and said, "Litt [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell], you don't wanna get your mother in trouble. You don't wanna get in trouble. Don't do anything more. Come on. Let's go." And Dick said, "Litt, get on the bicycle. Let's get on the motorcycle. Let's get on the motorcycle and get out of here, 'cause you know you can't do this, you really can't." So, I got on the motorcycle and got out and my whole life was spent getting back to get John Isaacs, and when I got to be president of the state NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I asked 'em, "Let's go after migrant labor and get migrant labor." One of the things that really disappointed me, I wrote one of our-- Speaker 1: Just give me the year that we're talking about when-- Speaker 2: We're talking about the year, it had to be about 19- maybe 19- gosh, you know I can't put that. The years Dick and I were together it had to be, that was before I graduated from high school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I don't know, I can't get the year on that, but Dick had a bi- a motorcycle, so he had to have a license, so that makes us about seventeen, eighteen in that area. Story_ID: 316687 Speaker 1: But just to jump ahead for a little bit, in '61 [1961] when you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) President. Speaker 1: --president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you said we're going after migrant workers-- Speaker 2: I asked, I said it wasn't a thing that I had to do, I had to get people to work with me to do it. I couldn't do anything by myself, so I said, "Look. Migrant labor don't have no one to be their advocate. We need to look at migrant labor." So, I became president of the region. The region in NAACP runs from Maine, all those states including down to Delaware in that area. So there, we have New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Rhode Island, you get it. I got the region to adopt a resolution that we, in each states would look and make an accounting as to what migrant labor was in each state. So, in this State of Delaware we got it. When I got that, Pete du Pont [Pierre S. du Pont IV] was our congressman. What do I have? A letter. My wife [Jane Watson Mitchell] kept a book with our letters with it and I wrote to him and said, "I'd like you to introduce into [U.S.] Congress about migrant labor." He wrote me back a nice letter and said he wasn't able to do that, and I should get in contact with Senator Javits [Jacob K. Javits], in the [U.S.] Senate. Now he, to me, my opinion is he weaseled out of it because migrant laborers were farmers and he was going to depend in Delaware as a Republican on these farmers. Down that area was very heavily Republican, so he's not gonna step into it. And, we tried, we went after Senator Javits. I got letters to him. We went to Washington [D.C.] and we spoke about the migrant labor, and in during that time, I visited migrant labor camps and we took pictures of the migrant laborer in slides. We had 'em on TV, we talked on the radio, we got them here. We even had a family from Mexico, who was brought in to do it and got them taken out of here, and we closed the migrant labor camps, and you know, it's not, you don't want to say vindictive things about people, but John Isaacs' [John S. Isaacs] family, one of his, I don't know what he was, was coming out of Wilmington [Delaware] and decided to go into a restaurant and he was in the far lane and he crossed right across the highway in front of a great big truck that ran over and killed--the body was in there. John Isaacs wasn't in there, but he had died, and I guess God does have his way of doing things, but John Isaacs has his home on the highway there and he had problems too, but that was one man that I was glad to see close down. Story_ID: 316688 Speaker 1: So, going back in time after you left Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] and you went to Lincoln and taught instruments-- Speaker 2: No, not Lincoln. You said Lincoln. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Binghamton, New York. Is that what you mean? Went to the factory, Binghamton factory, that is the school at Binghamton, New York, then went to Biggs Field [Biggs Army Airfield, El Paso County, Texas], Texas and then back to Tuskegee, and taught the instrument fly right. Speaker 1: And all of that concluded in what year? Did you-- Speaker 2: That stopped in '46 [1946]. Speaker 1: So, yeah, that's what I'm trying to get to, so I couldn't find anything about you from '46 [1946] to '61 [1961]. What were you doing then-- Speaker 2: In '46 [1946], I came back and went to West Chester [West Chester State Teachers College; West Chester University of Pennsylvania, West Chester, Pennsylvania]. I went to college, spent my years in, my two years in West Chester, and while I was, when I, the day I graduated, I had some job offers. There was a job offer up in Coatesville [Pennsylvania], one in Peoria, Illinois; another one was in another area and when I graduated and my wife [Jane Watson Mitchell], my family was there, and my wife said, "I have a job for you." And I said, "You have a job for me?" (Laughter) She said, "Yes. We're gonna work at Governor Bacon Health Center [Delaware City, Delaware]." I said, "What in the world is Governor Bacon Health Center?" And she explained it was a new program, residential treatment center for youngsters who had been diagnosed as emotionally maladjusted; socially and emotionally maladjusted. And they would be brought there and would live there. They would come. They would be the kids who were disruptive in school, disruptive in homes and brought there, and for rehabilitation, living there. I said, "But I'm not in that. I'm in phys ed [physical education] and science." She said, "Yeah, but I think when I tell you what happened--." I said, "Well, what is it?" She said, "We get a house, you don't have to cut your lawn, and you don't have to have your garbage taken care of. We get heat, and all the utilities free." I said, "You're joking." She said, "Yeah." So, I said, "Well, I don't wanna go Coatesville I don't wanna go to Illinois. I'm willing to try it." She said, "They don't have any teachers and they want teachers to teach these kids." I said, "Well, let's find out about it." So, the man who did this was a Dr. Tarumianz [M.A. Tarumianz], so we went up and talked with Dr. Tarumianz. He said, "Yes, I need teachers" and we were the first black couple he had gotten, and we would have a house and light, heat, garbage disposal, and the grounds would be taken care of. So, we had everything. So, I said yes. Well, you know how things look good, but they can't look too good, because it can't be true and I knew something had to be off on it, so I said, "Let's go look and see at the home we're gonna have," so we looked and saw the homes and when I saw what the white had, I knew we weren't gonna be getting that. We were not in those brick homes that they had. They were little bungalows like this and it was one, two, three, four, five, about six rooms in it, and we went in the one that we were supposed to have, and just as we got in there, we heard the man say, "That's good enough for them. They're Negroes. He don't have to have it any better than that." Right away I was off the bat. I went right down there to see what he was talking about. They were sanding the floors and making the floors nice, and I said, "You mean, we don't need to have sanded floors because we're Negroes? And we don't have to have it as nice as white?" He said, "Well, we've got it fixed." I said, "If this isn't gonna be sanded right, I'm gonna go tell Dr. Taruminaz about this, because I don't have to have that for this." He said, "Well, look, I didn't mean it like that." I said, "Too bad." So, I told Dr. Tarumianz about it. I said, "Now, here we've started off on a negative way." He said, "I will see that that does not happen again, and I'm very sorry and we will have your area just as well as any place else." So, we lived there, over there for thirty-five years, and then during those thirty-five years, we had bought this area in here and we decided through our friend, Louis L. Redding, who said we should build here because of the canal in the back and how nice it would be. So we built here. Story_ID: 316689 Speaker 1: But we were over at Governor Bacon Health Center [Delaware City, Delaware], and I became a teacher, and in this state, while I was teaching, the law says, the law says that white students shall not be taught by Negroes, and Negro students shall not be taught by white teachers. But I was at Governor Bacon Health Center, had nothing but a class of white boys, males, and was teaching there for years when I couldn't teach no place else. And that was done because Dr. M.A. Tarumianz was a czar in this state in mental health and he held many, many of the very elite citizens of this state, he held their welfare in his hands. So, he could do almost anything. We have a swimming pool out here. He would have the planes that come over and spray and we could swim at night and not have any mosquitoes out there. He had it done. It looked like a park that was beautiful, grass cut, everything kept. He even had his special office built where, when he came in he went there, and you went there to see him. So Dr. Tarumianz was powerful in this state and we worked there; my wife [Jane Watson Mitchell] was a nurse there, and then she left Governor Bacon and went to the main hospital where she became director of nurses there. Story_ID: 316690 Speaker 1: So, when you were at--when you--so from, at '46 [sic. 1948] when you started to work here [Governor Bacon Health Center, Delaware City, Delaware] at the school as a teacher-- Speaker 2: Over here, yes. Speaker 1: Over here as a teacher. What was happening in the community and how were you involved in the community's politics? Speaker 2: Well, at that time, when I worked over here, I was not involved in the community politics then. We decided, my wife [Jane Watson Mitchell] and I, decided after we had been here a year, or maybe a little more, we wanted to get involved because we looked at a couple of things. Number one, my wife had--was the only nurse, and there were discriminatory ways that they were having with her, and we were fighting discrimination right where we were, but neither one of us would move out. We were, if you move out, you don't do anything, but people just move another one in. But if you stay there and make yourself a sore thumb, you're not only bothering people but you are making some headway somewhere; maybe not for everybody, but somewhere you're doing it. And we stayed to do that. And while we were there, we decided to become alive with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. I had been in the NAACP when I was young. I had to go to leadership classes with Dr. Benjamin Mays and Justice Thurgood Marshall, and Roy Wilkins. Speaker 1: Take me back for a moment if you will, to those early days of the NAACP, when you were a student and you were going to the leadership classes. Who introduced you to it, because I-- Speaker 2: My mother [Helen Purnell Mitchell]. Speaker 1: Your mother. Speaker 2: My mother decided I ought to be in NAACP. Now I don't know why, but she did, and they had a leadership training sessions and I would go to leadership training sessions. Now, the leadership training was done by Mr. Marshall. He was then the general counsel for the NAACP, by Mr. Wilkins, Roy Wilkins. He was the executive director the NAACP. Dr. Benjamin Mays would be one of the outstanding people who would come up there to teach us there. Dr. Mordecai Johnson from Howard University [Washington D.C.], Dr. James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] from Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], Jack Greenberg, who was also a counselor for us, Gloster Current [Gloster B. Current]; these men would teach us what we should do under different conditions. For instance, I have never forgotten how Mr. Wilkins came in when we were in there one day and gave us each abridged dictionary like this and he sat down and he said, "Now, we're gonna take a step further in how we have to react to people who are not kind to us, people who are prejudiced to us, people who make us feel that we're worthless. We have to make them worthless too, but we have to do it in a way in which it's acceptable. Now, I am a, I'm going to be a racist mayor from down in the heart of Georgia, and I don't like niggers, and I want you to get in front of me and insult me, but look up every word you want to say and see if you can find it in this dictionary. If you do, call me any word you want to." And we would have to sit there and he would, he would tell us where we, now that's not nice. Now you need to say it this way. You need to say it that way. You need to say it the other way. And I've been told that I have a very acid tongue. I'm told that, and I probably have. I had some good teachers. And everything that I am, and I tell this to people, not to be funny, I'm serious. I think I am the result of these men, because what they told us, how things would happen, what would happen, how we should react, what to do when you're sitting there with someone who you know is a racist, who you know doesn't like you, who knew you and was going to try to hurt you, how you have to react to that and how you must hide your basic feelings of hate and dislike and put on a smile at times when you don't wanna smile. These men, these men schooled us and I think, as far as I'm concerned, I'm told that they did a darned good job with one of 'em, anyhow, and everything that I am, I'm man because of those men and women who came along with it to help us to do that. We don't have that now. In fact, the kids now don't want to hear it. They know about it before you even get to it. Well, we knew it. We would say, look. These old men, they're talking about this stuff, they don't know what they're talking about. But they did. They knew what they were talking about and they taught us. Story_ID: 316691 Speaker 1: April '68 [1968], when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr] is killed. You're teaching here (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was here at Governor Bacon Health Center [Delaware City, Delaware], yeah, um-hm. And the riot started in Wilmington [Delaware]. It started burning in Wilmington. Well, at that time I was a member of the [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] branch in Wilmington. I was not an officer of the branch, and I was not an officer--wait a minute, I was state conference president. That was in '68 [1968], state conference president. And, I knew that the president, at that time, of the Wilmington branch, was having difficulties because trying to get a hold of him. But the thing that was very wonderful about that in Wilmington, there were so many ministers who were directly involved and got themselves involved in it. And all I had, all that was necessary for me to do was say what you want me to do and I was just one of the ones that was in there, but these ministers like Maurice Moyer, Dr. Reverend Brown [ph.], there were white ministers that were in it. The, I'm trying to think of the name of the organization that was very--National Council of Christian Jews [sic. National Conference of Christians and Jews; National Conference for Community and Justice]--was very directly involved in it. So we had a combining of many areas that came in to try to get that and put it together, and they did. They did very well. Our state conference was not involved in it directly, except each one of us was doing whatever he could to help out with it. We knew what was happening and that was a difficult time, because when they brought the National Guard into Wilmington, there were times when the National Guard seemed to be pushing, hoping they could make something happen, I thought. That's my opinion. I thought it was that way, and the governor [Charles L. Terry, Jr.] of the state at that time, and I-- Story_ID: 316692 Speaker 1: Who was the governor [of Delaware] at that time [1968]? Speaker 2: His name was Charles L. Terry [Charles L. Terry, Jr.], and Governor Terry and I had a real, maybe we'd say dislike for each other, a personal dislike. You see, before he was elected, he appealed to us and said, "When I'm elected, I'll look out for you." Well, at that time in 1964, when he was elected, there weren't any black hired in the state, on the highway, we needed jobs. The only thing they'd give us was custodial jobs. And so, we said, "Will you give us custodial jobs?" Well, when he got into office after two or three months, we didn't see any problem. So, we asked for a meeting and we got the ministers from down state, ministers from throughout the state. We came and met with Governor Terry in his office, and I was sitting next to his administrative assistant. I think his name was Sandstrom [ph.], and Governor Terry came out with, after we sat there and talked, he said, "I have compassion for you and I understand, but I gave my compassion and see what we can do." And I said, "We don't want your damned compassion. We want jobs. That's what we came down here for. We came down here because you promised us jobs. The hell with your damned compassion." Man, everything in there jumped. All these ministers (laughter) and Sandstrom sitting next to me said, "Damn, that's the governor." I said, "Hell with the governor. We came in here for jobs." And he had, of course, his state police and everybody looking at me. I said, "You haven't given us anything." And we didn't get anything. So, when he went out, I said, "If I'm in a, if I'm with everybody else in line, you don't have to shake my hand." I'll make him shake my hand as I go out, and let him know that I'll be looking right in his face and tell him, "You certainly disappointed us." So, the last one out I stopped and I said, "Governor, if you don't wanna shake my hand that's fine. But you disappointed us, and we won't forget it." So, he put his hand out and I shook his hand, and he knew what I meant. Story_ID: 316693 Speaker 1: So, we went, we had an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] convention in California. Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: This was, I think it was 1965, I think. Yeah, '64 [1964], he got out in '68 [1968], yeah, '64 [1964], so I think it was '65 [1965]. We had the NAACP convention in Los Angeles [California]. At the same time, the governor's conference was in Los Angeles. Roy Wilkins said we're gonna have a luncheon and since they have the governors here, I want each state conference present to invite his governor over to have lunch with him. Man, that was made to fit. That was my meat. I said, "Man, I got this. I'm gonna embarrass this rascal. I'm gonna get him." Now, a reporter was there from the newspaper [The News Journal] in Wilmington [Delaware] named, Bill Frank [William P. Frank], and Bill Frank and I knew each other very well and I called Bill, because he was right at the convention reporting on it. I told him what's gonna happen. He said you think the governor [Governor Charles L. Terry, Jr.] is coming? I said, "No, he ain't coming, and I'm gonna call him all kinds of things because he's not coming." He said, "Oh, let's suppose he comes." I said, "If he comes, I'll use it the other way." See that? He's turned around and he's with us. I said that man don't want me. He does not want me on any conditions, but if he doesn't come, I'm gonna lay it to him. So, I got a telegram. "Bill," cause I said, "Bill, you come up in our room." My room, my wife [Jane Watson Mitchell] was there and I called a telegram in to him at his hotel. I said don't worry. This man wouldn't dare to come. He's not that kind. So, about, late that afternoon I get the telegram back. Sandstrom [ph.], his administrative assistant, sent it and it said the governor regrets, but due to a previous engagement he will not be able to come. I said, "See that Bill, I told you. Now let me take on." And I took on. I said this is what we get for having a racist governor. He hasn't even got the courage to represent the people from the state that he comes from at a conference in which all the governors would be there. I'll tell you who came to that luncheon. He was the vice president from Minnesota--who was the vice president under President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]? Oh, anyhow-- Speaker 2: Was it Johnson, Lyndon [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]? No. Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Unh-uh. Speaker 2: Under Kennedy? Wasn't it Lyndon Johnson? Speaker 1: The vice president at '65 [1965] was, oh, come on, he was from Minnesota. Speaker 2: Humphrey? Speaker 1: Humphrey. Humphrey. Herbert Humphrey [sic.]. Hubert Humphrey. He was the vice president, and Humphrey came and while I was there, they were having each one do--and the newspaper picked up--I said, "The governor from Delaware could not come. His racism would not let him attend and because of racism he is now in his hotel room, but he will tell you all he had another appointment, but that isn't true. He hasn't got the courage to stand up with me and I'm black." And man, that went into the newspaper. His lieutenant governor told me, he said, "Litt [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell], out there I told him, I said, 'Governor, go to that man's dinner. Go to that luncheon. You've got a chance to take advantage of it. Go there and say, you see, I'm not as bad as Litt Mitchell is portraying me to be. I'm here, and put your arm around him and go there.' He said, no, he wouldn't dare do a thing like that." I said, you have to know your enemy in order to fight 'em. And I knew he wouldn't come. I bet on it, and we did not like each other, not one bit, not one bit; in fact, I was trying to go to California when the government brought out that teachers who had been displaced from integration schools, black teachers, they had certain schools for 'em to go to and become expertise in areas. And I thought I could get in any one of the schools in California in communications so I applied. Well, there some people found out I applied and I understand that as far as the governor said, "Tell me what I could do to get the son of a bitch out of the state," (laughter) so (unclear), at least that's what I understand, but Governor Terry and I didn't have any love for each other. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 316694 Speaker 1: Continuing on tape (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were three things my wife [Jane Watson Mitchell] used to say don't ask me about: don't ask me about kids, don't ask me about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and don't ask me about bull fighting. You get me on those three things and I'm liable to go for years (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, why don't we go to the NAACP, you having been, I'll say a lifetime member. Tell me some of the things that you fought to change that perhaps I wouldn't know about because they were not big stories, but they were the small things that you were fighting to change behind the scenes. Speaker 2: First, I always have to say this. I wish it weren't possible for me to put it, and it isn't possible for me to put it in--I did nothing. It was groups of people who thought that what my suggestions were, were good. It was groups of people who stood for me and let me stand up in the front, and they stood with me, not behind me. Just like I talk about my wife. She was never behind me. She was always at my side. Never, and I considered her my partner, but there are so many things that youth of today do not understand. For instance, the youth of today can go anywhere and eat. They want a hot dog? Yeah, there's a hot dog stand over there. This could not happen during my period and just think, up until 1964, that's not too far back, that wasn't possible to do. If you were in Delaware and you were black, you had no place to sleep or to eat. That was the law. If you were on a bus and you got ready and you wanted to eat, you could go into the restaurant, but you'd go into the restaurant and go all the way into the back and there was maybe a little corner in which you would stand until somebody came to you and said, "What do you want?" You would say, "I want a hot dog and a root beer," then you walked out and ate and drank it. If you wanted a place to sleep, you sleep in your car or you wouldn't sleep at all. The law was that way. These are things that our youngsters now don't understand. The fact about getting on a bus and being made to sit on the back of the bus. That wasn't just happening down in Montgomery, Alabama. That was happening all around the area. People think Montgomery, Alabama is the only place where you had to sit in the back of the bus. No, it isn't. You sat in the back of the bus in Delaware, too, if the man wanted you to sit there. It didn't say the law says you have to, but he would seat you there and then they had other wheels, where you sat over the wheels of the bus. They're uncomfortable, sit there. Nobody'd sit there. That's where they would sit Negroes, black people. Over the edge of the bus. All right, for instance, let's look at very simple things. Diamond Telephone Company [Diamond State Telephone Company; Verizon Delaware, Wilmington, Delaware], Bell Telephone Company, they didn't hire black. We picketed them. We got in front of their buildings. We did everything to get just the first job as janitors; not telephone operators, janitors. Each one of the steps had to go a little further, because after janitor, then we want telephone operators, or the linemen up on the pole. The first lineman that went up on the pole is still alive. That's in Delaware. He was a young men that went up on that pole first and got in that big money. They make good money up there. We had to picket. We had to call 'em nasty names. Freedom, we had to make people understand that freedom is not free. People don't understand that. People that you can say freedom and say, "Will you please let me--," you don't get a darned thing by saying will you please let me. Let you, nothing. You let me do it or I'm gonna kick your teeth in. Now, you're getting ready to get the man to do something and the one that makes him do something is when he's gonna lose his money. Now you can mess with him all you want, but the man wants his money and if we can take his money from him, we can get it. Story_ID: 316695 Speaker 1: The hospitals in this state [Delaware] were segregated. Our NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] got a letter from the [U.S.] Department of Health, Education and Welfare [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] saying, "Tell us about the hospitals in your state and let us know how their treatment for patients are." They were getting federal funds. Well, I had an expert (unclear) with me. My wife [Jane Watson Mitchell], she was director of nurses at State Hospital [Delaware State Hospital, Wilmington, Delaware], so I didn't have to ask anybody. If I go in there, I'm not an expert. I don't know. I can see where patients are, but somebody else--so I have to say, "Is it all right if my wife goes." They said, "Take anybody you wish. Just give us the information. Well, we started at the main places, Wilmington Hospital [Wilmington, Delaware]. The patients in all hospitals in the state were seated black patients in the cellar where the coal is, where they have all the equipment that's going on. The patients were in the cellar. If you had the mumps, you were in the cellar. If you had given birth to a child, you were in the cellar. There was no segregation according to what your ailment was. You were there if you were black. You were just in there. If there wasn't any room for you, you were in the hallway. For instance, down at the Milford Hospital [Bayhealth Milford Memorial Hospital, Milford, Delaware], my home, when we went there, the patients down in the cellar, one per room was right next to where the coal bin was. They used the coal for the furnace and when that patient would sit up in bed, if he sat up suddenly he'd hit his head on the pipes going above him. This is what they were like. Or a patient would be out in the hallway right there with plenty of room upstairs, so when we went down there, the place that really, really changed, we went to Beebe hospital [Beebe Medical Center] down in Lewes, Delaware. I had this letter from the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. I always liked to have an ace in the hole. I liked you to run yourself up on it and you don't know what I got, and then you tell me no, then I'll pull my ace out, or I don't tell 'em--come here for a second--I said, "I would like to look and see how your patients, Negro patients, are treated here and I'd like to see how, what kind of treatment they're getting." The director of nurses told me, "No, we can't do anything like that." I said, "Well, where is the director of the hospital, because I would like to know exactly--you get federal funds and I want to know how patients are," so my wife takes over from there, "Jane Mitchell, director of nurses at Delaware State Hospital, and we're here to look at this." "Well, I can't do that." "Oh," I said, "Are you sure you can't just let me go see? Oh," I said, "Well, read this, then, and see what you think about that." They'd read that letter where it said we want to know how our federal funds are being spent and you will give us the information as to whether we will keep the score. She said, "Oh, my goodness, I better get Dr. Beebe [ph.]." I said, "It's all right with me." So, Dr. Beebe was also a member of the board of trustees of one of the banks. Said, "He's in a bank meeting." I said, "Get him out, get him out, or else I'm gonna have a long thing for you." They got him out and he comes down and she said, "This is Mr. [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell] and Mrs. Mitchell, and they want to visit our hospital." He said, "Well, you know they can't do it." She said, "Dr. Beebe, you better read this first." He read it and he said, "Take 'em through." So we looked and it was the same there. They were down in the cellar, pipes with their heads where they come up and sit up, when they sat up to eat the meal, they did like this to keep from hitting their head on the pipe. They had to go back down like that. So, my statement was, "Within one month, we want the (unclear) integrated." He said, "Oh, I don't know whether we can do that." We went back in one month; they were integrated, every hospital in the state. Federal funds, that's what it does. Federal funds. Story_ID: 316696 Speaker 1: So those are some of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] moments, but when you look back over your life, what are--what moments are you most proud of, what stands out for you as being-- Speaker 2: Well, I would say there are two moments that really, I think of 'em and it's most, I'd say appealing to me. When I went to a migrant labor camp on Baker Farm [Middletown, Delaware] in Delaware here, I was knocking on doors and looking at the terrible conditions and one door I knocked on and the lady opened the door and her face was swollen right here, and I said, "Oh, my goodness. What's the matter?" When she talked, she had an abscess tooth. I said, "Oh, my goodness, you gotta go to the doctor." And she said with her slang, she wasn't talking unless I'm talking. She had a southern drawl and she said, "The boss won't let me go." And I said, "What boss?" She said, "The crew boss." Now, the crew boss is the man who brings them up from the South in their bus and controls. He even pays them because the farmer pays him, then he pays them, which means he can keep some of that money. I said, "Well, why can't you go?" He said, "He wants me to work in the field and right now, I got to go back." I said, "No you haven't either. You're going to a dentist." She said, "I can't pay to go to no dentist." I said, "You won't have to pay. I'll take you to a dentist." She said, "But sir, I don't know how I'm gonna do this." I said, "Look, I don't know where he is, but he's got no business being here, and if he is here that's too bad." Now you see? I don't even consider the fact that I'm here by myself, little old short rascal, and got nothing. I don't have no pistol or nothing else, and talking. I said, "Come on. You're gonna get in the car and we're gonna go take you to a dentist." Well, my brother-in-law is a dentist, so I got her in the car, drove into Wilmington [Delaware], and walked into Woody [Woodrow Wilson], my brother-in-law, and I said, "Woody, look. You gotta take her right now. Look at her go." He looked down and he said, "I sure will." He took her without anything else. He knows when I come in there, it's really something serious. So, he took her in, administered to her, and got back, took care of it, and said, "Now, when you feel bad about this, you tell Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell], don't tell the cruel boss, 'cause I'm gonna ask him to come back and see you in two days, and if you don't feel good, he'll bring you back to me. If you feel good, fine." So, when I got in the car and I took her back down, she said, "I'm still hurting and feel good?" I said, "Well, you're gonna be sleepy because he gave you an anesthesia." She said, "What is that?" I said, "It kind of puts you to sleep." She said, "All right." So, when I got out of the car, she says, "Sir, God must have sent you because nobody has treated me this nice in my life." Put her arm around me and kissed me here. That is something I will always remember, and sometimes when I tell it I get a little teary-eyed, because I kept thinking suppose that was my mother [Helen Purnell Mitchell], or suppose it was somebody's sister or something. And I never did get to see the crew boss. I wanted to see him, but I didn't get to see him. Story_ID: 316697 Speaker 1: And the other was at that same farm, I got a call from Rochester, New York, that a young boy, fourteen years old, was being held at that farm against his will, made to work. I said, "That can't be possible. It can't be possible." I was living at Governor Bacon Health Center [Delaware City, Delaware], and I got in my car, took off, you know, like I am always doing, going off and bad as a rascal, went down to the farm and I asked for this particular boy and they said, "He's in the field working." I said, "Well, where is the field that he's working in?" They showed me the field and I went out there to him and I said, "Your mother and father want you to come home." He said, "I can't come home. He won't let me go." I said, "Who won't let you go?" He said, "There he is, over there. That man." I said, "Okay. How about walking with me? Will you walk with me?" He said, "I think I better stay here and pick---." I said, "If you walk with me he won't, nothing's gonna hurt you." Dumb Mitchell [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell], (laughter) and dumb fool. So, I walked over and I said, "This boy's being kept against his will. He's got to go." The man pulled out a gun and put it in my face and said, "You MF. You take him from here and I'm gonna blow your brains out." I said, "Okay." Then I realized what a fool I was. I had no business going there by myself. I had no business doing it. What the hell do I think I am, anyhow?" So, I come out of there and when I'm coming out, I said, "Well, I know people. I will get a policeman. We'll go back." So, I went to my friend's house named Ralph Peters [ph.], and got him. I told him what was happening and he said, "Let's get a policeman." I went to the state police, got a trooper, went back there with a trooper's car and me, and got that boy out of there and we brought him here. Bill Frank [William P. Frank] wrote about it. Got Bill and I called Bill Frank, my friend at the newspaper [The News Journal], and said come on down. He came down with his car, flying, and went down there with us, took pictures of the boy, and put it in the paper so to let people know what had happened. Those are the two things that are utmost in my mind. I took that kid out of Baker Farm [Middletown, Delaware], and that lady who said that was the best thing that ever happened to her. That's all you live for is to make sure that you make somebody else happy and you increase their health and success. Story_ID: 316698 Speaker 1: What was the issue you had with du Pont and Bill Frank [William P. Frank]? I can't remember exactly what it was, but you had some issues with du Pont? Speaker 2: I didn't have any issue with Bill Frank-- Speaker 1: No, not with Bill Frank, but would du Pont and Bill Frank help you write about it or something? Speaker 2: All right, you might be talking about the time when a du Pont in the legislature [Delaware General Assembly] was bringing up a bill to, it was something about-- Speaker 1: Let me check my notes, but that's exactly what I'm talking about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it was something about welfare. It was a du Pont in the legislature, and, let's see, what du Pont was that? I can't remember the du Pont it was but I know the other--one was Donald Isaacs [J. Donald Isaacs], and the other, he's a farmer, and the other was James Robinson [ph.] from Milford [Delaware]. Now, both of those two were racist rascals. They were farmers and they were getting subsidies, and they wanted to do something to prevent welfare recipients from getting something. I don't remember the complete total, but du Pont, whoever that du Pont was at that time. So, I got in contact with my friend, Clarence Mitchell [Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr.], who was the Washington [D.C.] contact for NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. They called him the 102nd senator [sic. 101st senator], because he was up on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] so much, and I told him, "Look. I have these three farmers who want to put a bill in the house legislature here. Please find out for me if you can, if you're getting any subsidies from the government by getting paid and not putting anything in the field." I said, "Of all things, if you can, do it quietly. Don't let anybody know," and I told him why. I said, "I want to break in on these rascals right," and he said, "I'll do my best." Well, I did that in the morning and that afternoon he called me and he said, "Are you on your private phone?" I said, "Yes." He said, "I got it for you. Write this down." He told me how much each one of them was getting in subsidies. Well, with that, Norman Rottman [ph.] was an internist working at The News Journal and another black, [HistoryMaker] Jay Harris, was there and I contacted them. They were the writers. They were there. I contacted Norman and contacted Jay and told them what it was. They said, "Litt [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell], are you sure you want to put this in?" I said, "Look, my name is Litt Mitchell, I don't run from nobody. You put this in. I can back it up." They said, "Litt, this is hot. I'm telling you, this is really gonna--," but I said, "Yes, they're all Republicans. Put it in." They called me an hour later and said, "Litt, I'm sorry but the newspapers won't let us put it in." The newspaper was owned at that time by Christiana Securities [Christiana Securities Company]. That was the du Ponts owning that. That was a du Pont that was involved in it with Donald Isaacs and James Robinson, and they were getting subsidies on that and when that came out, they stopped that bill, but they wouldn't let us publish that in the newspaper. That was put off. But that goes to show you how, if you do your homework and make sure that you know what you're doing, you can be successful. Fighting discrimination is nothing more than another war. It's a war in which there is attrition. Story_ID: 316699 Speaker 1: What did we lose in having integrated? Most people know that when I was in that black school, I was taught black history. I knew 'Lift Every Voice and Sing' when I was in the third grade. Well, down in the South they teach the kid 'Dixie,' don't they? And a kid can teach 'Dixie' by the time he can talk, so what's wrong with black kids learning to sing 'Lift Every Voice and Sing'? I do not consider that my black national anthem. Unh-uh. My national anthem is the same national anthem that this country has, and that has to be understood. I don't stand up when I sing 'Lift Every Voice and Sing' because it's my national anthem. That is the fight song that brought us together so that we would know what we have to do in order to have equal opportunity with everyone else, so that when they play 'The Star Spangled Banner,' that's my national anthem and no other so that I will die for it, I have done it, my parents [Helen Purnell Mitchell and Littleton Van Mitchell] have, and so has everything else. So, we have to have an attrition when we do it, but it's worthwhile when you get to the end of the tunnel. It's worthwhile. I didn't think I would live to see judges in the federal courts here. We have a judge in the federal court, Judge Gregory Sleet [HistoryMaker Gregory Sleet]. I didn't think that the man who did a lot to help that, Louis L. Redding, died on the same day that Judge Sleet was sworn in to office as a federal judge, and to me that was a little significant. Here we have the man who was the first black attorney in the State of Delaware and who made discrimination in our public schools become eliminated and he's dying when the first federal judge is going in. But, we have to pay for freedom, and there are some people who are not free to pay for it. I am. If it means I lose, I just have to lose, but I want people coming from behind me, not to have the fight that I had to have. Story_ID: 316700 Speaker 1: So, what are you hopes today for the black community, Negro community, African American community? Which do you like to refer to it as? Speaker 2: I don't care; just like I tell people, you can call me Afro American, Negro, black, colored. Which one makes me above everything else? Which one of those? Now whichever one you think makes me equal to you or above, call me that. That's all. A doctor from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] wrote an article about Afro American, and I don't recall it all, but he said the word Negro is not where they tell you that it's from. And I don't remember all of it, but he wrote a very excellent article on that. I don't mind people calling me colored. I don't mind people calling me a Negro. I don't mind people calling me black. I object to them when they say you're half white. I feel like saying to 'em, I think I have a little more Indian [Native American] in me than I do have white. (Laughter) But that can't be done and the only ones who know about the Indian is the people in the family. We don't talk about it and we don't do it because if I did do it, it would look like to me that I'm trying to be something that I'm not, and I want to be [HistoryMaker] Littleton Mitchell, and I want you to accept me for being Littleton Mitchell. If you don't like me the way I am, that's fine, but just respect me for what I am. Story_ID: 316701 Speaker 1: So, Mr. Mitchell [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell], what are your hopes for the black community as we move forward? Speaker 2: I wish, I wish I could believe that our young blacks would understand that what they have now did not come because they were smart, did not come because they passed a test, did not come because they did better than anyone else. It came because there were others ahead of them who caught hell, so that a door could be open for them to come through. But there are too many of them who believe they've made it on their own. They haven't. Believe me, but we don't teach our youngsters the truth. That's what I admire about the Jewish people. They teach those youngsters the history of their culture. We don't do that. Okay, you can the schools don't do it. There's nothing to stop you from doing it at home. I know that youngster that came in that door had to learn a lot of things in the house or else he didn't get his television or he didn't go to the movies or he didn't get some of the other things. We have to do it and we are dependent upon our parents to do that, but it looks like some times that we take two steps forward and go a step-and-a-half backwards, and I hope I'm wrong. I want to see our young people protrude. The one place where I do 'em making headway is in the [U.S.] Armed Forces. I do see headway there and I can say that I believe that the Armed Forces are ahead of our communities in every way; I really believe it. And until somebody shows me better, I can't turn away from that. Story_ID: 316702 Speaker 1: So, what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Whatever anybody wants. If they just say that Litt Mitchell [HistoryMaker Littleton Mitchell] was a cog in the wheel and did his best, that's all. Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: Being Litt Mitchell. That the people who know me say, "Litt Mitchell--," when I go to Milford [Delaware] and the people say to me, "Litt Mitchell, you haven't changed one bit"--that's me. That's me and I feel so good about it I don't want to be anything different. I saw what had to happen. I didn't like it and the only way when you don't like something is to get involved and to try to make it better; not for yourself, but for those who are gonna come after you, and that's what I was, that's what I thought about. I really did, I did. But I also thought about eliminating the kind of treatment that people receive. Story_ID: 316703 Speaker 1: Have you done that? Have you left this, have you made this world a better place than it was when you-- Speaker 2: I don't know. That's up to other people to say. We all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, do you, how do you feel about what you've done? Speaker 2: When I look at some of the things that have happened there, I think we've made at least a mark in it, but we didn't make a dig into it the way I wish it could have been done, and I can't live long enough for that. I wish I could. I wish I could live long enough to see the end of Black History Month. It was a black history day, black history week, now Black History Month. I'd like to see that done away and the history books show what we've done all the way down the line. That's what I wish for, but not--it won't happen during my time. During my time, whatever I see now, I'm grateful and thankful for. But, there are some things you look and see and see migrant labor living in a habitable place, I feel good about it. I know that sleeping and eating in Delaware, we did quite a bit for that, so I do feel good. Story_ID: 316704 Speaker 1: So, in your--very last question, when you look back and you think about all the history you shared with me today, why do you think it's important to share this history that you shared with us today? Speaker 2: I'm sorry. I didn't get the last part. Speaker 1: Why do you think it's important--the history you shared with us to be shared? Speaker 2: Why do I think it's important? Because our youth will never know that the things that they've gotten did not come by them. That it was those who came before them that made it possible for them to be where they are today. And they should be taught that so that they will be appreciative of it and remember they have the same responsibility that we had; to get ready and make it better for those that are coming after them. I'm afraid too many of them are saying, "Well, this is it, we don't have to worry about anything. We'll sit back and take it easy." But when those corporations cut back on 'em, Lord of Mercy, they think about that, then they'll know what's happening. And I want them to be to the point when they'd say, "Oh God, I've got to take out and fight the battle. The battle's not over." The battle's not over. We haven't gotten to the point where we are not second class citizens yet. If you don't think so, think about Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]. I don't have to go into an explanation of that, but I think everybody who knows Colin Powell would know what I'm talking about when I say that, but he was, he's an outstanding black citizen. You hadn't heard about him recently and, of course, you know why. Because he had to front for the president [President George Walker Bush] and look what happened. So, we've got to take every little area that we find inequality and make it that responsibility ours. It's too many people saying, "One person can't do it." Oh yes, one person can. If the person thinks, plans, and know your enemy; what that enemy can do and what he can't do. That's it...