 Story_ID: 18636 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson. I'm the interviewer. Scott Stearns is the videographer and Samuel Adams is the observer. And I'd like to have you start off by stating your name and spelling it for us and giving us your date of birth. Speaker 2: All right. I am Dr. Audrey Forbes Manley and I am--was born in, on March 25th, 1934. Speaker 1: And your middle name? Speaker 2: Elaine, Audrey Elaine Forbes Manley. (Laughs) Speaker 1: And I'd like to have you give today's date and the location that we're at. Speaker 2: All right. Today is March 14th and we're at Spelman College in Atlanta, Georgia. And we're in Rockefeller Hall which is the administration building, the office of the president. Speaker 1: Can you give the address of the building? Speaker 2: It's 100--well the campus has a campus address which is 350 Spelman Lane Southwest, Atlanta, Georgia 30314. Speaker 1: And can you give your profession? Speaker 2: I am a physician by training, public health professional and now president of Spelman College. Story_ID: 18637 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Wow. (Laughs) I'm afraid I'm a real Southern girl. I love banana pudding. Speaker 1: That's good. I'd like to know what your favorite color is? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Well the Caribbean in general but Jamaica specifically. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "To whom much is given, much is required," which is a Biblical saying. Story_ID: 18638 Speaker 1: And I'd like you to talk about your, your parents. I know you were born in Jackson, Mississippi but I'd like you to talk about--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: --your mother Ora Lee? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: And can you tell us about her and you know what she, what you know about her growing up? Speaker 2: Well my mother was Ora Lee Buckhalter, born in Rankin County, Mississippi. She was the oldest of two children and went to--the family moved from Rankin County which was a rural county then into Jackson, Mississippi and she went to high school at Holy Ghost High School. I was born early, she was a teenage mother and I think my grandmother [Minnie Davis Buckhalter] certainly had a great influence of me during the early years of my life. My mother became ill when I was twelve and would spend the major part of her adult life in and out of a mental hospital so I became an adult let's say very early because I really did take care of my mother for the rest of her life. Speaker 1: And your father can you talk about him? Speaker 2: Yes. My father is Jesse Lee Forbes. He was from the rural county of Hinds County [Mississippi] which is the next neighboring county to Rankin [County, Mississippi]. He was orphaned early and was raised by a grand-aunt but they moved into Jackson and he went to Lanier High School. So there was a typical story. In most Southern towns I think at that time there was a Catholic high school and a public high school but that's where they met, during high school. He was very popular. He was a football player. I understand he was very good, athletic, also a performer and was active in the theater. Speaker 1: And your siblings, can you give me their names and can you spell them? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, I have two--well my father has six children. I have two siblings that were close to me. The three of us were raised together, Yvonne James and Barbara Higgins, those are their married names. We're sort of stair steps, we're about a year apart each one of us. My middle sister [Yvonne James] has passed and my younger sister [LaVyonne Harris] is still living in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Actually, cause your father is still living. Speaker 2: Yes, he is. Speaker 1: All three--I was--everybody's--your sister, your father and your brother? Speaker 2: I have a brother yes. I have a half brother who's a year older than I am, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, also you had a stepmother, is that--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And when did she come into the picture? Speaker 2: Well my father had several wives I should say. But the one that I know best, Helen Valentine Forbes was really my stepmother and came in the picture when I was an adolescent, about fourteen years of age. Speaker 1: Now you, so you were really raised by your grandmother, is what it sounds like? Speaker 2: Yes, that's true. My paternal--my maternal grandmother [Minnie Davis Buckhalter] passed when I was about four years old and I was raised primarily by my paternal grandparents [Buck Forbes and Hattie Forbes] in rural Mississippi. Speaker 1: Now can you--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And my parents went to Chicago during the war period when many rural blacks as you know went North to Chicago primarily or Detroit [Michigan] or St. Louis [Missouri] in search of employment. And both of my parents worked in the garment industry in Chicago, my father making uniforms for servicemen and my mother also in the garment industry. Story_ID: 18639 Speaker 1: Tell me some of your earliest memories of growing up? So you're the oldest, you're the oldest--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I'm the oldest, yes. Speaker 1: So but I'd like to know some of your earliest or your, the earliest memory that you have. Speaker 2: I have some very poignant early memories. Some of them are around school. I remember the first day going to school as a kindergartener in Jackson, Mississippi. And I remember my kindergarten period. I later recalled some earlier experiences and one night in, in particular has become very pivotal to me later in life and that was the night my maternal grandmother [Minnie Davis Buckhalter] passed. I remember the ambulance coming and her having to be taken out of the home. She had a stroke and I was about three and a half years old. And that night I told her that when I grew up I was going to be a doctor so that I could take care of people when they got sick like her. And of course we'd always remember those early experiences but later my uncle would tell me the story and I would recall that night in particular. That's probably the earliest vivid memory that I, that I have. Speaker 1: What do you think you knew about being a doctor and taking care of someone--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I have no idea. I really, really don't. I--there's been no, been no physicians in my family. At that point there was no way for me to even think about what that meant but I knew that she was sick and I saw the, the attendants so probably they were in white coats and I remember them coming to--and they were probably ambulance attendants but I thought that they were physicians, thought they were doctors. Speaker 1: And how--any other memories of those, you know, those early years? Speaker 2: Early years? Speaker 1: Mm-hm. Speaker 2: Oh yes. I have vivid memories of the early years you know, playing with my sisters, going to school, moving from Jackson [Mississippi] when I was seven to Tougaloo [Mississippi]. Now Tougaloo was a rural community around Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] and we lived in the community around Tougaloo and all of that was in preparation for my parents [Jesse Lee Forbes and Ora Lee Buckhalter] to go to Chicago [Illinois]. So we were moved to Tougaloo to be with my paternal grandparents [Buck Forbes and Hattie Forbes] and they went off to Chicago in search of employment. But I remember, I have good memories of Tougaloo growing up in the country. My grandmother had a truck farm and this was during the war years if you'll remember. And we grew everything. We--you didn't go to the store in those days for anything unless you really had to. And I remember being very active in things that--chores on the farm from cows to chickens to the garden, but I was fortunate that we were near the college [Tougaloo College] and I do mean near. The college was in walking distance. And so much of the activity in Tougaloo took place on the campus. As a matter of fact there was a, a, a favorite expression, "We're going to go up on the campus." So I remember Marian Anderson coming to sing when I was fifth grade and I remember a concert by Roland Hayes who was in black tie and what an impression that made on me. I also remember when Ralph Bunche came to speak at Tougaloo and the Ku Klux Klan burned a cross at the college gate the night before he spoke. But it was a rich experience. You know I took piano lessons, there were college faculty and there were students and basketball games and football games and so it was a rich, very rich experience that I had as a very young child. I saw my first academic processional as a third grader [at Daniel Hand School at Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] because that was the point at which we moved to Tougaloo and I saw my first academic processionals. Tougaloo had a lovely chapel. It was Wood--the Woodworth Chapel had a beautiful pipe organ and a wonderful organist who--and I remember you know 'Pomp and Circumstance'. If you can imagine that for a third, third grader with the cap and gowns and hoods and academic regalia. It was very impressive. It apparently, obviously made, had a real impact on me and college was just something that was a given. I never thought that I would not go on to college. Of course at that point I assumed it would be Tougaloo because it was in the community and it was there. Speaker 1: So your grandparents had a large part to play in making this you know available to you? Do you think--did they--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Not really. My father [Jesse Lee Forbes] was probably more influential in that respect. Knowing that he and my mother [Ora Lee Buckhalter] were going to Chicago to work, he moved the family to Tougaloo partly to be near the college but also because it was easier for us to live, you know, as I said we did everything. We had a big garden and chickens and cows and you just grew everything that you needed. And of course there was cotton you worked in the cotton fields. I started working, picking cotton when I was about nine years old which most kids did at that time in rural Mississippi. Speaker 1: Did it impact your going to school at all, the picking of cotton? Speaker 2: No. No that, that was unique about the Tougaloo community because student kids my age were never kept out of school to go to the fields, but after school you left class and then you took your books and you went to the fields, whatever it is you had to do. And of course you worked in the fields on Saturdays and when school was out. Story_ID: 18640 Speaker 1: Tell me the, the name of your school in Tougaloo. Speaker 2: It was the Daniel Hand Elementary School [at Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: And what kind of--is it, was it a one-room schoolhouse or--? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Yes. There was a one-room schoolhouse which was the county school, and that's why I was fortunate I did not have to go to a one-room school. This was a, a, I would say it was private. We paid tuition. It was the practice site for the college students to do their practice teaching. And in those days most of HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] had what they call the practice school. Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] had one. Spelman had an elementary school and a high school well into the '40s [1940s] and Tougaloo, Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], most schools did because there was the segregation. So that the school at Tougaloo we would have about thirty, thirty, thirty-five students per class. Each class had its own room, big playground, things like music and art and drama were part of the curriculum, library. There were some things that we did up on the, with the high school students. We used the college facilities for very specific things. But certainly when there were special guests invited to the college the elementary school was invited. And we would go politely and sit in the back or wherever we were supposed to sit. But you were privy and we were part of that, the whole--home economics, I remember we had home economics class, stellar teachers. As a matter of fact I would learn later that my fifth grade teacher, was a Spelman woman, she had a great impact on me early. As you will hear as I talk I think my--the classroom teachers certainly had a big impact on my life early because my parents [Jesse Lee Forbes and Ora Lee Buckhalter] were away and my grandparents [Buck Forbes and Hattie Forbes] were elderly parents. So that a lot of the ideas, study, what to do, discipline, came from the classroom. Miss Owens (ph.) was my fifth grade teacher. She was the fifth grade teacher but she also ran the library and my first encounter with her was when I was checking out some books to read and she didn't think they were the kind of books that a fifth grader should be reading. (Laughs) So she redirected my reading. I think I was reading 'Forever Amber' and she directed me to 'A Tale of Two Cities' and she continued to do that. I started early reading. I would go to the library and get four or five books and I'd read those and come back on Friday and get another four or five books. And so she started giving me, you know these are books you should read. That stayed with me. Story_ID: 18641 Speaker 1: What kind of child were you? Were you, you know cause you're the oldest child. A lot of times oldest children, you know, feel the responsibility. But were you a quiet person, were you a dreamer, were--? Speaker 2: Well I think I still am a quiet person relatively. Yes, I was the oldest and had a great sense of responsibility and I was given a lot of responsibility not only for my sisters but also for my parents, my, my grandparents [Buck Forbes and Hattie Forbes] who were quite elderly you know in terms of paying the bills and writing things, you know, they looked to me. I went through a period I think as many early adolescent students do, children do of being very acting out and that lasted for about two years. I think the fifth grade and the sixth grade were difficult years for me. I was always getting sent out of class, sent home, mostly for talking and it was because I would do the homework and then I would get busy doing other things like talking or disturbing other students, reading a true story magazine or something that I should not. And, and I realized later it's cause I didn't have enough to do. And then I had a teacher that I encountered my seventh, eighth and ninth grade, this was junior high school, Mr. Caldwell and--Charles Caldwell. That's the second teacher that had a major, major impact on me because when I finished and started getting into trouble he would look up and say, "Go on to the next chapter" and that, that always worked, that it was the challenge. And so here I was, the class would still be working on chapter two and I was already on chapter three. And then when we got ready to do chapter three he might well say, "Well Audrey you read this now tell us what you've read, lead the discussion." Very demanding, very disciplined but he was my math teacher as he taught math as well as science and thus I think my interest in math and science. He was a brilliant man. He taught biology, chemistry and physics but he also taught algebra and trigonometry and geometry and those courses alternated years so that you could get all those things in. And I just loved it and so of course I performed very well in those areas, which is obvious later. Speaker 1: Did you at that time, did you have a sense that you were, you were brighter than other you know kids in your class? Speaker 2: I probably realized that about seventh grade, yes. I didn't before and I just as I said I was going through that acting out period fifth and sixth grade. But by seventh grade well many things changed. First of all I learned of my mother's [Ora Lee Buckhalter] illness. My mother was in Chicago [Illinois] and I learned that she was ill and that was very sobering for me. My father [Jess Lee Forbes] was in a new marriage and I just realized that the future was in my hands and I became very, very serious. I was about twelve years old. And always, up till then, had been leading my class. You know I made the As and I was at the--they'd post the honor roll and I was at the top but I never thought too much about it. It was just the way things were and I wasn't serious about it. But seventh grade all that changed. I became very serious so it was important for me to be at the top of my class and it was important to make good grades on every exam. And that was the story for the rest of my life. I began to understand very early that if I was going to go to college, if I were going to do whatever I was going to have to have scholarships and one way to get scholarships was to have good grades so I became a very serious student. Story_ID: 18642 Speaker 1: I want to go back. Your parents [Jesse Lee Forbes and Ora Lee Buckhalter] moved to Chicago [Illinois] what--? Speaker 2: 19--well--. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't let you finish the question. Speaker 1: No, I was just wondering what age, but what date? Speaker 2: How old was I? Speaker 1: Yeah, how old were you? Speaker 2: I was about eight years old. Speaker 1: Okay. And they were there so you're still going to school [Daniel Hand School at Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]--, Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --and living with your grandparents [Buck Forbes and Hattie Forbes]? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And then the thought was that you would go up later--, Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --when they got things settled. Speaker 2: That was the usual, the usual story that, that you know--the story I'll tell you the book that you'll enjoy reading if you want to understand this history is 'The Promised Land' by Nicholas Lemann because he writes this story very well of the migration of African Americans from the rural South to specifically Chicago. And that really was the story of my life. Everyone in my family--I remember uncles on my mother's side of the family became Pullman porters on the train, the Panama Limited and that was a big, big thing. You got a job as a Pullman porter and you went to Chicago and you came back with money and one uncle had a gold watch with a chain you know it was--so going to Chicago at that time was going to the promised land, there were jobs. And my parents went thinking that as they would get settled and find a place and then they would send for us. And then my mother's illness I'm sure now prevented all of that from happening in that fashion but eventually we did go because my paternal grandmother [Hattie Forbes] became ill and had to have medical care. Speaker 1: Do you know what caused your mother's illness in hindsight? Do you know that or I mean--and probably things were not told to you at the time but maybe I'm just wondering if--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well at that time nothing was told to any child about anything. But yes, as a, as a professional I have certainly had insight and understanding. Story_ID: 18643 Speaker 1: You know in the area of Tougaloo [Mississippi] if you could sort of take yourself back there I'm wondering what sights, smells and sounds would you say remind you of that, your childhood there? Speaker 2: Tougaloo was a marvelous place. In many ways Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] reminds me of Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], a campus as you can well imagine, the chapel, the discipline and the order of campus life and then the vitality. Why are these things going on? And the cultural climate you know that's, those things have a powerful impact on a, a, a young, receptive mind, good teachers, people who spoke well, dressed well and did their jobs well. Those were the images before me. Now Tougaloo like many historically black colleges and I don't know how well you know them, but if you look at the history of Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] or Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama], Tougaloo, probably not Spelman too much because it was an urban school. But the rural schools were very self-sufficient. There was a farm and there were fields and the barn and horses and cows and I remember, you know the time when Tougaloo supported anything that, all the food that was in the dining hall came from the farm. And students who quotes--had work-study at that time or worked their ways through did those kinds of jobs. So I have a, a rich but a very powerful memory of those years at Tougaloo and what it means to be self-sufficient. This was also during the war period [World War II] if you recall or you don't recall but when everything was rationed, you know. You could get one pair of shoes a year. You had to get stamps for sugar, you had to get stamps for almost everything that you bought. So being at Tougaloo during that, that period was very good for me but also very powerful. Story_ID: 18644 Speaker 1: When your paternal grandmother got sick--, Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --let's--her name was--? Speaker 2: Hattie [Forbes]. Hattie. Speaker 1: Hattie. Speaker 2: No, Minnie [Davis Buckhalter] was my maternal grandmother. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Ok, Hattie, right, sorry. Hattie Forbes. Speaker 2: She passed when I was about three and a half. Speaker 1: Okay, Hattie. Speaker 2: Now, Hattie Forbes. Speaker 1: When she got sick--, Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you were what age? Speaker 2: I was fourteen. Speaker 1: Fourteen, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) At that point we, I moved to Chicago [Illinois] and at first we went for her to get medical care and probably thought we'd be there on return to Tougaloo [Mississippi]. We didn't just move. But the illness was far more serious than anyone had anticipated. She had cancer, she had rectal cancer and so the move to Chicago became permanent. And that's sort of another turning point in my life because at that time she had to have medical care and the care was at Cook County Hospital [Chicago, Illinois]. My first exposure to Cook County was to take her to her clinic visits. You know if anyone had to stay out of school you know Audrey could do it so I learned the route from the South Side of Chicago, how to transfer on the train, the L and go to Cook County. And that's helped in another very powerful impression. I remember going through the, to the clinic with her and seeing the people in the lines waiting and seeing the doctors and, and everything that went on around that. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that a little bit? Speaker 2: Well, I knew that I never thought that one day I would be back at Cook County and that I would be in charge as the chief resident at Cook County. That didn't cross my mind. It was, at that point it was just an experience you had to get your grandmother to the clinic and--but obviously I was absorbing all these sounds and images and the doctors in the white coats and the fact that they were all white and almost all of the patients that were sitting on those benches with me were black. Speaker 1: Did you, do you remember even the move to Chicago and how it made you feel because you had been in this really nurturing environment? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: You know it seems when you describe it you get a feeling of all this warmth, you know rich and warm. And so you come to this really big city and I'm wondering you know how a young you know a young Audrey is reacting to all of this? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I never really thought of it that way but yes at first it was great excitement, great excitement, you know me and my sisters we couldn't sleep. Here we were at last going to Chicago. Remember now we've heard all these wonderful stories from our uncles and aunts and cousins who'd gone to Chicago and how wonderful Chicago was. And their idea of being wonderful was that you know there was no segregation and, and I haven't talked about the segregation in Mississippi and my experiences with that and what my view of Mississippi was. But the thought of leaving Mississippi for any black person with a brain would have been excited about the prospect of leaving. Getting there I do remember. I remember getting off the train at the 12th Street station and being overwhelmed by the, the, the enormity of the you know the size and, and the buildings. I mean it's like going to New York now you know. It's wow! And then going to the South Side--. Story_ID: 18645 Speaker 1: The excitement to be--first of all going to Chicago [Illinois] and I talked about the stories that as a young child we would hear from your relatives who had already made that transition to Chicago. And it truly was the promised land that [author] Nicholas Lemann had described. I didn't talk about my experience with segregation in Mississippi. I mentioned the fact that I saw the Ku Klux Klan burn crosses at Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] when Ralph Bunche spoke but there were other, many other incidents clearly. I remember there was a Girl Scout troop at Tougaloo, again one of the kinds of things that you wouldn't get in a one-room classroom. But there was a Girl Scout troop, 4-H club and so I belonged to those things. And we had to go downtown into Jackson [Mississippi] to get a Girl Scout uniform and the store was named Kensington. But I remembered that I could not try this uniform on. Black people could not try on clothes in the store so they'd hold it up to your back to measure the width of the garment and your mother or whoever was with you would always get the garment just a little too large so that if it didn't fit they could take it up. And of course my mother [Ora Lee Buckhalter] was an excellent seamstress and she did a lot of that. She often made our clothes but the Girl Scout uniform had to be purchased. That I remember, I remember you know not understanding why we couldn't try on the clothes. I remember going to the movies once downtown. There was a black theater on I believe it was called the Ashby [sic, Alamo Theater] on Ferris--Farish Street and this was sort of the Negro Auburn Avenue and once my mother took us downtown to a movie. I think it was Jennifer Jones and Joseph Cotten, I'll never forget it, 'Love Letters'. And we had to go down the alley and get on the fire escape and go up to the balcony. That was the one time I remember going to, quotes, the white theater. But of course there were many situations like that. And I used to ask my mother why don't black people just leave Mississippi? If white people don't want us here why don't we just leave? And of course as I grew to know that it was more complicated than that but not too much more complicated than that. Black people who could leave, did. Now those were very, very difficult times for black people in the state of Mississippi and that was my experience. And my view was if I ever left Mississippi I would never come back so that's a, that's another whole story. But so leaving Mississippi it wasn't so much going to Chicago I think but the thought of leaving this kind of oppression and this kind of segregation was, was exciting. Speaker 2: Dr. Manley--, Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --I want to ask one question. I don't ask this very often but I have asked this. With you being a lighter-skinned African American, did you find that there were any distinctions made in this Mississippi environment? Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: Can you talk about that? Speaker 1: You got, well you caught the, you got the worst of both sides. If you were fair you were still black in Mississippi, that didn't make any difference. I never, never experienced any preferential treatment or reaction towards me because I was fair. But you did get a reaction from darker-skinned blacks who either thought or said you thought you were better than they were because you were fair or treated me with resentment, sometimes even hatred because you were fair. But this I never understood but that did happen at that time. So the gradation, the difficulty was more with darker-skinned blacks as far as I was concerned personally than it was with white, whites. Speaker 2: And did your grandparents [Buck Forbes and Hattie Forbes] or your, you know, parents [Jesse Lee Forbes and Ora Lee Buckhalter] talk about that issue with you or--? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No there was no discussion. Speaker 1: No. My, my grandparents would not have--well they just didn't have that kind of insightful dialogue or discussion that they would have discussed that. My parents were away. If it were going to be discussed it would have been discussed in the classroom and there were teachers who could have led that kind of discussion but they never did. Story_ID: 18646 Speaker 1: Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] was, as many historically black colleges were then had mixed faculty. You had white faculty, black faculty, but you also have a lot of fair-skinned faculty and that as an issue I don't ever remember being discussed during my childhood in any way. Speaker 2: I have another question. I meant to ask this to [Morehouse College President] Dr. [Walter] Massey yesterday as it relates to the white faculty. Do you know on hind--I mean I know at the beginning people start out with sort of a missionary zeal you know about this. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Was that the type of white faculty that existed? Speaker 1: Absolutely. Absolutely. Not only at Tougaloo but I found the same thing here at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] when I arrived here in 1951. You know the story of Spelman, two missionary women from New England came to found this school to educate black women right out of slavery in 1881. Well Tougaloo was no different and I believe Tougaloo was founded in 1876 [sic, 1869] a little before Spelman. But they were missionaries, white missionaries who came South from the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church to establish a school for blacks. And Tougaloo was set up pretty much like a mansion, a plantation. There was a Mansion, the central house which is still today called the [Tougaloo] Mansion by the way, it's the central administration building but it was a plantation. So there was a mansion and then of course there were the fields around--cotton fields around the Mansion which later was given to Tougaloo or bought by the AME Church to found a college. The people who, the whites who were there were of a missionary mind and so they worked for almost nothing. And that persisted well into the '50s [1950s] in most of these schools. Spelman was no different. When I got here in 1951 the white faculty, and there was a lot of white faculty, felt that what they were doing was for the good of mankind. They were making a contribution. They had a missionary zeal, zeal, many of them lived on the campus and they were ostracized by the broader community. Spelman faculty, white faculty didn't go into the city of Atlanta for any social kind of life. Whatever socializing took place was within the confines of the college community. Fortunately in the, in Atlanta there were six colleges and so there was a lot of exchange, especially between Spelman and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia, now Clark Atlanta University]. Speaker 2: Because I, you know I've just been curious about that and what impact you know that had with them living and also you know with their approach with the student body, that's what I was just wondering. Speaker 1: Well very missionary, very church, very churched not only from my own church my family Baptist experience but from the environments that I've been in both at Tougaloo and here at Spelman. Story_ID: 18647 Speaker 1: Were you raised Baptist? Speaker 2: Yes, raised Baptist very much so. Speaker 1: Now I--but you were raised the proper Baptist but you were--there were two, you know there are different Baptists. There are a bunch of different Baptists but you were the high level Baptist. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (Laughs) I would not say that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Well there were different Baptists though. Speaker 2: Well--. Speaker 1: You sang hymns? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But in Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] for example which I said was AME [African Methodist Episcopal], it was founded by the Methodists so that was a, what we would call a high level of service. But I lived in the community and there was a community church where I went on Sunday which was we called it the church up on the hill which was a different kind of Baptist. So I knew all about shouting and testifying and of course we were trying to get out of church as much as we could. But I guess I grew up understanding the difference between what I saw on the campus and the campus community and what I saw in the community where I lived. Story_ID: 18648 Speaker 1: I want to take you back to you know you're a Chicagoan [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You said at first I was very excited you know but I'm thinking this is such a different environment and I'm wondering once the excitement sort of you know the excitement of being here wanes--, Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what as that experience like for you? Speaker 2: Very sobering I guess is my best word for it. To realize that this promised land, this land of milk and honey as I heard it described what that really meant, I and when I think back on it I'm amazed myself at the depth of my, my ability to analyze these things. Remember I'm not talking to anyone. No one's helping me figure this out. I'm going through these things sort of pretty much on my own you know coming to my own reality. But the apartment was small where we lived, too small for the number of people that were in it. This was during the period when, when there were kitchenettes. People would take a big apartment and cut it up. Walking to school was no fun. I had to pass big tenements. I'll never forget one night I saw this big rat run out in front of me almost as big as a cat. I just couldn't believe it. Certainly the school [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] was different. Here I am now in a class of about three hundred and fifty, three [hundred] seventy-five and you don't know everybody and I come from an environment where I knew everyone in the class by first name. Knew all my teachers and it was a challenge. How was I going to cope with this big school and a different kind of student clearly all of them not nearly as serious about school as I was and still achieve my goals which was to make good grades and get on to college? That was a challenge but I figured it out very quickly. I found the right people, students who were--I'll tell you how I did it. I remember now there was a school newspaper called the--now I can't think of it, 'Wendell Phillips Eagle' [UNABLE TO VERIFY] or something like that I think. It was at Wendell Phillips High School and in the school newspaper on the back page they always published the honor roll. So all the students who made you know Bs and As, they were called Ss and Es then, whose names were posted. So I would figure out very quickly these were the people I want to know [laughs] and got to know them and soon found out that yes there was indeed a leadership group in my class who were leading the class. They were the club presidents and class presidents and they were on the honor roll and I got to know them and I got to know them in the, ways we all get to know them--I mean I joined the, the, the a cappella chorus and the service club and I got on the newspaper and by doing those things I got to know people who had similar interests. They were the ones who were going on to college whether they came from good homes or poor homes they were college bound. Story_ID: 18649 Speaker 1: Now Wendell Phillips [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] at that time that, it was primarily black or all black? Speaker 2: All black. Speaker 1: All black. Speaker 2: All black. Speaker 1: It was [Jean Baptiste Point] DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Wendell Phillips--? Speaker 2: DuSable, Wendell Phillips and Dunbar [Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] were three schools where blacks went and the black population and that was another eye opener you know they said there was no segregation and yet there were clear boundaries in which the black community lived and was confined. So from about 35th Street--we're talking about the South Side now-- from 35th Street to maybe 51st [Street] and from State Street as far as east as Cottage Grove [Avenue] that was it. And to be found after dark outside those boundaries had serious repercussions. Well now you know that was a shocker for me, not Chicago? You can't go east of Cottage Grove, but then I learned that there was still racism there and what it meant in Chicago was different from what I had experienced in Mississippi. Speaker 1: And speak to that. What did it mean? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How was it different? Speaker 2: That there were limits. You were free to do all these things. You know 47th Street was the mecca. That was the center of the black community. And I'll never forget when I saw my first stage show you know Louis Jordan playing the saxophone you know this was great and black folks were having a good time. And there was--everything took place on 47th Street. It was--you'd go there on Saturdays and shop and was all black and blacks were, had homes. But you could not go east of Cottage Grove after dark or you would be in serious trouble because there was a, an invisible line marked where blacks could be found from 51st Street south and west of State. Of course you would go downtown in the Loop and that was the other thing so the Orient--the big theaters, the Chicago Theater, the Oriental Theater that was a big thing to go downtown and to the theater and, and that was the mixing bowl for Chicago was the Loop. But we didn't live on the West Side and we certainly didn't live on the North Side and we didn't have much money. We just didn't know it but we didn't. We were, we had you know mostly had blue collar, blue-collar jobs. People were living well by comparison to what they had come from in Mississippi. Now there's a wonderful exhibit about this period of history at the American Museum of History [sic, National Museum of American History] in Washington, D.C. I don't know if it's still up where it's depicted in you know actual cubicles and individuals, mummies who are depicting this period of history what the kitchenette period was like in Chicago but I remember it well. Speaker 1: Now who, now you were living with your--? Speaker 2: My father [Jesse Lee Forbes] and my stepmother [Helen Valentine Forbes]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that's a whole different experience for you. Speaker 2: That's true. That's true. Speaker 1: Was it, were you really, did you feel more on your own as you said? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was, I was, I was very by then very mature, very grown and so you can imagine some of the conflicts that would automatically incur around that. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You didn't want to be told what to do. Speaker 2: Couldn't, couldn't, couldn't tell me too, you know you couldn't tell me too much what to do. (Laughs) That's true. Speaker 1: But you're still a good student and it wasn't--. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 18650 Speaker 1: At Wendell Phillips [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] was there anyone--you would have wonderful mentors you know at Tougaloo [Daniel Hand School at Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well did you find any of that there you know at Wendell Phillips? Speaker 2: I had good teachers. I had good, individual teachers because I sought them and I sought them by finding out who was teaching the honors courses, who was teaching the tough courses. But by now I'm pretty much on my own to find that. So I found some good teachers. I met Mrs. Maxwell that I took college-level algebra from and Mr. Houston who was my homeroom teacher. Sure you could find teachers but you had to know what you were looking for you know and that's the disadvantage for a lot of youngsters today, they don't know what they're looking for because they've never seen something else. I knew what to look for and I knew when a teacher was teaching and when a teacher wasn't teaching. Disaster in physics and chemistry and I talk about that even now that I had wasted two years at Phillips. The chemistry teacher and the physics teacher, clearly they were probably rejects from the North Side of town who were sent to Wendell Phillips and they would come in and go in their back room with their lunch or whatever and we would never see them. We would just get the book and that same little group that I'm talking about would get the textbook and decide what we were going to do that day and how we were going to do it. But I knew that I was--cause I was having fun wasting my time but I knew that we were wasting our time and I knew a good teacher when I encountered one. Story_ID: 18651 Speaker 1: Now, what were you thinking you wanted to be at this point? You said you--. Speaker 2: Oh I, no I never changed. Speaker 1: Never changed. Speaker 2: Never changed. Speaker 1: You knew what you wanted to be--. Speaker 2: Whatever, whatever happened to me when I was three and a half was in the back of my mind. As a matter of fact when I was twelve years old I started a scrapbook which I hope I still have. But I started this scrapbook and I started collecting everything I could about medicine and the study of medicine and so I think there was an article in 'Life' magazine, there was a 'Life' and there was 'Look' [magazine] and they did an article about going to medical school, showed you how you know you study of the bones and the skeleton and all that. So I knew, you know I had been reading now for about six years about what it took to be a doctor and what it took to go to medical school and what kind of grades you had to have. But that's just on my own. Speaker 1: That's pretty--you were a directed child. Speaker 2: Well that--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You say--I mean--. Speaker 2: Things happen in your life that cause one to be directed. Speaker 1: Either that or put off path completely. I mean you could go either way. Speaker 2: Yeah that may be true. I don't, I can't speak to that. I can only talk about how I reacted to it. I had a sick mother [Ora Lee Buckhalter]. I had a father [Jesse Lee Forbes] who had several different marriages and other children and other family and I knew that my life was in my hands because I had great faith in God now. I wasn't by myself. But I always had the confidence and the faith that if I stuck to it and did the right thing that everything was going to be right. And I always felt directed that it was intended for me to do whatever it was I was doing. Story_ID: 18652 Speaker 1: And was there anything else that's significant in that period, that happened during that period you know when you're at Wendell Phillips [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] or this period between you know age twelve--no fourteen, fourteen? Speaker 2: Well yes, church. I said school and church. I was very active in the church and sung in the choir had a good voice. Speaker 1: What church were you in--? Speaker 2: I went to Tabernacle Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: And who was the minister there? Speaker 2: You know these, you know these, you know these places. (Laughs) Speaker 1: I live in Chicago for twenty years. Speaker 2: Yes, Tabernacle Baptist Church, Reverend [Dr.] Louis Rawls who is [musician] Lou Rawls's uncle. That was a big church then, seated what probably about fifteen hundred. At that time that was a mega church and so yes I had family. You know Reverend Clay Evans, I saw him on the plane two weeks ago coming to Atlanta [Georgia] and I haven't seen him for years. But he was the youth minister at Tabernacle. There was a youth church so the grown folks were meeting in the big church we had a youth church and Reverend Clay Evans was the youth minister, a great influence. The choir, Mrs. Grace Taylor who was the choir director and who started talking about my voice and as a matter of fact was the person who directed me to Spelman, oh you got to go to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. So yes between school and church I stayed on the right path which we both know is either meant to be but could have been much otherwise because by now I know what other youngsters my age are doing under the stairs and in the bathroom and who's dropping out and all of that. Never, never got near me, never touched me, never fazed me. Story_ID: 18653 Speaker 1: You say Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], the decision to come to Spelman was really based--? Speaker 2: Well it wasn't a decision it was a, my choir director [Grace Taylor at Tabernacle Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] started saying you have a good voice. Mr. [Willis Laurence] James would love to have you in the glee club. You need to go to Spelman. And of course I didn't know Spelman. I had, I'm still thinking I'm going back to Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] when I finish [Wendell] Phillips [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] I will get a scholarship back to Tougaloo where I know people and I know teachers and I still have a lot of family and I don't have to pay any room and board and I can live in the community. And when she started telling me about Spelman I never heard of Spelman but I started reading about Spelman and that's how I got to Spelman. She encouraged me to write to [Spelman College President] Miss [Florence] Read, send my grades, dah-dah, dah-dah and I received a scholarship. And the other thing I will say now if I talked to young people, I never get a chance to talk like I'm talking to you. I've never paid a penny's tuition in my life. I had four years at Spelman, full tuition paid by the college. I had two jobs during my room and board and at that time I went on from Spelman to medical school again on a fellowship. I never paid any tuition at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and that's almost unheard of and I had another couple of jobs to get my room and board and some help from my father [Jesse Lee Forbes]. And even when I went back to get my masters in public health [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] that was a U.S. Public Health Service fellowship paid for by the government. But now you do have to work hard and you have to have good grades. No one is going to give you a scholarship if you've got Cs. So you got to have mostly As if you can do that. But certainly you got to make at least good Bs and As to get scholarship assistance. But I say that because even without money and family support I've had twelve years of education and training that I have, that I owe for because I never had to pay. Speaker 1: And it's true even today--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right it's true today because I don't think, right. Speaker 2: It's even easier today because between the Pell Grants and the loans and the fellowships and, and fellowships today are very large but you must put in the time. You just can't, just can't make good grades if you play with studying. Now I've always--that's the work that students have to do. We all have work to do and your work is to study. Speaker 1: Now when you come to Spelman--, Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that's, I would assume that there were similarities but there were also differences you know and I'm wondering if that is the case. You know you said that Tougaloo felt very much like Spelman but Tougaloo is a rural school and Spelman is an urban school. Did that make any difference at all or did it feel very much the--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, what you have to do is see the setting, the time. Even though Spelman is an urban, is in an urban setting at the time it was the same as Tougaloo because of the segregation. My life at Spelman was at Spelman. I didn't go into Atlanta into the city as we called it that much. I think I went downtown to a movie once. I went down to see, went to The Fox Theater once to see 'The Robe' [feature film] and I had that same experience in Mississippi where I had to go down the alley and up the fire escape into what they call the crow's nest of course I never went back. Atlanta was still very segregated. Campus life took place between Spelman and [Clark-] Atlanta [University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] so there were movies on campus on Friday night and there were dances in the gym and there were football games and there were basketball games at Morehouse and of course we went all together you know thirty-five or forty of us with chaperone. No one went anywhere by themselves and it was not safe. And we were, we were, we were never allowed to go anywhere, quotes, alone. So my experience was pretty much on this campus and I loved it. I loved Spelman. But in those days one could not say I loved Spelman because you were supposed to hate all the rules and regulations you know. Spelman women always complained you know but I did, I loved Spelman. Speaker 1: And what was Spelman like at that you know at that time? You had--. Speaker 2: The same. Speaker 1: No, no, there's a way you might you had to dress a certain way when you--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, no. Speaker 2: They--I said the same as Tougaloo is what I was about to say. The cultural life was rich, under richer--every Sunday there was vespers and there was a major speaker at Spelman. Mordecai Johnson, Benjamin Mays, Howard Thurman, [Reverend] Vernon Johns you know remarkable speaker, Mary McLeod Bethune, people who came to Sisters Chapel to speak. Every morning there was chapel at eight o'clock that you had to attend and sometimes Miss Read spoke but many times there were guests, international guests. There were concerts in Sisters Chapel and artists and then there was a Christmas carol concert, I sang in the glee club. It was just a, again that cultural environment at Spelman was so rich. And then you had a broader exposure to Morehouse and what was going on over there. So it was very much like Tougaloo only I, I would say it's much richer and much more demanding because you see Tougaloo was co-ed and the students would kind of do as they please but here you had to do these things. It wasn't a matter of whether you wanted to or not or whether you chose to, these were required things that you had to do. Yes, now in that sense all of that has changed today. Story_ID: 18654 Speaker 1: You are still on your track to go to medical school. Was it assumed that you were going to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: No, I'm at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] now. Speaker 1: You're at Spelman? Speaker 2: Yes, and I'm pre-med--, Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and very tenaciously so. And you will read as you read stories about me and I'll, I'll get into all that, that how at the end of my sophomore year [Spelman College President] Miss [Florence] Read retired and Dr. Albert Manley came as the new president (laughs), yes. And so we came to visit Dr. Manley in this very office, about six of us and when we got in the room everybody else got quiet so I found myself doing the talking. I had not come in the room to be the spokesperson but I ended up being. And so there were three things that were bothering me that I wanted addressed and so as usual I picked the, the important things, not the frivolous things and they were all sort of you know managed. The first was chemistry because the upper level chemistry at Spelman, we didn't have upper-level chemistry, we had an introductory chemistry course that was really designed for economics majors. And so I wanted to go to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] to take chemistry and no Spelman women had been allowed to go and take classes at Morehouse up to that point under Miss Read. So Dr. Manley said he'd consider it and think about it and the other was lights out, we had a lights out curfew, ten o'clock you had to have your lights out and be in bed. You had a bed check. So I was always getting in bed and having to get up and go hide and find someplace to study because I, as I told you I had a biology major, chemistry and math minor. I was in labs all day, I had two jobs so I didn't start studying until ten o'clock which I still do, you know. My mind seems to wake up at eleven o'clock and I'm usually up till two, two thirty so he said he'd look into that. So the curfew wasn't lifted but each dorm had a study room so if you wanted to study after ten o'clock you could go to the study room. And the other thing was cards. Cards were outlawed at Spelman and I was a bridge player. I had started playing bridge when I was fourteen and I was a pretty good bridge player so it was the biggest pastime that I, that I found challenging and so we started playing bridge. At that time any place you'd go you'd find a bridge game on campus some place so those things were done. So that was sort of my introduction to Dr. Albert Manley. That's another story. (Laughs) Speaker 1: (Laughing) That's another story. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So did you get your demands met? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All three of them? Speaker 2: All three of the things were changed, yes. We went to Spel--I went to Morehouse for my chemistry. Took chemistry from Henry McBay and from K.A. Huggins and I, again looking for the best teachers. I knew if I could take chemistry from Henry McBay and pass his course I would be all right for, for medical school. And remember I told you about this terrible chemistry that I'd had in high school [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] so I just felt like if I was going to be successful in medical school I had to correct that deficit and I was right. I took his class and made a B plus. I didn't get an A, but it, it strengthened, gave me the strength that I needed. Speaker 1: So you had no problem adjusting to that class at all? Speaker 2: Oh no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well--. Speaker 1: You know, [Morehouse College President] Walter Massey said he went for that class cause he was supposed to be the hardest you know. Speaker 2: (Laughing) And to hear him tell that story we laugh about it cause it's so funny. I was doing the same thing. I wanted to take chemistry from Henry McBay because I knew he was tough and I knew he flunked the fellows out, I knew all of that. And I figured if I could take his chemistry and make a decent grade then I'd be all right in medical school and if I couldn't then I needed to know now that I was not going to be able to be competitive in medical school. That's a good way to find out. But that was all on my own thinking you see. That's the kind of counseling that students need today. And of course I came back [to Spelman College] years later and helped establish the Health Careers Office to do just that because students need to have a realistic assessment of their abilities. If you can't make a decent grade in organic chemistry, if you can't make a decent grade in advanced algebra or trigonometry, if you can't pass organic then you don't need to be thinking about medical school. You know, there are just some realities that we have to deal with. And I still find students you know making Ds and Cs and telling me they're going to medical school and so they need counseling advice. Speaker 1: Now did you, were you--was this a change in policy when you took this course or--? Speaker 2: Well I'm not so sure it's a change in policy. Presidents at that time and I guess they still do have the ability to make decisions that, that--administrative decisions to allow students to go to Morehouse to take the chemistry. Now what Dr. Manley did to work that out I have no idea. I don't know whether he talked to Dr. [Benjamin] Mays, whether he had some kind of understanding. But that was, it led to bigger things because even today, as you will find out, Spelman develops the fine arts and theater and dance and Morehouse men take theater and dance here and have done so for many years. We have strong music departments at both schools. At that time there were so few women majoring in the sciences it would have been not cost effective for Spelman to have invested heavily into the sciences, so I sort of led the way. I didn't go by myself. There were two other students who were with me, my classmates who went over to take chemistry. There were three of us but we really did lead the way to Spelman women going to Morehouse to take chemistry and later Clark [College, Atlanta, Georgia, now Clark Atlanta University] to take physics. Now what has happened though, women at Spelman have gone more and more into the sciences. Their numbers have gotten so large that we could no longer rely on that cooperative relationship and we've had to develop our own sciences. Speaker 1: Now those two other women, did they go on to become doctors themselves? Speaker 2: No they didn't. Again, bad stories. One had talked about going to medical school. I'm not sure that that was really serious but never did go. The second one did go to medical school with me to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] had and, and died a very tragic death and the end of our sophomore year and I won't relive that. We were roommates. Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yeah. So oh, okay. Now where did you, who did you use for physics, who were you--? Speaker 1: I took chemistry--physics--. Speaker 2: At--you said at--. Speaker 1: No, I took physics here at Spelman. Speaker 2: Oh okay. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh I thought you went--okay I see what you're saying. I got it. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Now were there other things significant in the whole--so that helped you. You had a good chemistry course. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And you, well you were able to play bridge. (Laughs) Speaker 1: (Laughs) But at that time that was part of my lifeline you know. If I couldn't get a good bridge game it was, it was, that was really sort of my, you know release. If I wasted any time it was more likely to be wasted at the bridge table. And one of the things I'm going to do when I retire is go back to playing bridge. (Laughs) I miss the game. I, I love it. Story_ID: 18655 Speaker 1: Were men at all sort of intimidated at all by you wanting to be a doctor, was there any of that? Speaker 2: I never remember anything like that. As a matter of fact I say sometimes that some of my best friends are Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] men and they, women don't really understand that but it's true because we were, we were dying in Henry McBay's chemistry class together. Many of those young men who were in that class with me went to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] with me. They ended up at Cook County [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] with me. I encountered them at hospitals where we all trained. So they were helpful, they knew more about you know how to deal with some of the things than Spelman women because we weren't used to the kind of tough approach to assignments and they knew the old exams and old tests and old problems and some of them became good friends, lifelong friends and some of them became pediatricians. Dr. Rudolph Jackson who chaired pediatrics at Morehouse School of Medicine, Dr. Dewitt Alfred who chaired psychiatry at Grady Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia] you know Lou Sullivan, lifelong friends. I couldn't--oh Dr. James Anderson from Jackson, Mississippi I've known as a child. I meet him again in Morehouse and where we end up at Meharry together. So these are, these are people that my professional life has intersected with in so many ways at so many times. So they are some of my best friends. And there was never, it was always, it was always a sister relationship you know, Spelman sister. Story_ID: 18656 Speaker 1: So you're at the end of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]--, Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and it's time to go on. Immediately thinking that you're going to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] or applying for--? Speaker 2: No, I did not. I did not know what I was going to do you know. Here I am in my senior year. I am prepared as a pre-med student with the intentions and the desire to go to medical school. But I have no idea how I am going to finance a medical education. But by now remember I'm rubbing elbows with the boys and they don't know either so they don't know, I'm in good company. Well how are you doing to do it and what are you going to do? How are you going to manage this? Some of them had parents, fathers who were doctors who were going to send them. But most of them were going to have to do what I was probably going to have to do is to get some kind of financial help and support. Now remember we're still in a segregated period and I don't know if you know this but at this time the Southern states would send a black youngster to medical school so that you would not apply to the state school. So all my friends from Mississippi, Vic Sanders who went on to study psychiatry, Dr. James Anderson that I mentioned were from Mississippi. The state of Mississippi paid their tuition to go to Meharry. I don't know if you know that we went through this. My problem is I was now a resident of Chicago, Illinois and I was no longer a domicile in Mississippi. I considered whether I could reestablish my residency in Mississippi and go that way so that was always a possibility. Could I, you know, did I have enough relatives there to--but I would have to go back to Mississippi to practice. There was always that obligation. So I decided I would see what I could do, I would see what I could find out. I certainly couldn't depend on my family for help. The thought of having to stop and work and save money to go back to medical school did not seem workable. I thought if I stopped and got out of the habit of school and studying and probably got married that I would never get back so that was not an option. So I was going to have to find some way to get some help to go to medical school so that's what I did. I went looking and I came to the registrar's office and I asked if they had any information on, you know scholarships or fellowships for medicine. We have a Health Careers Office now which I have started where you can go in and there's a counselor there to help you, you know what's available. But at that time there was no such thing and there was a file drawer, a four-drawer file drawer that the registrar, in the registrar's office and they told me I could go through it. That they have a lot of stuff and I could go through it, so that's what I did. I'd come by the registrar's office and go through each one of the folders and found two--I found three things I think and two of them were specifically for black students going to medical school. One was the Sloan Foundation and the other one was the Jessie Smith Noyes Foundation and so I applied to both of them and Jessie Smith Noyes came through. It was a New York based foundation and they provided medical scholarships only for black students who were going into medical school. So I applied and I was accepted and I--they paid my tuition for four years. And when I, of course I had learned that I, there were some Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] counterparts who were applying to the same foundation. So really there were things but of course you had to go find them. There was, it wasn't laid out like it is now the Pell Grants and Stafford [Loan] and all you got to do is plug it into a computer and get it. You had to sort of turn over some rocks and, and look around. Speaker 1: And so you found out--when did you--was this at the beginning of the school year or towards the end--? Speaker 2: No you usually, you know you usually start applying about medical school probably in November, December. And most places required that you be accepted into medical school before they would give you a scholarship. So I applied to not a lot, Meharry, Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois]. And Meharry accepted me first and so I sent my deposit and then I sent my papers off to Jessie Smith Noyes Foundation, told them I had been and they said fine and so they paid my tuition at Meharry for the entire four years that I was there, plus gave me additional money for books and a small living stipend and it was unheard of. It was, what do you say, this was meant to be? I got an angel looking after me? God is in his heaven? How can I, how can you explain something like that. I'm sitting on the floor in the registrar's office at Spelman going through a file draw cabinet with hundreds of fellowship offerings and I found this one. That happened. Speaker 1: It could be your grandmother [Minnie Davis Buckhalter] who--. Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: I mean really she has been your angel because you were telling her I'm going to be a doctor. Speaker 2: Well you know you think about some of the--I don't think about those things too often because they are very touching. But--and I would later get to know the, the program officer Miss Justine Smadbeck. I'll never forget her name, this white woman who was the program officer for this project. And years later I'd finish Meharry and I was off at Cook County [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] and she saw my name in the paper somewhere and she wrote me. Story_ID: 18657 Speaker 1: You show up at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], no break, you don't have a break, you're there and this is your lifelong dream. And so how is it, how--? Speaker 2: Well there are a lot of things that go on in between there of course. I, every summer I had a job, that was good. Speaker 1: In Chicago? No? Speaker 2: Not necessarily. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what I was going to tell you. Being the kind of independent person that I was and not having these close family ties, during the summer I was always off to something exciting, you know something different and something new. I worked upstate New York one summer up beyond Albany [New York]. I don't know if you know this but the Children's Bureau for the state of New York used to run a series of daycare centers for migrant workers, the children of migrant workers. And Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] women would go up and work in these daycare centers so I had a summer up there. I worked in Atlantic City [New Jersey] one summer as a maid, Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] men would go and pick tobacco in Connecticut. I'm sure [Morehouse President] Dr. [Thomas] Massey told you all about that. So most of us had to work in the summer and you went to work where you could probably make the most money and save most of your money. Going to Chicago [Illinois] was counterproductive if you got to go and pay to live somewhere and eat and go out so you probably went to some rural area where you could work and save what you made and that's what I did. And every summer I had a good summer experience, okay. So, and I had a college roommate. My college roommate, my old roommates for, for three years, not the first year but the three years and we became very close, like sisters. So my family now is here at Spelman, had a close circle of friends so a real clique you know. And so between Spelman and a summer experience and I would come back to college, it's time now to go to medical school. Story_ID: 18658 Speaker 1: And of course once I was accepted [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and had resources it's off to Nashville. Now that's an experience (laughs) because there was no dormitory for women. There was a men's dormitory but there was no women's dormitory. So in order to go to medical school at Meharry at that time you had to go to Nashville and find a place to live and a place to eat. And so I went up that summer--no, I went to Atlantic City [New Jersey] first. I worked in Atlantic City that summer, saved enough money, came back to Nashville--trunk and all that, you got to get books, you got to get a microscope, you got to get organized and found a room in a boarding house. And there's a lot of places in Nashville where women would cook in their kitchen and they would serve two meals or three in their dining room. It was just a house and it was very common for the men then to have a meal ticket where they got their meals. You know remember now I'm--my, my Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] buddies are there now so I'm learning the ropes from them you know how, how you do these things and manage. But that was a tough year that first year, big books this thick. You got to lug books from home to class, no car, really tough. Days you need the microscope you got to take the microscope. There were no labs that had microscopes. Every student had to buy their own microscope that was eight hundred dollars. That was, it was, that was--expenses of medical school were unanticipated, either were tuition and books and some living support. Books and supplies were, were a big problem. Speaker 2: Did you ever question during that time I mean that year that you had made the right decision? Speaker 1: (Laughs) I knew I had made the wrong decision many days. I had no idea what I was getting into but I wasn't alone, you know. There were, there were six women in my class an unusual class. There were six women in my class. One of them was a Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] alumna who had finished some years before I had but had come back and we had a study group very quickly. You know Spelman-Morehouse people had gotten together. There was a study group, time to study, a place to study and so there was support and that lasted throughout the four years that I was at Meharry. Speaker 2: Were there other things forming you at that point too in medical school or no? Speaker 1: No, just survival. (Laughs) Speaker 2: Just survival, okay. And everyone learned to survive together. Speaker 1: Yes. Yes. It was--. Speaker 2: And had you decided--. Speaker 1: And being, and being one of the first, in the class that had a significant number of women but realizing that it was still a male environment. It was not set up for women either living or jokes or experiences, anything. It was purely a male environment. All the things you had to adjust to, the drinking, I wasn't used to that and all the other things just--but I had good friends. Speaker 2: You mean the female? Speaker 1: Yes. Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Right my female friends. Story_ID: 18659 Speaker 1: Who was in that [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] class with you? Speaker 2: Well I was going to name two people. All of them didn't finish but two that you might know. One of them was Dr. Clarisse Reed (ph. COULD NOT VERIFY) today. She finished Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama], came from a family with brothers. So she considered herself the mother of us all. She was also a bridge player, an avid bridge player. She came to a family where her mother and father both played bridge and so she--I remember her schooling me on how to, how not to drink with the boys because on Friday night that was sort of the big thing you know. They went out and how to get a drink, they'd look like you were drinking. And so I, I learned a few tricks on how to survive in that kind of environment. And on Friday nights we would meet at her house. She had a house with her brother. She and her brother had a--and we would play bridge. We played bridge on Friday nights and study on Saturday and Sunday. And today she's retired but not only did she go into pediatrics she transferred from Meharry and went on back to the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] where she finished medical school and went on to pediatrics. And then later we found ourselves together in the government. She was at the NIH [National Institutes of Health], director of the sickle cell disease program, brilliant physician. And the other person who was in my class was a Spelman alumna was Dr. Wilmatine Jackson (ph.) who practiced here in Atlanta. She was a physical therapist first and went into physical medicine, one of the first women to become boarded in physical medicine. So we sort of stayed together. Speaker 1: Now and the men, the--you didn't because sometimes in those environments the men and the teachers themselves can be sort of brutal. You didn't experience--? Speaker 2: Well the jokes, no. I never had any personal, I never had any personal problems with either classmates or instructors. I don't know whether it was cause I was so unattractive I don't know but I didn't, I didn't have to deal with that. What I did have to deal with we all did with the jokes, the jokes in the classroom were you know were horrible and the things that they would ask the female students to do, you know kind of an intimidation and embarrassment and you just had to do--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Like what? Speaker 2: Well you know in your sophomore year when you first start doing examinations and male patient has to have a rectal exam, ask the female patient or female student to come do it, you know all these were set up kind of things. Well Doctor Forbes--. Speaker 1: All right, I got it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 18660 Speaker 1: So what happened now, you, was it this--you got your resident, internship right, at Cook County [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, I did my internship in Gary, Indiana--, Speaker 1: In Gary, okay. Speaker 2: --at St. Mercy Hospital, St. Mary Mercy Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay. And was that, you know, are those chosen by lottery or whatever? Speaker 2: Not then. Not then. Speaker 1: Oh no, and all of this is new business today. Speaker 2: Okay. So why did you go there? Speaker 1: No you would, you would write, sit down just like I found the Jessie Smith Noyes Foundation you would canvas your friends and word of mouth for internships where, where they were accepting. Now remember this was in 1959. We were still in a segregated society. At this point black medical school graduates were assured places in about a handful of institutions. You knew you could get a residency at [George W.] Hubbard Hospital at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. There was Homer G. Phillips [Hospital] in St. Louis [Missouri], there was Provident in Chicago, there was Mercy-Douglass [Hospital] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then about a handful of black hospitals where you knew you could go if you applied and you were a good enough student you could get a residency. And there was Howard, Howard [University] Hospital [Washington, D.C.]. Some residency, residencies were more, were harder to get than others, let's say, surgery, OB-GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] very difficult to get into, very competitive. And black physicians you know fought hard to get them but I forgot Howard. Howard was a big draw for training. We had not yet gotten to the point where you could apply anywhere you wanted to apply and hoped to get in and there was no such thing as a lottery. I learned about the internship program in Gray--in Gary through another physician who had did her internship there the year before me. They never--they had one year with a black intern and she had done very well. Now that was another thing you want to talk about being the first, how you have to always do good, be almost perfect, walk on water because you're opening the door for others. Her name was Georgia Mitchell. She went to Meharry and she worked in Gary because she got married and her husband was in Gary. And they accepted her at Mercy Hospital. Again, Catholic hospitals came first and she did a very good job. So she called, she came back to Meharry to recruit and she said this was a good internship program and you know encouraged us to apply. The thing about it that attracted me, it paid a little better than the others. I think, now I think at Cook County then we were making a hundred and twenty five dollars a month you know that's the slave wages. And this program paid maybe like three hundred dollars a month and they gave you an apartment and all the food you could eat and everything so they really--for an internship that was great. So I said well that's close to Chicago, gets me closer to home, closer to my mother and so I applied and I was accepted. That was a great internship. I was on call every fourth night. That, that means when you're on call every fourth night that's the forty-eight hour shift that you got to pull. Story_ID: 18661 Speaker 1: I have you now in my internship at Grady in Gary, Indiana [St. Mary Mercy Hospital] and what's--two things, it's time now to do my residency and I'm torn between doing a residency in pediatrics or psychiatry. And I'm sure my mother's [Ora Lee Buckhalter] illness you know I'm thinking well you know that will help me. And then I did my, I did a summer a psychiatric hospital in Gary, right outside Gary, Indiana, a place called Westfield, you'll know this, Westfield, Indiana. It's a mental hospital. They have a maximum security and that summer I was all of, I weighed all of ninety-eight pounds. I was between my junior year and my senior year [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and I had what we call an externship program. And so what happened as the physicians went on vacation I would rotate and take their service so that meant I got to see the whole hospital. They had an adolescent ward. There was a young thirteen-year-old boy there who had killed his mother, shot his mother. They had a maximum security and I mean these are people who have murdered and done everything. They would do all these terrible things I never heard of like put razor blades and everything up into their bladders and attack the guards and here I am ninety- eight pounds going in and dealing with these people, and I did that. Then I realized that psychiatry was not really the, the profession for me and decided on pediatrics. So now I'm like where am I going to do pediatrics? And I'm still in the mind frame that I'll go either back to [George W.] Hubbard [Hospital at Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] or to St. Louis [Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri] or to Howard [University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] for a residency because I'm not going to get a residency anyplace else. Now I was assured of one at Homer Phillips where [Dr.] Helen Nash was you know. She's Spelman [College, Atlanta Georgia] alumna and a Meharry graduate, Helen Nash is there and I knew her and I can apply and I--but I was encouraged by someone to apply to Mercy Hospital in Chicago [Illinois]. You, now--and I'm glad you know these places cause you will understand what I'm saying. Joe Christianson, Dr. Joseph Christian, Christian not Christianson, Joseph Christian ran the residency program at Mercy Hospital and again a Catholic hospital and had a reputation for being receptive and I was encouraged to apply to Mercy just to see. So I applied to Homer Phillips and to Mercy. Now this is interesting. Joe Christian called me in Gary, Indiana and said he had my application but they were all filled. They didn't have any openings. But my application was so good he wanted to know if he could send it to Cook County [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]. And I said sure, you can send it but they're not going to take me. At that point Cook County did not have a reputation for taking black doctors. Many people don't know this, this was in 1960, 1960. This is still before the Civil Rights Movement and there were no black residents of any, any numbers of Cook County so he wanted, he wanted to test Cook County. And they called me and asked me to come for an interview and I did and I was accepted. Now again, was that meant to be? But getting a residence at Cook County--that's why you see us in the papers and all that because that was big news then you know for a black woman to get a residency position at Cook County Hospital. Even though it did only paid a $125 a month and I wondered how am I going to adjust to this but there were, there were ways to do that. But the experience at Cook County of course was just fabulous. There's just no way that you can describe that. And to then become chief resident at Cook County as a black woman was again--so here I am, I told you about when I was fourteen taking my grandmother to the clinic and now I'm back at Cook County really in a very responsible position not only as a resident but as the chief resident in pediatrics. Story_ID: 18662 Speaker 1: Now that is why we're going to get to [future husband, President of Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] Dr. Albert Manley, because the day--I was appointed chief resident and it was a big, it was big news in Chicago [Illinois]. And you see that article in the 'Chicago Tribune' [newspaper] and I was at Karl A. Meyer Hall which is the dining facility and a residential facility for the house staff at Cook County [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] and I got a call you know how they page you, "Dr. Forbes go to the phone, Dr. Forbes to the phone, Dr. Forbes to the phone." So I went to the phone and picked up the phone and it was someone here at Spelman, from Atlanta [Georgia] calling me. Said, "I understand that you're in the paper today." It was Ernestine Brazeal. Miss Brazeal was director of alumna affairs here at Spelman. I said I knew Ms. Brazeal knew everything that went on at Spelman but Chicago. I said Miss Brazeal, how did you know that? She said well, "Dr. Manley is in town. He was fundraising for the United Negro College Fund, he's at the Palmer House. And he saw your picture in the paper this morning and he wants you to call him." So that was my reconnection with Spelman. And I was so excited and I called him and said, and he--I said well why don't you come over and visit. I'd like to show you the hospital. And he got a taxi and came over and I met him in front of Karl A. Meyer Hall. So here I am showing him all through the hospital and you can imagine how exhilarating that was. And Cook County is, it's just fabulous. I mean their resources are fantastic you know the blood bank and the OR [operating room] and the nurseries and the labs and, and the research facilities and the nursing school and all these things that I was you know showing him how we did things and it was sort of reconnecting me to the college and to him. At the time he was still married and I knew his first wife. But two years later he asked me to come on the board of trustees so that was about 1965 I came on the Board. And by then my career had moved along and I had done other things. But I came on the board. In the mean time he lost his wife and he was widowed for eight years. And so it's well how did you marry Dr. Manley? Because every time I went to a board meeting I would find myself seated next to Dr. Manley. So whether it was here in, here in Chicago--Atlanta or New York or there was symphony tickets and whatever, you know it was Dr. Forbes and Dr. Manley and of course we ended up getting married and I returned to the college in 1970 as Mrs. Manley. Speaker 2: That's pretty exciting--, Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --when you think about it he made it possible for you to take that chemistry class. Speaker 1: He did. He--and there were many other things that at the time I didn't know, it was like, you know, our paths would bump up against each other to take the chemistry class. I moved to Africa, to [Operation] Crossroads Africa. I learned later that Dr. Manley has submitted my name to Jim [James] Robinson to go to Crossroads. Certainly coming on the board of trustees and sort of pulling me back to reconnect me to the college, I'm not sure that I would have done as much for Spelman as I had done or been as involved with Spelman as I have been. And he would always say to me, "Don't forget about Spelman now." I said oh Dr. Manley I'm not going to forget about Spelman. I also wouldn't know that he read my letters in chapel because I would write these nice, glowing alumni letters about what I was doing you know where I was going and what I was doing in medicine in Cook County. And I have a good friend in Washington [D.C.], as he would read your letters we hated you. So that was, that was interesting. Story_ID: 18663 Speaker 1: You had decided on pediatrics because of what? Speaker 2: Well I loved children. I loved children. I always felt that pediatrics was by far the most difficult of the specialties and I'll tell you why. It's because a baby cannot tell you what's wrong. You got to be an astute diagnostician to make the diagnosis for an infant and that was a challenge, an exciting challenge and I was a good pediatrician, very, very good. Speaker 1: And for a short time you also were in private practice with Dr. [L.E.] Keith, right? Speaker 2: I did, yes. You know Dr. Keith? Yes I joined, when I left Cook County [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] I was in private practice with Dr. Keith on the West Side [of Chicago] for a short time [1965-1967]. Speaker 1: Now but you--your, your career took a different turn in that--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I was looking, you published a lot during that period you know. Speaker 2: Well there were two things. I left Cook County and went abroad. Went to Nigeria that summer. That had a profound effect on me because I thought that I had seen everything that was bad to see about medicine at Cook County. I spent four months in Nigeria in the bush in Enugu [Nigeria], what is now [Republic of] Biafra. And I went to Nsukka [Nigeria] and Calabar [Nigeria] and Kano [Nigeria] and Kaduna [Nigeria], [Republic of] Benin. I can name all the major cities and areas in Nigeria looking at healthcare and pediatric care and took care of patients. I led the first medical team from [Operation] Crossroads [Africa] to Nigeria and came back I'm sure changed because the private practice setting was no longer quite what I had envisioned that it would be emotionally. And in practice one has to deal with you know the green card and whether mother can pay and she's got five kids and she can't pay. And so how are you going to provide care for her if she can't pay? And if you're in practice it's still a business and you end up taking--get people who can pay and not those who really need you and that just did not fit me. And so I had an experience, I didn't just leave practice I had an experience that caused me to make a, had time to make up my mind. I actually had an automobile accident. Had an automobile accident out making a house call one night and was in the hospital, had time to think. Said you know you could have been gone. Is that what you really want to do? And changed my path completely and went back into public health. That's what happened to that. Speaker 1: And so you wanted, at this point going back to public health you want to do that at this point? Speaker 2: Well, well I wanted to do what I had trained to do which was Cook County [Illinois] medicine you know. And I made house calls Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago public housing]. I mean there was no place in Chicago where I wouldn't go, mothers need me. You know they had the Black Stone Rangers [street gang] were out, the Disciples [street gang] and mothers would call and I said well you have--and I knew all these kids by name, have so-and-so meet me down at the corner and I'll be there. And so it was, I can't explain it in a few words. You have to understand the difference between public health medicine dealing with the underserved and the disadvantaged and, and taking care of private patients. You have two kinds of medicine in America, we both know that. But the mothers who qualified for Medicaid you know had green cards, that's a different kind of patient and they didn't--and if you are into that kind of practice and you want to serve those who need you most then public health is the, is the best place to be. Speaker 1: Now you, you went back to get your--that's much later. Speaker 2: No, that's much later. Speaker 1: That's much later. Speaker 2: So in the '70s [1970s] you were where--because you were publishing that's why I'm saying--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well, I published--. Speaker 2: -- you were working, you were starting to develop an expertise in sickle cell--. Speaker 1: That was, that, that was, that was before, that was before--no that was after I came back from Africa. I was talking about Africa because when I came back I went to a fellowship at the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] and that's where you're thinking about publishing because it was an NIH [National Institutes of Health] fellowship. I was supported by, as an NIH fellow, did a lot of good research as you will see, Similac with iron came out of some of the early work that I did, iron-fortified formula, hypoglycemia, early fluid administration, nursery with premature infants and published. It was--I still didn't have this practice thing out of my system I'm sure so that's when I went into practice with Dr. Keith. It was after that that I went back to public health. Story_ID: 18664 Speaker 1: Now that's interesting too because when I was making up my mind about what I was going to do when I left practice I got a call from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. I have never looked for a job. Someone has always called me. I got this call saying Dr. Al [Albert] Dorfman at the University of Chicago would like to talk to you. He understands you might be interested in making a change. And I said well how would he know that? Well I--. Speaker 2: (Off-camera discussion) Speaker 1: During that period you know I probably was talking to someone expressing my feeling, my frustration with private practice and, and how it really didn't seem right for me. And I have an, I won't name the person but I think I know who it was and that word got to Dorfman at Chicago and he called me. And of course you have to realize that my appointment as chief resident at Cook County had made sort of news you know so few people knew my name and I know they were looking for a black pediatrician at the University of Chicago. I was the first black woman to hold a full time faculty appointment at the University of Chicago School of Medicine. Now you are of Chicago so you will appreciate this. But the Woodlawn [Chicago neighborhood] community was going through the same thing that the West End [Atlanta, Georgia neighborhood] community is going through here right now. The Blackstone Rangers [street gang] and the Disciples [street gang] were fighting. Let's face it, the University of Chicago did not want those little dirty-nosed, snotty-nosed children in their emergency room and in their clinics with those green cards and the community was protesting that the university was not being responsive to their health needs. And everybody was being sent across town to County [Cook County Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]. That's the days when they called the police wagon, the paddy wagon and everything came to County. Women delivered in police trucks on their way to county. Well I was a part of all that, you know, decentralization. Every hospital has got to take its share. Michael Reese [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], you had to go to the nearest hospital. You could not bypass Wyler [Children's Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], you couldn't bypass Reese. Northwestern [Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] was no different, Mount Sinai [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] was a--at, at that time every black person was sent to Cook County. So they wanted someone to help and I was recruited to come to University of Chicago to help with the Woodlawn project. What is now the Woodlawn [Maternal &] Child Health Center was the centerpiece of that whole effort. So TWO [The Woodlawn Organization] and [Bishop Arthur] Brazier and [Dr.] Leon Finney, all those people, you know I cut my teeth on my first community sort of outreach effort and I was the pediatrician at the center. As a matter of fact I shared this recently, that's where I was the day that [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated and we had the big decision to make do we close the center or do we leave it open. And of course they all came to ask me. I'm the resident (laughs), you know black physician. And we decided to stay open and we were the only thing on the block that wasn't trashed and looted. But in a--you know the Blackstone Rangers that was their turf but we took care of their babies and their girlfriends and it was their center. And of course by then they pretty much knew me so it was a good experience for me and I had a great experience at the university but I also knew that that wasn't the end for me. It was a good experience. We did a lot of good community things but I didn't see myself just settling for a faculty appointment at the University of Chicago. Story_ID: 18665 Speaker 1: Other things happened you will see San Francisco [California] I got--that was a call. They had a big problem in San Francisco. Now I'm going to see myself now not as a stationary person in one place but as someone who is going to engage with many different situations, San Francisco. I had no thought of going to San Francisco but when the flower children started getting out of the Haight Ashbury [San Francisco neighborhood] they were leaving behind those who couldn't get out and these were fifteen and sixteen-year-old girls with babies and small children. Some of these women were tripped out on speed for two and three weeks and they needed a pediatrician, someone who could deal with those kinds of problem. Well I, you know, Cook County [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] and Woodlawn [Maternal and Child Heath Center, Chicago, Illinois] I had some good experience. Went out to visit, loved San Francisco and decided I would go. I went out there and spent a couple of years [1969-1970] but San Francisco was too far and the problems in San Francisco were worse than I had ever seen anywhere, that's the truth. So--. Speaker 2: You mean because of the drug culture? Speaker 1: Well because of the drugs yes. We saw in San Francisco first what would later sweep the nation, there's no question. But I saw it in 1969 and '70 [1970] before it got the way it is now across the nation. But yes, that was early, speed and we didn't have the crack then it was mostly speed and, and marijuana and these young women who were just wasted by the experience in Haight Ashbury and their children. And the project was supported by Mount Zion Hospital and the University of California, San Francisco. And it was, it was one of those things that you know again, a good experience but I don't think I would have stayed there indefinitely. Don't know how long I would have stayed if Dr. [Albert] Manley hadn't asked me to marry him and that's what happened. You know, he says you're going so far, why are you going so far away? And you know we got married and I came back to Atlanta [Georgia], so you know the rest. Speaker 2: No, but--, Speaker 1: Know the rest. Speaker 2: --no, the thing is you were, at that point you're already serving on the [Chicago] Board [of Health] though right? But I resided from the board. Speaker 1: You resigned from the board. I resigned from the board, right. Story_ID: 18666 Speaker 1: [After working at Mount Zion Hospital, San Francisco, California] Came back to, here to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] did some very good things for Spelman. We started the Health Careers Program. We were involved with organizing the science with the science division, getting the sciences together, writing proposals to strengthen the sciences and the services for women, the women's health program. All the while I was working full time at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] had a full time faculty position at Emory working at Grady [Memorial Hospital]. I did that until Dr. [Albert] Manley retired [1976, as president of Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. It was at the time that he retired that it was time to stop and reassess you know what are, what are you going to do with the rest of your life. And of course we considered many things, staying here at Atlanta. Dr. Manley had property in North Carolina. We went back to Durham [North Carolina], look around and at the Flat Rock [North Carolina] where he owned some property to look around and finally decided now this is--I somehow knew that Washington [D.C.] was my next stop. And that's another whole story about my experiences in Atlanta dealing with programs and projects and federal funding and state funding and city funding and what wasn't happening and who should be doing what, Title Ten, Title Five, Title Twenty and how we were not getting our share of federal funds. And I said the next place for me is Washington. This has got to change. And so the next twenty-one years as you know, you see now the Office of Women's Health came from Dr. Manley's desk, not by myself of course but Dr. Ruth Kirstein and I helped to get the system of women's health programs--Offices of Minority Health, Historically Black College [and Universities] Initiative, a lot of things. And at all times I kept my connection with Spelman, whether it's helping to get a program, you know opening a door, or let me know about some RFP [request for proposal]. So it's just been, been very rich, very rewarding, very full and of course talking about my career in the [U.S.] Public Health Service as you will see from the written material, unusual, from the bottom, sickle cell program which no one wanted to touch you know, black program. No one wanted to touch sickle cell. I was recruited. I was brought to Washington to implement the sickle cell program and the genetic services program to get them together. And it was a real challenge but after I did it, then the promotions just came one right after the other all the way to the top. The big things that I like to share with people that they should know like the sickle cell program and how that schism between sickle cell and other genetic diseases, the hemophilia people and the Tay-Sachs and the Huntington's Chorea. There's some two thousand genetic diseases. But the sickle cell disease and the other hemoglobinopathies which primarily affect blacks was not you know, that is, that tension there and not wanting to cover that. Now we, we worked hard to get that as part of the newborn screening program to get those projects off the street, out of the store fronts and now all states are required to test for sickle cell disease as part of their newborn screening program that's paid for by Title Five which is federal funding. The other thing later on director of the National Health Service Corps, first woman to head the National Service Corps. That's the major scholarship program for the Public Health Service for, where we train doctors and physicians and dentists and nurses and social workers and then we place them in underserved areas throughout the country which includes the Indian reservations. So there's hardly an Indian reservation that I haven't spent some time on. But the big things that really people don't understand about the Public Health Service is that we respond to the emergencies. I was the doctor on duty that night of Hurricane Andrew, fascinating story to tell about what happened with Hurricane Andrew, the Mississippi floods when the coffins were coming up out of the--you remember that and they were floating away and getting a helicopter to go out and you know land and get the troops together, mobilize forces and what things we needed. Those kinds of things yeah the adrenaline gets to pumping again, it's great. But we've done those kinds of things that make life interesting and keeps you, keeps you on your toes you know. So being surgeon general or the deputy assistant secretary for health is not just sitting behind a desk, much, much more than that. As a matter of fact it was the result of Hurricane Andrew the, the night that I was on duty and that hurricane touched down on Dade County [Florida] and we have what we call DMETs [Disaster Medical Emergency Team], they're medical disaster--disaster medical teams. There are about thirty-five of them that are set up around the country, most of them are volunteers. And when we have a disaster we mobilize a unit but they mobilize with full gear and what they're supposed to do. These are doctors and nurses. And we were planning to fly the military. DOD [Department of Defense] provides the air transport. We were planning to fly into Homestead Air Force Base [Homestead, Florida] and when they called me and told me that Homestead Air Force Base had been wiped out, it was hit, the hospital was gone. That was panic time cause we had not anticipated a back up plan, we just had a plan A. So you know I'm on the phone with people strategizing, well what are we going to do and how are we going to rearrange this? And we finally flew into Opa-locka [Florida]. If you will recall that's in the northern part of the state which was okay we got in but it was difficult because all the traffic was one way coming out. And we got trucks and everything trying to get down into the southern part of the state. That wasn't the hard part. The hard part was the weather forecast was predicting that it was going to touch down in New Orleans [Louisiana]. I don't know if you remember that night but the forecast was where you had, there was one touch down, it was staying along the Gulf Coast and it was probably going to touch down in New Orleans which is under water. And so we were in Washington those of us responsible trying to figure out what we would do if this touches down because we had already mobilized almost everything we've got. And it didn't touch down in New Orleans luckily, but the thought that it would got our attention, certainly got my attention that we could not have ourselves in that predicament again. So we started Commissioned Corps Readiness Force, training force training for certain kinds of scenarios. Now we didn't train for an anthrax scenario but that is the kind of thing that the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service does. And so preparedness training, disasters and we've had many, the Hantavirus [Pulmonary Syndrome] outbreak. If something happens abroad it's the, it's the U.S. Public Health Service that usually responds, now I'm not saying solely but usually. When Chernobyl when down in Russia it was you know U.S. doctors who go over, when the Kuwaiti oil fires were burning and we were worried about quality of oil, there were people from the CDC [Centers for Disease Control] that mobilized to, to do those kinds of things. The Public Health Service is fantastic. And to have spent, had a full career to have gone to the very top of the service, one of the most rewarding you know experiences and blessings that I could possibly hope for. So if I--was it meant to be, have I gotten a full course out of what I was supposed to do? I think so. But coming home and being able to bring some of that experience back to Spelman women is by far the best, the best. Story_ID: 18667 Speaker 1: I want to go back to this whole issue of really public health and the fact that you know you chose it as a field but there were some discoveries you were making along the way about the inequities in the system and I'm wondering if you, well you, you--. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay. So I wanted you to address what you found in terms of inequities and what you feel that in your, you know your significant career in public health have gotten corrected and also what happened then. Speaker 2: Well the public health system I think is little understood by the American public. And certainly the [U.S.] Public Health Service as the United States service as a uniformed service is little understood by the American public. The Public Health Service actually began in 1798 as a uniform service created by then [U.S.] President John Adams. The Public Health Service from its inception was created, quotes, "to provide physicians to take care of the merchant marines," the merchant marines. So the men who were on the seas, on ships when they came into port there would be doctors who would take care of them, provide them medical care and later they would extended it to their wives and their children. So the Public Health Service, those doctors, those physicians their responsibilities kept expanding, expanding, expanding. For example when they came in, when the ships would come in to port they would have to then check the ships and see what was on those ships, if they were bringing disease into the country. Cholera, typhoid, plague, smallpox, all those terrible things. So from the very beginning the inception of the Public Health Service was in a state of disease detection, infection detection and quarantine. As a matter of fact you asked me about the yellow flag. The yellow flag was the flag that was flown over a ship that denoted that that ship was quarantined and no one on that ship did then come into port. So that there were key hospitals around the United States in port cities, Boston [Massachusetts], you could, you could pick out where they were, Boston, Charleston [West Virginia], Galveston [Texas], Seattle [Washington], San Francisco [California], I think Baltimore [Maryland]. There were about then major sites where ships would come in and where public health--we had a public health service hospital and we had public health service doctors and nurses and a team of people to do jus that, take care of the seaman, take care of their wives and their children and then quarantine ships and make sure that there was no infection coming into the country. Now over the years it just kept multiplying and growing and growing. So today we have eight agencies that make up the Public Health Service. There's the CDC [Centers for Disease Control] and the NIH [National Institutes of Health] and the Food and Drug Administration [FDA] and the Indian Health Service and HRSA which is the Health Resources and Services Administration, the Indian Health Service and all of those agencies together, collectively make up the Public Health Service. Speaker 1: Now when did you find out though just about the inequities that existed as it relates to--you know think about was it your grand, not your grandmother. Well yeah, I mean she didn't die because of that, that poor health your grandmother [Minnie Davis Buckhalter] did she? Speaker 2: No she had a stroke. She had a stroke. Speaker 1: Yes. Okay cause she--an ambulance did come to get her, okay. Speaker 2: Right, at that point most people black or white would have died of stroke. She was young. She was only forty-two but we didn't have the drugs then that we have now that can control high blood pressure. She may not have even known that she had high blood pressure. Speaker 1: But also what was some of the research that you did you know when you start doing this research on sickle cell and the other I don't know all the terms, but you know all the things that I read that you had written papers about, what were you finding? Speaker 2: Well it was not, it was not so much research that I was involved in. The early research that I did was involved in diseases of the newborn. As you know you will see the word neonatology. I'm a trained neonatologist with five years in the nursery dealing with diseases of premature infants and newborn infants. Most of that dealt with the diseases that newborn infants and premature infants have and how we treat them so it's clinical research not basic science research. I had been more involved with service delivery and how we get services to all citizens and unfortunately much of that service delivery system for poor people is in the public arena whether that's the federal health public service or the state system or the city system or a county system. And if we had, talk about inequities I think that's what we're talking about. Speaker 1: Right. I remember when I interviewed Dr. Harold Freeman of Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York] he talked about the fact that with breast cancer there were patients who were coming in you know he had to start focusing on detection all right because by the time they were coming to the hospital it was too late. Speaker 2: Oh I think Dr. Freeman is from the, same kind of doctor I am. His, his area of specialty is different but his focus has been on cancer and the delivery of services for poor people, especially African American people and African American women. And I think if you talk to any of us, no matter whether we're pediatricians or we're gynecologists or surgeons we will talk about the inequity in the deliver of services for our people. Story_ID: 18668 Speaker 1: Has it improved [the equal distribution of heath care to the poor] over this you know your life there or is it just--? Speaker 2: That's a, that's a whole discussion. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We make progress, it seems to me now we make progress, we seem to be making great strides and then something will happen and we've got a big slide backwards. For example, in my own field I spent a lot of time in the nursery, disease of premature infants and newborn infants my major focus as a neonatologist. I then realized that we would get these one and a half pound babies, these two pound babies, all the things we had to do to save their lives and still many of them had, had residual effects. We had to get to these situations before we have these one and a half pound and two pound infants. Let's look at teenage pregnancy, what can we do to reduce the incidents and the rate of teenage pregnancy. So I did a lot in that area here at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], contraception education, contraceptive awareness, did a lot at Grady [Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia], I've done a lot in inner city in Chicago [Illinois] around that issue and we made some progress there recently. Certainly the rate, the incidence of infant mortality and low birth weight among minority women and teenage pregnancy have declined dramatically, not as great as the decline for whites but we made great progress. So we did fine and then first the AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome] epidemic comes along and wipes all of that out and then the crack cocaine epidemic comes along and wipes all of that out. So we're, we're in many ways back where we were. Sick mothers were not getting prenatal care early enough, who were not using contraceptive services and are still having babies now not only with low birth weight but their low birth weight, they're HIV [Human Immunodeficiency Virus] infected and then many of them are drug addicted. So I'm just giving you that as one example that yes we made great progress and we, many of us in my generation of medicine in the public health arena thought we were really turning the corner on some of these big issues. And I, I still feel the AIDS epidemic and the crack cocaine epidemic have, have, have had a serious impact on the black community. What we're doing right here in, with now and I don't know if you know this but I have made it part of my administration's initiative in outreach to the community, the West End community [Atlanta, Georgia], we are surrounded by a center of urban decay. We've got everything here that you will find in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois neighborhood] twenty years ago. In Anacostia right now in Washington, D.C., in Robert Taylor Homes [public housing, Chicago, Illinois] which you know well. So if you've got drugs and gangs and crack houses and young men hanging out on the corner, teenage pregnancies, we have that and we're trying to reach out to the community to work with Atlanta Housing Authority and revitalize some of this public housing to have some voice in what is, comes back into our neighborhood. Speaker 1: And as a, as a health professional do you feel that it's worth the time and the energy? I mean I'm just seeing a lot of resources go into these things, do you think it's worth it? Speaker 2: We have no choice. We have no choice. It's a matter of survival for the black community. If we ever give up and say this is the way it is, ain't nothing we can do to change it, then we're lost. So there has to always be people like [Dr.] Harold Freeman and [Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] Lou [Louis W.] Sullivan and Audrey Manley who are willing to continue to grapple with these issues that face us in terms of public health and in terms of health services for our people. I mean who else is going to do it? No one else comes. And if you talk to anyone from Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], if you talk to [Meharry Medical College President] Dr. [John E.] Maupin at Meharry you will find out that black people come back to black communities to work and practice. You don't find others coming into our neighborhood trying to help us and grapple with these problems. Now Meharry has been doing this for, as long as it's existed. Story_ID: 18669 Speaker 1: You know I get asked that question what are you going to do when you retire and this time I really am going to retire. And I think just talking to you this morning you can see how many career changes I have made. I made four major career shifts. And every time you do that it's like starting over you know private practice, academia then public health and a full career in public health, military, international. I've represented America at WHO [World Health Organization], United Nations, China, Pasteur Institute, great experiences. But you know traveling takes a toll on you after a while and right now traveling is probably at its very worst. So--. Speaker 2: (Off-camera discussion) Speaker 1: Oh, I want to finish that because you need to know that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I have a home in Washington [D.C.] and you know that [husband] Dr. Albert Manley passed three months before I came back to Atlanta [Georgia] and my house in Washington is just like it was the day he passed. And it has gotten to thee point now that I just can't deal with that the more I go home and his books and his papers and his room and all of those things have to be dealt with. And I, I don't, I don't have time to do, that working the way I am. And it's just, I've just reached the point now where I've got to take some personal time for my personal life and first of all get his things to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] because I know he'd want his books and papers to come to Spelman cause I'm gonna leave all of mine (laughs) here and so that must be done. I also intend to write a history of the development of the sciences at Spelman, yes. Story_ID: 18670 Speaker 1: Just in terms of Spelman's [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] legacy--, Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --will you talk just a little bit about that and what, just a little, just a little sound bite, just a little bit about what you know the importance of this institution is? Speaker 2: Oh Spelman? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Speaker 2: Oh you can't talk about Spelman's legacy in a sound bite, one of the most uniquely important institutions in the nation. You know we are, now we say premier, but we are the only institution you know really strong Bible institution for black women in the nation. There's no place else where people are focusing on concerns, interests, needs, a place for black women. That's why Spelman's important. There must always be Spelman. Why I'm willing to come back and give another five years even after retirement to show that we are--and I think that's what I've done that we've set the foundation for the next move into the twenty- first century. You know I've dealt with historically black colleges for at least the last fifteen years in the [U.S.] Public Health Service and I know them well and it's talk of transition. We've got to make some transitions for the future, technology being one but internal management systems, how to be efficient, efficient in registration, efficient with research and planning, strategic planning, having goals and objectives and accountability. Our physical plant, many of our schools having serious problems with old buildings, important buildings and certainly of historic value but still they need renovation and, and help. So that we're making that transition and it's important that Spelman make that transition. Story_ID: 18671 Speaker 1: You know we can talk about a legacy in terms of physical things, spiritual things. For me it's going to be very difficult to decide which is most important. I know there are those who are going to identify the science building. I certainly think that's part of my legacy to see that that's done, the land. I've made a major effort to try to get more land for the college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Certainly getting a lot of attention to internal management systems, technology but I think to bring back the spirit of Spelman, what Spelman really is as I knew it, what it's traditions are, a commitment. It's consistent with its mission for academic excellence, for leadership in service. We've made a major focus on, on leadership and on service and the renewal and the revival of the spirit of Sisters Chapel. So and, and I, I can't leave out the alumni, to, to get alumni more involved with the college, not only giving but doing major things for the college. And all of that is coming to fruition. So I can't point to any one thing but I probably would, would hope to leave a message and I think the message is more important. And I think it's said better in action than it is in words that they should do as I have done, come home, make a contribution whether it's financial or in service. But I consider these last four years of my career a contribution to my alma mater...