 Story_ID: 218896 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: I'm Ralph Gregory Moore, R-A-L-P-H, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y, M-O-O-R-E. Speaker 1: And, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 4, 1949, Community Hospital [of Evanston], Evanston, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a management consultant; certified public accountant [CPA], also a management consultant. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Today is August 9, 2004. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Chicago, Illinois, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue]. Story_ID: 218897 Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type lightweight questions and I'm compelled to ask you them. They only require a short answer. First one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Okay, and that's complicated for me. I would say favorite food would be salmon. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: All right. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Atlantis Hotel in the Bahamas. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year. Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: We're all in this together. Story_ID: 218898 Speaker 1: Okay. Now I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and your father's [William Eiland Moore] side, and we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Alberta Cunningham, that's her maiden name; Alberta, A-L-B-E-R-T-A, Cunningham, C-U-N-N-I-N-G-H-A-M. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Weir, Mississippi, which is outside of Kosciusko, Mississippi, July 7, 1916. Speaker 1: Okay. And, how do you spell Weir, Mississippi? Speaker 2: It's either W-I-E-R or W-E-I-R; I'm not sure which one. If I looked at it, I could tell. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know exactly where that is. Carthage, Mississippi close by-- Speaker 2: Okay, and in the old days, I'm not sure if we'd do it today, but you measure Mississippi by where you get off the train, so you get off at Durant [Mississippi]. Now, you get off at Greenwood [Mississippi] because they closed the Durant station. Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting. We go back to her parents, and that's the documentation I have left, but they have pictures of both parents in the family research, so her, so we go back to the, when her parents were born, around 18--I think her mother was born in 1859, and her father was born in 1865, in the same area of Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, well are there any stories from that side of the family? Now they were born right after, you know-- Speaker 2: They were during the-- Speaker 1: During the Civil War. Speaker 2: Very few stories. Interesting, I took my, again she has seven, she had six sisters and one brother, and about six years ago, I took her and my daughter [Avery Moore] and my niece back to Mississippi to go back to the old house and the house was gone but the old church and all of that--but there are very few stories. All of her brothers--her brother and most of her sisters are gone. She has an older sister, two older sisters that are still living, which is interesting. She was the baby of the family. Her sister, Lucille [ph.], is ninety-two, ninety-one years old and she has a sister, Ella [ph.], who is ninety-four years old. Lucille lives in Evanston, Illinois, and Ella lives in, still lives in Weir, Mississippi, but there are very few stories that--I can give you one story that I didn't learn until we went back down there. She had, there was a cousin, her father's brother, and I can't tell you his name at this point, but there was a dispute over property and money and he ended up stealing most of the land from the rest of the family, but nobody talked about it. People were obviously very bitter about it, but, and he had a young wife who, a second wife, and a real scandalous kind of thing, also in short, most of the family lost all of their access to land rights through some business transaction with the uncle, which would have been my, I guess my cousin, my mother's uncle, but that's the only story I've ever heard outside of-- Speaker 1: That's interesting. They seem to be fairly lucky to have landed in Mississippi, anyway, you know, to even be able to lose, so, but this uncle took the land-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 218899 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how the family came north, or did they-- Speaker 2: Well, you know it's interesting, my mother [Alberta Cunningham] came in 1938 from Mississippi. At the time, I guess that would have made her thirty-two years old. Everybody was leaving Mississippi. I mean, the great, she was in the middle of the Great Migration, and wanted to come north to work and to get away from the South, from the land, from being a farmer, and came to live with one of her sisters, who was already up here and met my father [Wiiliam Eiland Moore] shortly after she got here and the coincidence, to show you how small the world is, my father grew up in Louisville, Mississippi, which is about twenty miles from Weir, Mississippi, but they obviously didn't know each other until they got to Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 218900 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Alberta Cunningham] talk about growing up in [Weir] Mississippi or going to school or anything? Speaker 2: Well, she went to school. She went all the way through high school and when we went back down there, we learned an awful lot. That was a wonderful trip; as a matter of fact, I have audio tapes of the trip. We met and ran into one of her old boyfriends, who she didn't acknowledge. He said, "You know, Alberta, I was trying to talk to you all through high school" and she was like, "no, I don't remember you. Get out of my face." But, I had never seen her in that kind of banter with a man before. But, as far as the story is, my niece asked her the question, "Grandma, what did you do for fun when you were my age?" She said, "Nothing. We didn't, all we did was, we played a little ball, maybe on Sunday or Saturday afternoon, but we worked. We worked the field, we worked from the house, we cooked. That wasn't a lot of fun." She was quite, it was kinda sad; the way she said it you could realize it was not the easiest kind of life, it wasn't an easy, leisurely lifestyle she grew up in. I think that's probably why she left. Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of hard work I guess in those days. Didn't have any fun so what do you do for fun? Nothing. Speaker 2: Exactly, nothing. Exactly. Story_ID: 218901 Speaker 1: Did they talk about the racism down there at all? Speaker 2: No, it's interesting. My family, I have never, although my mother [Alberta Cunningham] became a very strong advocate of Rainbow PUSH [Coalition] and very, very in tune with the Civil Rights Movement, but never talked about their specific situation as far as race. I know that the summer Emmett Till got killed, I was in Mississippi that summer. I used to go every summer as a little kid, and I don't remember because I was so small. I was only seven. He got killed in '56 [1956; sic. 1955], I believe it was. I was seven years old, and, but they told me that they were going to take me back to Mississippi after that, because I was always questioning when I would see a white only sign or, you know, the colored drinking fountain that was a pail or a dirty pipe or something, and I would say well, "Why is this colored only? Why is that white only? Why can't we go in that door?" And they said I would be so, I was so challenging as a young kid that they were worried about me because I would say the wrong thing to the wrong people. But there was very little talk about the racism. Again, all of my people grew up (unclear) so you weren't really in touch with whites on a day-to-day basis. Speaker 1: It's Money, Mississippi where Emmett Till was lynched close to where? Speaker 2: It's not that close, but again, it's, at that time, you know, Mississippi is and was Mississippi. Story_ID: 218902 Speaker 1: Now, oh, what did your mother [Alberta Cunningham] end up doing in Chicago [Illinois] when she--? Speaker 2: Well, she came, initially she was a domestic; a matter of fact, like most, got on working day work with people on the North Shore [Chicago, Illinois] and after meeting my father [William Eiland Moore] they got married in 1942, and they were, they lived in Chicago in South Park[way; Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], 3906, I believe it was, South Park, where they lived in Chicago, and they, my brother [William Moore] was born in 1944; March 20, 1944, and they wanted to have a better life for my brother, so my mother working on the north side, working on the North Shore, they decided to move to Evanston [Illinois] and they moved to Evanston in about 1947, but she was always working domestic work, from, for years until 1957, she got a job at the Chicago post office. She worked there twenty years until she retired in 1977, from the post office. And it's interesting, one of the funny things after that, my nephew who was born in 1973, and my mother was still working, but then after she retired, she spent a lot of time helping my brother raise my nephew and after he went to school, went to grade school, this had to be 1980, and my mother had moved out there, they were living in Schaumburg [Illinois]. For about four months, she worked at McDonald's. Now, she had to be, she was sixty plus at the time, but maybe sixty-five. I made it a point never to go see her. I just couldn't go see my mother working at McDonald's, but she seemed to enjoy it and when she finally quit, she said it was just too many, too much on her feet. She said that the people really wanted her to stay. She was a good worker. I mean, she has always been very diligent, a never miss a day kind of person; so, she's always been a working person. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Did you have--well, obviously, you met your grandparents, right? Speaker 2: No, no, no. My grandparents were gone, long dead before, being born in 18-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they were dead. Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1850s and '60s [1860s]; they were gone. So, I never met any grandparents or came close to it. Story_ID: 218903 Speaker 1: So well, tell us about your father. What's his full name and can you spell it for me? Speaker 2: His name is, was William Moore, and there's an asterisk there because his legal name was William Eiland, E-I-L-A-N-D, and-- Speaker 1: Well, what's the story? Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting. Well, the story, the first story is that, again, he was born in 1900. I think he was born in 1900, although something said 1902. He has a, or had a sister, well basically he had seventeen, there were seventeen altogether. He had sixteen brothers and sisters; only three, I have ever been able to even document. I don't know where the other fourteen are, and they're all Eiland. But, his little sister, Inez [ph.], who just died about four years ago and she was like ninety-seven when she died. She would tell the story, and I got a lot of stories from her, about my father but one day my mother [Alberta Cunningham] and I were coming back from visiting with my aunt. I was forty-two years old, so that's, what, thirteen years ago. She said, "Well, when your father got in that trouble." My aunt had told a story about the trouble he had gotten into in Florida. He had been to Florida and got into a fight over something. Long story short, and there are two versions of this story, there are many family stories. He got into a fight with a white man. My aunt said he killed him. My mother said he didn't kill him, but he had to change his, he had to dress up like a woman to leave, to get out of town and I remember driving back and I'm driving the car. She said, and that's when he changed his name. I'm like, (laughter) I'm [HistoryMaker] Ralph [G.] Moore--been Ralph Moore--I'm likely about to drive off the highway. I said, "Wait a minute. Changed his name?" "Well, yeah. His name, well you didn't know that his name was Eiland. It wasn't Moore." So, he changed his name to Eiland. He was maybe seventeen or eighteen years old, so after, from that point on he was William Moore versus William Eiland. That's why the asterisk on Moore. Although I've attempted to go back into Louisville, Mississippi records, but in those days there was not a lot of records for blacks in Louisville, Mississippi. Speaker 1: You might even be able to find the wife's name, Eiland, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting, I've been waiting. I spent eighteen years raising my daughter [Avery Moore]. She is going to college soon, on Friday, so now I'm going to have some time to go back on some of these kinds of projects. Speaker 1: Okay, so Louisville, Mississippi, is twenty miles away from Weir [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Um-hum, just close to Ackerman [Mississippi]. Story_ID: 218904 Speaker 1: I guess you just didn't know a lot about his [Moore's father, William Eiland Moore] people and so forth. Speaker 2: Well, he knew that he had, well it's interesting, again, being older and the other thing that happened with my father, he was, he worked nights for the railroad. He was quite an adventurous guy. I mean, he would travel. He had all kinds of stories about the [Great] Depression and he wanted to join the [U.S.] Army in World War I [WWI], but was too young, and then he wanted to join the Army in World War II [WWII], he was too old. As a matter of fact, I have some copies of his deferment card and all that with me. But, he had these wonderful stories about people looking for work during the Depression, but he never talked a lot about his family because what happens, when he left Mississippi, the only person he kept in touch with was his sister, Inez, and they were the closest two people, the closest brother and sister I've even seen in my life, and when he died in 1964, you could tell it just took so much out of her. But, he had another brother, Charles [ph.], that died in 1953 and, again, I didn't hear much, my Aunt Inez told me more about him than anyone else, but she didn't know a lot of the family because their father, my grandfather on the paternal side, was very abusive to the kids. So as a kid, they were old enough to get away and I said that, again, seventeen kids, they were, Inez said they would leave in the night. One day you'd see one, and the next day they just wouldn't, they're gone. So, some kids were leaving at 12, 13, 14 years old, just trying to get out of there. So, and my brother stayed with Inez because he didn't want to leave her there alone and but yet he continued to beat up on my father, and Inez told him to go ahead, you gotta go, and he promised he would send for her and after he got settled, he traveled the country for a while, Florida and a few other places, and then he finally sent back and they lived together in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: That's quite a story. Story_ID: 218905 Speaker 1: Did they [Moore's paternal family] have any stories about life in Mississippi in those days? Speaker 2: Well, Aunt Inez [ph.], (laughter) she was a storyteller. I mean, it's interesting. My daughter [Avery Moore] wrote her thesis about one of the characters of one of thesis was my Aunt Inez and their relationship, but, because you could tell here's a woman that had no, and everybody, no one in the family ever, well my father [William Eiland Moore] dropped out of school in third grade to work the field and, a matter of fact, that was a requirement. There was no encouragement to go to school. When you were old enough to work, you would stop going to school and you would work. So, he tried to, he went on and off to school. He would go back in the off season, but he didn't get through the eighth grade, and wasn't that literate of a person, but the only message he would always tell me was, you know, study your books. He wouldn't know what I was studying, but he knew that I need to study and he didn't want me to make mistakes he had made, but the stories are more--my Aunt Inez told the story, because they lived on the main street to the school house, and they would be working in the field when the kids were walking by going to school, and although she was a year younger, kids would pick on my father, her brother, and she would beat 'em up, and so she was, I mean, let her tell it, and I have no reason, I mean, if you heard her tell the story you'd have to believe it. She was a pretty ornery, pretty tough woman to deal with. I mean, she'd pull a knife on people and she cut a couple people and, you know, she's pretty tough, a pretty tough person, but outside of that there were no real stories about the South other than the need, they had an incredible sense of urgency to get out of there as quickly as possible. Speaker 1: So when you'd go back [to Mississippi] in the summertime, you'd stay with-- Speaker 2: On my mother's [Alberta Cunningham] side. Speaker 1: On your mother's side, okay, all right. Story_ID: 218906 Speaker 1: What was it like growing up? What's your first childhood memory? Your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's interesting. I was just talking about that the other day. I was born in Evanston [Illinois], and I have been blessed from the standpoint of my parents [Alberta Cunningham and William Eiland Moore] really looked out for me and my earliest memory was nursery school. There was a gentleman in Evanston who was a legend, Mr. Payne [ph.]. He had a nursery school--matter of fact, I didn't go to his nursery school initially. My first memory was a different nursery school and I went from one--I must have been three or four years old. I don't remember being in this nursery school, but I do remember playing ball there and they told the story and my mother walked me up to school and left me there, and she would come and pick me up and we would walk home; so, one day she left me at school and around lunch time she saw me, you know, I walked in the house and she said, "Well, what time did you get here?" I must be four years old, and she was saying that I just took the same route, it was about maybe a four block walk. I walked the same route we would walk together, but it also entailed crossing one of the busy streets in Evanston and it's a miracle that I was able to cross that street and not get hit by a car or something. She said, well any student that was irresponsible and would let me walk away like that, she didn't want me to be there, so she took me to Mr. Payne's nursery school, and that's where my earliest memories is playing ball and enjoying that school. It was in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and at the time, Evanston had two Y's, like many cities. We had the white Y and the "colored" and they would say colored c-u-l-l-i-d, cullid Y, and it was in the second floor of the colored Y and I have a dear friend, Collette Hill [ph.], who is now down in Atlanta [Georgia], who runs the literacy program, the volunteer literacy program for Atlanta, and we were just talking the other day at how we were both in that school and that was over fifty years ago, and how I met her when I was four years old, and now fifty-five. So, my first memory is just the goodness of the school, playing with kids, I was always a shy person, but I remember that being a wonderful experience. Story_ID: 218907 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I've always been a nature person, and there's no prettier place to be than Evanston, Illinois, the trees overlapping in full bloom. That's why spring is my favorite season; in full bloom, the trees overlap the street where you can't tell which side of the street the branches are from. So, it's always been outside. I would ride my bike to the lake, and I just love the aroma of spring. The sights and sounds will always be, the most fond will be spring but at the same time for anything anybody growing up in Chicago [Illinois], snow certainly played a role from, you know, you have snowball fights and staying out too long and all the other things, but from the standpoints of sights and sounds, I guess I've had a full existence as relates to just nature and, for a while I was a bird watcher for one summer, and I just did a lot of different things as a kid. Speaker 1: Okay. Bird watching, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, I had suppressed that and I had forgotten all of that, to tell the truth, but I had a, for whatever reason I've always been an early person. I mean, I would be, even in school, like the summers when most kids like to sleep 'til noon, I'm on my bike at seven a.m. I'm outside waiting for people to wake up. I would do a lot of things alone, but as you well know, if you're out that early in the morning, I mean, you know, it's just, you know the birds are singing and it's just a very serene time. So, I really grew up cherishing those moments. Story_ID: 218908 Speaker 1: What kind of neighborhood did you live in [in Evanston, Illinois]? Was it mixed or was it all black or-- Speaker 2: It was relatively mixed. You know, my childhood, I mean I could talk about my childhood for hours. I don't want to take up the whole time before we get through that, but I had a, it was a mixed neighborhood. Initially, I lived on Ashland Avenue, 1838 Ashland, through the end of the first grade. In July of 1956, well the summer of '56 [1956], we moved to 1421 Dewey, which was, so the Ashland address was really more of a black neighborhood and I went to Foster School [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Literary and Fine Arts School, Evanston, Illinois], which was an all-black school. And then, in, at seven years old, I moved and started going to Dewey [Elementary] School [Evanston, Illinois], and was a mixed school. As a matter of fact, my best friend was a white boy named Alan Deutsch [ph.], from Dewey, and he was probably, again, we're talking about eight years old. He lived a block away and Alan, and there was another gentleman, Burt Irick [ph.], who, I think his family was from Turkey, but we became three very good friends and it was interesting; you know, my first lesson on race was, and that was probably, that was the second grade, third grade, we were friends all the way through the sixth grade, and then as we got to the seventh grade and we all changed schools, there was a point where they just kinda, you could tell they had gotten to the point where we weren't friends anymore. I won't say we weren't friends, we were, they didn't wanna hang out with me, and I could tell their parents weren't that receptive to me, and it got to be kind of a, it wasn't a big deal, but it was an interesting thing and there was a quote in a book that I gave you by one of my uncles, it said to me earlier on, he said "[HistoryMaker] Ralph [G. Moore], when you go to school, be nice to the white kids because they're just as good as you are." And, I took it to heart because usually they would tell us, you know everything would be the other way, you know, "You're just as good as they are." No, no. He told me, and I really took that to heart, so I need to be good to these kids, so I mean, it really gave me, I think to this day, it gave me an edge in race relations that has allowed me to be very successful, 'cause I've been in a lot of situations where race has been, could have been an issue and where it could have been a disadvantage, I turned it to my advantage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, so, my earliest friends were certainly, but I also had some black friends too, and they ended up becoming my best of friends as we went to eighth grade and high school [Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois]. Story_ID: 218909 Speaker 1: What were your favorite subjects in school? What did you like the best? Speaker 2: There were no favorite subjects, to tell the truth. I mean, I wasn't the greatest student. I was always a whiz at math, and I was a whiz at history; a matter of fact, now we are already up to high school [Evanston, Township High School, Evanston, Illinois]. My high school--but I was--let me put it this way; I was not a great student in high school. I probably, I never took the book home in high school. I was always bright and if you looked at every one of my report cards, they would say, "[HistoryMaker] Ralph [G. Moore] is a smart kid, but he doesn't apply himself. Ralph is a smart kid, but he doesn't apply himself." So, I could get good grades in math. I was an A student in geometry. But, I was always a defiant kind of kid from the standpoint of how do you, I would challenge the system. I had a history teacher who, Mr. Guiney [ph.], this is my junior year in high school. Mr. Guiney was always, at that time he had to be seventy years old, and his point was he wanted you to remember every date there was in history, and to this date I can tell you from the Louisiana Purchase to the Adam Burr [sic. Aaron Burr] duel with Alexander Hamilton, I can give you the dates of anything, but I would challenge him and say okay, okay, I know all your dates, but that's not teaching me anything. What's the relevance of this? What's the significance of the transaction? I mean, what's you're just learning dates, that's nothing. He would challenge me say, "Well, Mr. Moore, if you don't know my dates, you're gonna flunk my class." I said, "Okay, I'm gonna know it, I know all your dates, but I'm not learning anything." So, it would just be a lot of--I would always be in a confrontational mode with school. Story_ID: 218910 Speaker 1: Oh yeah, your rote teacher [at Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois] with the dates and stuff. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So, he [Mr. Guiney (ph.)] made you memorize all the dates and you wonder why. Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I was just a confrontational kind of student. I didn't study. This was a time, I think, that I talk about in my book about what I--I found two things that I was very good at. One was Sigma Phi, so not much of a future in that, but I became the master, and the other one was playing pool. Speaker 1: Well, there's a position for you on the corner there. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Oh yeah, I was, and it's interesting, I was always a shy kid and this kind of brought me out and although it was interesting, I continued; had I had a different route, I'm not sure what would have happened. I mean, and let me say this, and somewhere I wanted to make sure I made this point. I truly believe that no one has had more fun than me. Now, when I say fun, not the hoopin' and hollerin', party-all-night kind of fun, but just an incredible amount of moments, experiences that have been so satisfying that it would be difficult for me to do what I've done in a different way. I really feel good about what I've accomplished, I feel good about my daughter [Avery Moore], about my business [Ralph G. Moore & Associates, Chicago, Illinois], and my experiences. I mean, I've had, I've had so many great things that happened to me and I've seen some, I've been a part of so many moments that were like, wow! This is an incredible moment. So I say that to say although I took a wide turn in high school; I mean, I, again I didn't take a--I had a spiral notebook for four years that had just gotten old and wrinkled on the edges. I probably could have torn out ten or twelve pages and sold it as a new notebook. I mean, I didn't take any notes, didn't go to school to work. Evanston Township allowed me to, and again, because my parents [Alberta Cunningham and William Eiland Moore], my mother, not that knowledgeable in the school system and my father died when I was fifteen, they mailed the grades home. So, who would be home when the mail came? I would be home when the mail came. So, my mother, to this day, she'll never know now because she has Alzheimer's and she is in a nursing home, but she never knew and she would say, "What's going on in school? How are you doing?" "Oh, things are great, ma. Don't worry about it, things are great." She said, "I don't know, I'm not hearing anything. Are your grades okay?" I said, "Ma, if things weren't okay, they would call you. You'll be all right." And then, I would get suspended. I got suspended a few times and they had a thing called inside suspension, where I could talk, I talked my way into, you just have to go to study hall all day, instead of being sent home. So, I was always on the edge of getting busted for being a bad student or whatever, but never quite got busted. Speaker 1: Now, did you really do bad things or did you-- Speaker 2: No, no. It was, I mean, the worst that would be is cutting a class, or in the hall without a pass, I mean I wouldn't do, you know--understand, we were basically good kids, no alcohol, no drugs, none of that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 218911 Speaker 1: The worst thing that happened to me was with my accounting teacher, and this was my senior year in high school [Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois], and it's very ironic, because I had one of my, one of those moments I talked about around five years later, but I had done very poorly, because in accounting if you don't do your homework in accounting, you are completely lost. Now, here's a guy that did no homework, so, and I could wing it in math because I was a very bright math student and I tested off the charts on math, so I could wing it, but you can't wing it in accounting. So, I'm in the final exam and this is the spring of 1971, I mean 1967, and he says, and the teacher announces to the class that he just passed out the exam, and he said, "Oh, well [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Ralph G.] Moore, why are you here?" I said, "I'm here. It's your final exam. I'm here to take the test." He said, "Now, understand, Mr. Moore, if you got a 100, a perfect paper on this exam, you would still flunk my course." I said, "Okay. That's good to know." So I, I said, "Well..." I just packed up my stuff and I'm gonna leave. So, "No reason for me to stay." He says, "No, you're gonna stay and take this test." I said, "Now you just tell me, you just told me I'm gonna flunk your class anyway. Why am I staying?" So, I get up to leave and, you know, those are the days where don't put your hands on me and, so he goes to block me from leaving, and, you know, don't put your hands on me, so we have a little confrontation there and, a matter of fact, this was the end of my junior year, so it, a long story short, I got in a little trouble for that, but the moment was reversed. Five years later, I come back to tell him, specifically look him up. I now am working at Arthur Andersen [Chicago, Illinois]. I have a degree in accounting and I just passed the CPA [certified public accountant] exam. So, "Oh, Mr. Moore, what brings you back?" I said, "Well, I just came back to see a few friends." "What are you doing now?" I said, "Well, I'm working at Arthur Andersen. I am a CPA." What I didn't realize then, a high school accounting teacher, 1) if someone who never passed the CPA exam, they wouldn't be there, and 2) basically, kind of wash out in accounting. That's the worst thing you can do is be a high school accounting teacher. So, the look on his face was one, you know, I have like these, the top five moments of my world, and that was one of them. To see the look on his face. And the other one was the counselor at that school, who told me, "Well Ralph, based on your test scores and your grade point average, you really shouldn't waste your parents' [Alberta Cunningham and William Eiland Moore] money by going to college. You should take up a trade, go to a vocational program, because you're not going to make it in college." So I had the (unclear) Mrs. Alt [ph.]. But, the reality was, and there's a gentleman who I acknowledge wherever I go, a guy named Charles Thomas [ph.]. He was an all-state football player from Wisconsin, but he was my history teacher in high school, and he was the guy that kind of got me to get--I still didn't study. He said, "Moore, you have too much to be wasting away like this." So, he kind of got me focused on trying to do something, so I ended up applying to college, and the only college I applied to was SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], and I got in. Story_ID: 218912 Speaker 1: Now, Evanston Township's [Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois] an integrated school basically. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, it's probably majority white and, but-- Speaker 2: Well, it was, at the time, it was 1/3 white, 1/3 Jewish, 1/3 black. It's now probably 40 percent black. But, at the time it was one of the top ten high schools in the state. Speaker 1: It's interesting that you phrase it that way, a lot of people that go, I mean, it's, I think most black folks see white people as white people, until you get in school with different kinds of 'em and you notice who is who. I mean, if you're in a majority white setting, you start noticing who's Jewish and who's Hungarian, who's Catholic, and that sort of thing. That's what I was-- Speaker 2: But, you know the Jewish, and I came to appreciate the Jewish history a lot; again, when you're in Evanston [Illinois], the school system, they close on Jewish holidays, so I really got an appreciation of the fact that, you know, a generation removed, they went through many of the same things we went through; I mean, you know, you look at many of the country clubs that wouldn't allow Jewish membership, the difference in the Jewish story or saga and the black saga is that when Jews, they weren't admitted to country clubs, they went out and built their own. When Jews weren't admitted, you know, were discriminated, had discrimination in housing, they would go build a suburb, and they would not feel the pain because economically, they could buy their way out of that, and we never had the resources to do that. But, I think the other thing that the Jews did that we have never done was that they supported each other to incredible ways that really negated the anti-Semitic feelings in America to the point where you couldn't do anything. What I saw them saying, basically, is what can you do to me? I have money. I now have access. The places you won't let me in, I could build better places than that. So, we, as blacks we've never had that ability. And also, we've never come together like they've come together as one people. Story_ID: 218913 Speaker 1: Did you see the Jewish community as a model, maybe, for-- Speaker 2: Oh, most definitely, most definitely. Because economically they pull together, and you mean, I've been in the business work for a long time and in my, I wish that blacks would come together like Jewish people would. I recall the president of Mexico, this had to be fifteen years ago. The president of Mexico made some anti-Semitic remarks in a speech, and within one week he was on the radio apologizing. What had happened, all of the Jewish travelers had called the resorts and places in Mexico and just said, "Okay, I understand. We have an anti-Semitic president. We're not coming." So, all the cancellations, and they were getting ready to put some of the resorts in Puerto Vallarta [Mexico] and Acapulco [Mexico]. All those places were getting ready to have serious losses, based on the Jewish visitors cancelling their reservations and they ended up calling the president of Mexico, "Please apologize so you don't put us out of business." We won't let people abuse us and never come together and rally like that. You look at companies like, and that's something I hope we can talk about more, about what we do professionally, but you look at companies like Reebok. Reebok, they have no commitment to work with black vendors, minority vendors, but yet they don't put an Allen Iverson or some black star in your advertising, and we'll line up and buy all the shoes, but we're not even asking the question, well, how much of this are we getting? At some point, black consumers have to start asking serious questions. I mean, BMW, BMW has little to no commitment to work with black folks, but yet we're very disproportionate number of customers, and we're not asking those questions. But that's, that's another, I'm going beyond your question here. Speaker 1: Yeah--that's, it's an interesting relationship, you know, and many other people have noted and made this distinction too. You know, there are white people that do this, what's the difference and what can you learn? Did you find that the other whites there, 'cause you just got white, Jewish, and black--did you find a white group discriminate against the Jewish group? Speaker 2: No, no, we all got along very well. It was really a great time to be in Evanston, and I've always been into politics and one of the things I point to with pride--in 1968, [Governor] George Wallace got 16 percent, and he was a racist, ran as a racist for president. He got 16 percent of the national vote. He only got 2 percent of the vote in Evanston, so, you know, Evanston at the time was a pretty liberal city, but it was one of those, I'm liberal, but I don't want blacks living next to me, kind of liberal, but it was still okay. I mean, I could live with it. Story_ID: 218914 Speaker 1: Did you, when you were growing up, did you take advantage at all of the fact that Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] was there and there was so many bookstores--(laughter) now, you said you were playing pool, so I guess-- Speaker 2: Understand, I was not--and that's why I love my daughter [Avery Moore] as much as I do, and we'll obviously talk a lot about her, but she's the intellectual. She's eighteen years old. She has a subscription to the Economist, to the New Yorker, I mean, she's out there. When I, I had a subscription to Mad Magazine, you know, a completely different perspective, and you say take advantage of Northwestern. My only relationship with Northwestern was when I was twelve and thirteen years old. That was the route, my paper route. I delivered the Chicago Daily News to the Northwestern campus. So, 1962, '63 [1963], I was the paperboy for Northwestern University. But, no event, I mean, it might as well have been, it could have been, Northwestern could have been somewhere else. I didn't know what it was, to tell the truth, other than a lot of students were there. I had no connection; as a matter of fact, I had no aspirations of going to college, so it didn't make a big difference to me. Speaker 1: Okay, so--so you applied to SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]? That was the only school you applied to? Speaker 2: That was it. My brother [William Moore] had gone there and, a matter of fact, I went down there for Kappa Karnival in the spring of my senior year in high school [Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois] and I had a good time, and I said, well hey, if I go to college, I should apply here, and I had no plan, and I don't blame my parents [Alberta Cunningham and William Eiland Moore]. My mother, you know, my father was dead at that point and she made an incredible sacrifice just to get me through school, and didn't really know how this whole thing really worked, so I was just fortunate to stumble onto SIU and, really, SIU, I mean if, if there's nothing else I leave you with, it's that SIU was a blessing, no doubt about it, because my life changed at SIU and whatever I am today is because of, not so much the school but the people who were at the school, that really gave me my posse, which I still have today. Speaker 1: Okay. All right now. This is--SIU is a state school-- Speaker 2: State school-- Speaker 1: Southernmost school in Illinois, I guess? Speaker 2: Right, Carbondale, Illinois-- Speaker 1: Right by -- Speaker 2: Well, it's about ninety miles east of St. Louis [Missouri], sixty miles north of Cairo [Illinois], southern tip of the state. They were still burning crosses, not so much in the county that the school was in, but one county over in Herrin, Illinois. When I was there, they burned a 20-foot cross, the Ku Klux Klan [KKK], they were still having meetings in those days. Speaker 1: This is the South-- Speaker 2: This is the South. We're talking about Carbondale is farther south than most of the State of Kentucky. You're talking about a southern drawl, but it wasn't 'til 1964 that blacks could sit on the first floor of the movie theater and I got there three years later, so it was still pretty bad, it was still pretty bad. Story_ID: 218915 Speaker 1: But what happened, it was a very unusual story and I think someday somebody is gonna write this story. I think it's been written but not publicized. SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], for a twenty-year period between 19, I think about 1960 to 1980, something like that, SIU graduated more blacks with undergraduate degrees than any other institution in the country that was not an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities]. So, it was really, there are so many successful stories. I mean, you look at Ernie Green [HistoryMaker Ernest Green]. He was part of the Little Rock Nine. He went to SIU. I mean, there were many people, not Ernie, but there was a lady [Minnijean Brown and Thelma Mothershed Wair] with Ernie Green who went to SIU and graduated from SIU. There are a number of successful people, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory, Richard Roundtree, ambassador to--what's the guy who went to--I can't recall his name now--anyway, but we have a series of successful people, but the sheer numbers-- Speaker 2: Walt Frazier, though I don't think he graduated-- Speaker 1: No, Walt left early, but what happens, interesting what happened, and they would use the Kappa Karnival in a very, they would recruit all their black athletes on Kappa Karnival weekend because, and when I was there, we had 3500 black students at SIU, which was by far the largest number of blacks in a non-HBCU at that point in time. And this was a time where it was very difficult for blacks to get into the University of Illinois, very difficult to get in the Eastern Illinois State [sic. Eastern Illinois University, Charleston, Illinois], there were some blacks at Northern [Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois], but the most were at SIU, and given it's five hours south of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, it does seem like there's a tradition here that black students are going to Northern or at SIU. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. Speaker 1: But it was a great place for me. Speaker 2: Okay; 3500 black students? That's really a lot for a state school in those days. Speaker 1: And that's more than most HBCUs; so, we really had our own black college. Speaker 2: That's bigger than the population of a lot of-- Speaker 1: So, we had our own black college in the middle of this institution. Speaker 2: Had they--I mean, how far along were they when you got there? Had the black students organized themselves into a black student organization or was there black studies-- Speaker 1: It was interesting. All of that stuff came after we got there; a matter of fact, I was a part of a lot of that. We had a gentleman, matter of fact, [HistoryMaker Anthony] "Tony" [Preston] Burroughs, and matter of fact I know we're kind of jumpin' around, but if you look at the dedication in his book, he dedicates, his book, 'Black Roots[:A Beginners Guide To Tracing The African American Family Tree,' Tony Burroughs] publisher Simon and Schuster, when he first got it published he gave me one of the first copies and said, "[HistoryMaker] Ralph [G. Moore], look at the dedication." And I looked at the dedication, and I was in shock. It was dedicated to me, because, and I think he, when I go back to my favorite phrase, we're all in this together. I don't know if you've ever written a book, or if a book is on your agenda, but there are moments where you put so much into it and it's still not enough, and there were moments where he needed some support, and we were, you know, again, he's my best friend, so I was going to give him that support. So, I supported him through that process, not in a way that would, in my mind, that would warrant any kind of dedication, but I guess the moral support meant a lot to him, and so the dedication was very special and very touching to me. So, Tony is one of my best friends and my other best friend is Darryl Reed, who is also, again, we're all Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] from SIU, and it's interesting, a fraternity piece isn't as strong as just a friendship piece, and I know a lot of people get hung up on the fraternities and the relevancy and all that, and all of us were very active in fraternity, but we leveraged the fraternity into very positive things, and Tony is certainly one of those people that made that, the kind of person that made that happen. Speaker 2: And Darryl Reed, that's not, is that the actor Darryl-- Speaker 1: No. Darryl Reed, he has an older brother Jesse [ph.] Reed. Darryl, he went to Harlan High School [John M Harlan Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], like so many people at SIU went to Harlan High School at the time. Speaker 2: Yeah, Harlan High School, I might just want to point out, that it was really a factory for successful black people in those days. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 2: So many people-- Speaker 1: Matter of fact, and I think there was a guy, Ed Moore [Vice Admiral Edward Moore, Jr.] --that's another guy you guys should talk to; Ed Moore. He came out of SIU. He just retired, I think it was last year. He retired as the highest ranking black in the [U.S.] Navy. He had, he was in charge of a Navy, everything west of the Mississippi to Hawaii. He was like a three star admiral, which was incredible ranking. But again, just, the kind of people we met down at SIU and the kind--and really what happened to me at SIU was I came face to face with not achievement, as much as people who, not success as much as achievement. These are people who are high achieving people, who were focused and were dedicated to making something of their lives, and it really put me on a track that led me to where I am today. Story_ID: 218916 Speaker 1: So, you're saying at Evanston Township [High School, Evanston, Illinois], you really weren't around those kind of people, or you-- Speaker 2: Well, if I was around them, I didn't take advantage of it, and to be honest with you, I might have, I was around--and then Charles Thomas [ph.] the teacher gave me some focus, but I think in high school and, again, my daughter is an exception, but in--I was certainly too immature to take advantage of that opportunity that I had, and by the grace of God, I could still be in that pool room, had I not, luckily I was--I always touched it well so at the time I was coming out of high school--my class rank, I was number 576 in my class out of 913. That was just in the upper 2/3. Now, again, that's almost crazy to talk about, the upper 2/3, but SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] accepted you if your ACT score was at a certain level, and my ACT was like twenty-six, and if you're in the upper 2/3 of your class, and had a certain ACT score, you could go to SIU. Speaker 1: ACT, that means if the scores mean now they did then, that's not bad. Speaker 2: No, that was good. Speaker 1: Twenty-six is pretty good. Speaker 2: Especially for a kid who was hanging out in the pool room and there were really three things I did very well. It was Sigma Phi, played pool, and I could pitch pennies to the line. I just had a touch. But, my golf game--now-- Speaker 1: But you're good in math, as you said...and you were interested in history-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I've had these interests, but they were never cultivated. Luckily, and when I got to SIU, the one thing that happened to me that changed my life was pledging Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity]. As a matter of fact, I moved into the Kappa house. It was on Kappa's housing, and here's a kid that never studied, didn't know how to study. Here's a kid that talked a lot of smack, didn't know when to stop, and here's a kid that the first place I found myself on campus was the student center, playing pool. So, (laughter) the Kappas changed all of that. There is one other thing I wanted to do or say before I--and one other thing happened to me in high school that was very special. I started, I played guitar, so I got into a band. A matter of fact, I used to play, our band used to play up on Wells Street. I'm fifteen years old now. We were playing four nights a week, from ten p.m. to four a.m. Speaker 1: Four nights a week? Speaker 2: Four nights a week! Speaker 1: On Wells Street... Speaker 2: On Wells Street--this is when the Wells was hot, four nights a week. Speaker 1: What kind of music were you playing? Speaker 2: We were playin' just--you know, rock and roll, and livin' the blues, you know, all the stuff from those days, I mean, The Temptations, and Wilson Pickett, all that stuff, 'Knock on Wood,' you know, all those joints down there. But, you could imagine what that was doin' to my school work. Well, or lack of school work. I had-- Speaker 1: Well, that may be the reason why you didn't care as much when you got to school (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) But that only lasted for about four months, five months, but it was just a period of time that was very good. But, what I did too, again, here's a shy kid, and I can't overemphasize how shy I was. I was probably, I was always, I'm sure I was the last guy in, at the end of the high school there were seven good friends. We called ourselves the Mac-Seven, good kids. Again, good kids but there was a guy named Bill Boss [ph.], Bentley Fare [ph.], James Zinnerman [ph.], Richard Lewis [ph.], Willoughby Jenkins [ph.], myself, and Fred Hunter [ph.], and we spent day and night together in high school, although when I went to the pool and they would come home and study and do all the things they were supposed to do. But, I--there was another gentleman, Frankie Donaldson [ph.], whose father, he was a drummer in the group. His father had a car, obviously, and he would drive us down to Wells Street, but that band kind of brought me out, the Sigma Phi brought me out, so I had music, I had pool, I could talk a good game. Story_ID: 218917 Speaker 1: You had an older brother [William Moore], though, right? He was--how much older was your brother? Speaker 2: Five years older. Just old enough, I don't know if you have any brothers older or younger, but five years is just enough of a gap to not really be that close, although I give him a lot of credit because the one thing he did for me, and it was really interesting. He was always in the fast cars. He had a '65 [1965] [Pontiac] GTO, which was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a dream car in those days. Speaker 2: That was amazing, a four speed. And he went from a '65 [1965] GTO to a '67 [1967] [Chevrolet] Corvette, and for a black guy in '67 [1967] to have a Corvette convertible, it was very unusual and he let me drive his car, which I thought, so, a matter of fact he let me drive it to the prom, and that was--you know, he let me drive it quite a bit. He let me drive it more than I would have ever let my, if I had a younger brother, I don't know if I'd let him drive my Corvette, but a real good guy, and we're different in so many ways. At some point, I'll tell you about it after school, when we get to that part-- Speaker 1: What did he major in in school, and what was doing-- Speaker 2: He majored in marketing, but in six weeks, not six weeks, a year-and-a-half, he dropped out of school. He was done, and it was at a point in time, and my brother is so articulate and so well read. Never got his degree, but he came out of school, well he dropped out of school at a time where they were hungry for black people. This was 1964-'65, [1965]. He quickly got a job selling the Dodge Reports, which was the construction industry newsletter kind of report. A long story short, he parlayed that into a series of sales jobs where he now is a national sales manager for a water treatment company, has done very, very well. Has broken all sales records over--wherever he goes he is just the most successful salesman you'll ever see. Very, very professional, very well accomplished person. So, I don't know if you can repeat his story today, because without a degree it is very difficult to do what he did. But, he did show me the way to SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], and that led me. Story_ID: 218918 Speaker 1: so when I got there [Southern Illinois University (SIU), Carbondale, Illinois], the reason I'm bringing music up, I get to SIU, my only skill sets being playing guitar, playing pool, and talking smack. Those three things will not get you through school, so I ended up pledging Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity]. I'll never forget, October 22, 1967, is when we started pledging and that changed my life, because what they make you do is go to the library four hours a night, and, but the first I didn't know, I was gonna go crazy. Four hours in the library? I had not spent four hours in the library in the last four years. So, after going through all the old Look magazines and fooling around, I finally said, "Okay, I might as well open these books and do something." So, I finally, during that period of time, learned how to study and I made grades, went on to become a Kappa the second semester, and that spring I did very well in school, and it was amazing to me. It was the first, I had no confidence at all that I could make it. A matter of fact, I thought I was going to go by the same way as my brother, I'll be here a year, year-and-a-half, and I'll see if I can find a job. And, at the end of that year, my freshman year, I said, "Okay, maybe I should become a business major." I knew I could, I was going to be a math major 'cause I was so good in math, and then I took calculus, which turned me back, and I--most math teachers--every major has that one watershed class, so either, it's going to determine if you're going to make it or not. Calculus told me I was not going to be a math major, and I said, "Well, what can I use it in?" I said, "Well let me use it in business." And I said, "If I go to business, I gotta, you know, accounting is a terrible class for me, so I said, let me get my accounting over with early." But now, I knew how to study. So, my first class I took my sophomore year was Accounting 251, which is an introductory class, and it was interesting, very similar to my high school [Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois], it wasn't quite as bad. We had a teacher who, he is one of those, you open the door and there are three hundred people in the big setting, big room, and he says, "Well, I understand. I want you to look around. My class is one of those classes, if you're going to be a business major, you have to take it, but unfortunately 80 percent of the people who take this class fail. So, look around. Only one in five will pass." Story_ID: 218919 Speaker 1: Well, I was just mentioning about the accounting class [at Southern Illinois University (SIU), Carbondale, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I said only one out of five will pass; so, again in a room with three hundred people, I stand up and say, "Now, tell me, is that a function of our knowledge or your teaching?" Speaker 2: So you asked that question! Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the people were like, "Uh-oh." He said, "Well, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Ralph G.] Moore, you'll find out," and he said, "one of the things you'll find, Mr. Moore, is that the way I hand out my papers, I put the best paper on front, on top, and the worst paper on the bottom. I expect to see your paper toward the end of the list. Sit down." Speaker 2: Oh, did he? Speaker 1: And, again, to his dismay, I was on top every--and he gave a quiz every week. I was on top every week, and--again, it's just my nature and what I found about accounting--unlike any other class, if you know the material, there is no subjectivity to it. So, I don't care, you could hate my guts. You gotta give me my A. I mean, an A is an A, like in management and marketing, or English, I don't like the way you analyze the foreshadowing, or your paper is too simplistic, and they can give you a C or a B. In accounting, if you got the numbers, if you got the answer right, you get the A. So-- Speaker 2: It is an exact-- Speaker 1: It's a very exact science, and a long story short, and after that I said, "Well, hey, if this is what accounting is about and I was just breezing through it, I probably, and they eventually put me in the school of business [Southern Illinois University College of Business, Carbondale, Illinois], and I went back to being inducted into the school of business Hall of Fame. I had one of the, well the highest grade point averages of the accounting curriculum ever at SIU, and this teacher, I mean, we never got along, obviously, but, and I wish you could see his face turn red, matter of fact, he stopped reading, obviously he changed his policy toward the middle of the class, 'cause he got tired of reading my name first. Story_ID: 218920 Speaker 1: But, so I found that I could do something else, and it was really an incredible discovery, 'cause it was also at a time where I was getting very active with the [Kappa Alpha Psi] Fraternity. I ended up being the president of the fraternity when I was, my senior year [at Southern Illinois University (SIU), Carbondale, Illinois]. But, one of the things that I also found, and this has really led me to my whole civic and my whole professional career, is that I could leverage the power of the fraternity to do incredible things. So, we created and I was, I organized the first breakfast program. What happened in Carbondale, Illinois, is a mini-city. You know, Carbondale is where the train stopped, and if you look at the migration from Mississippi, you took money and you took the train as far as your money would take you, and everywhere that plane, uh-train stopped, there was a pool of black folks, so the train stopped in Memphis [Tennessee], the train stopped in Cairo [Illinois], it stopped in Carbondale, it stopped in Centralia [Illinois], and there's a pool of black folks in every one of those towns. You just took, as far as your money would take you, you got off the train. So we had to pool the people in Carbondale, mostly poor, mostly underemployed and historically, in most college towns there is always a very divided community. There's the on-campus people, then there's the community, and in many cases the blacks and, for some real strange reason that I would need to go back and research as a sociologist, why is it that the educated blacks can't get along with community blacks, or the student blacks? So anyway-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a scene in Spike Lee's movie, 'School Daze,' where they meet at a chicken place and they have a confrontation with the salt, you know. Speaker 1: Exactly, and I lived that. I lived a lot of 'School Daze,' but one of the things that I did was we organized a breakfast program and because we had the Kappa Karnival, which is one of the most successful events ever given by undergraduate fraternity anywhere in the country. At our peak, which was my senior year, 1971, we had five thousand people that would come to the--we were in the SIU basketball arena, and our gross over the weekend was twenty thousand dollars. Now, here's some 19, 20, 21-year-old kids making twenty thousand dollars, and after our bills we still had about ten grand left. It's an incredible accomplishment, but we would use that money to benefit the community. So, we--I organized a breakfast program, and for the first time-- Speaker 2: Is this similar to the Black Panther [Free] Breakfast [for School Children] Program? It sounds somewhat like-- Speaker 1: Oh, very similar, very similar. We would buy milk, and-- Speaker 2: Were you inspired by it? Speaker 1: Well, it--to a point, to a point. Because interesting, Fred Hampton, his final speech before he was killed was at SIU. He was there on November 28, 1969, and then the next weekend he got killed in the raid on December 4. So, we had a lot of things going on, but we used a fraternity to sponsor a variety of activities. A matter of fact, Cairo, Illinois, and I left the picture--I think I left it, I meant to bring it--but Reverend Cohen [ph.]-- Speaker 2: James Cohen. Speaker 1: We organized and paid for, again, using up the money from our resources from the Kappas, we took twenty-two busloads of students to Cairo, probably four, five weeks in a row, and we marched down Cairo because none of the stores, including Sears, Roebuck [and Co.], none of the stores would hire blacks in downtown Cairo. So, we protested and, again, the people in Cairo were almost helpless. They couldn't protest. They, you know, that's one of those if you say something, you're gonna lose your job, if you say something you're gonna lose your loan at the bank, so they were scared to death. We came to town and they had never seen that many black folks, so we had-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a struggle that made national news. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: It made 'Tony Brown's Journal.' Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: On public television. Speaker 1: Exactly. And we seated the people, because they needed some bodies, and again it was the Kappas who helped make that happen. Story_ID: 218921 Speaker 1: Now the Marion prison [United States Penitentiary, Marion, Marion, Illinois], which, at the time was one of the toughest prisons in the country, we [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] organized a black arts festival with the Kappas, and we would have the prisoners art on display, and some of them, you know, they would sell some of the pieces and, it's interesting, then our band would go up and play at the prison and contrary to all the prison movies you see, you go into the prison, now you go through about four wall--about 20-foot walls and wires and all kinds of security, but when you get in, it's not like these hardened guys and, you know, people (unclear), just some regular guys, who--but I found it funny, we went up there two times. The first time we made a mistake and we brought our female singer, and the warden said, "Well, she's here now. But let me just tell you. There's some men here that haven't seen a woman in ten years." So, needless to say, they were like yah! (Laughter) It was really kind of sad. One guy was sayin' after he finished, he said, "Boy, you guys are great." Now, this is 1970--this is 1970. He said, "Understand. I'm only gonna be here until '84 [1984]. When I get out in '84 [1984], I'm gonna look you guys up. I'm a horn player. Maybe I can catch up with the band." You talk about '84 [1984]! That's fourteen years from now. You know, we're twenty year-old kids. We can't think in terms of, how do you say it, two years from now would have been a long time, but fourteen years! But they had no concept of time. I say all that to say that we leveraged the fraternity and I learned how to leverage: 1) I realized that I was, I had some leadership skills and my gift for gab allowed me to, with the fraternity, to turn it into a lot of very positive things. Story_ID: 218922 Speaker 1: I also worked with some small businesses in town [Carbondale, Illinois]. I helped some small businesses get business loans and file their taxes, so I really started my work, or my life's work, working with minority businesses while still in school [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], and the band helped a lot, because we were playing a variety of places. I was making an average of 100 dollars a week-- Speaker 2: Is he still playing the guitar? Speaker 1: I still have it. We had a [Evanston Township] High School [Evanston, Illinois] reunion this last summer and we got the old band back together from high school, but, no I play for my daughter [Avery Moore] from time to time. It's just a, and I also play a bass, so, but we had some good times, but what happened with the, the money I earned helped me get through college, and 100 dollars a week in 1971 was a ton of money, 'cause you know, in school you got a food contract, your food's paid for, your housing's paid for. Speaker 2: Right. I recall a student work study in those days was about sixty dollars every two weeks. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. So, I had a pocket full of-- Speaker 2: So thirty dollars a week was getting to be an average amount of money that a student had. Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, what happened now, and there are people that still (unclear). Now, I'm done with all, by my senior year I'm done with all of my work in school, my major accounting work is done, I got an offer from Arthur Andersen [Chicago, Illinois] over Christmas, so I got a job waiting for me, I'm taking just Introduction to Black America, I'm taking these, acing, very easy courses for the spring quarter. I go out and by a 1971 454 convertible [Chevrolet] Corvette, so you can imagine, and I shouldn't say this on this camera, that car went 100 miles an hour every day, so I had, again, who's had more fun than me? I mean, to go from not even knowing if I'm gonna make it in school, to here I have this great job waiting for me, I got this Corvette, I'm graduating from school, so life was good. No doubt about it, and then one of the pictures is a picture of me my first day at Arthur Andersen, and it really, it was really just an extension. At that point, I was so, and one other point I didn't make, is that after, what really got to me and what really motivated me once I got to school was I realized my mother [Alberta Cunningham] had made an incredible sacrifice. I didn't really put it in perspective when I was in high school, but for, needless to say, I wasn't getting any scholarship and I really didn't get the band together until my sophomore year, so my freshman year, my mother really had to scrape and toil. We're talking about 1971. She probably made ten thousand dollars that year, and that's to pay for myself and food and mortgage and all the other stuff. So, she had made a tremendous sacrifice, and I refused to let her down. So, studying and doing well was very important and it really worked out well. Story_ID: 218923 Speaker 1: Well what did you do, you went to Arthur Andersen [Chicago, Illinois], okay, so-- Speaker 2: Even Arthur Andersen, and again, you talk about strange stories. Speaker 1: Arthur Andersen's in trouble now-- Speaker 2: Oh, they're gone. I mean, Arthur Andersen basically no longer exists, and it's really kinda sad. Speaker 1: Yeah, but they were a world wide-- Speaker 2: World class organization, founded in 1911, one of the first international accounting firms-- Speaker 1: I've been in a complex of St. Charles [Arther Andersen Center for Professional Education, St. Charles, Illinois] where they train people, huge complex, people from all over the world come and there's training going on around the clock there and it's-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Great organization, and to this day I owe my professional career to Arthur Andersen. They taught me how to be a professional, and they taught me how to think like a professional, how to dress, how to carry myself, and it's a lot of, it's interesting. Many people look at some of the--in the old days they used to control you to the point where it was almost like, almost over--it was overdone. Two years before I got there, they had guidelines on hats. They got rid of them in 1969, but every professional person wore a hat. Those are the old Dobbs hats, right? And on May 1, you would change from a wool hat to a straw hat, and on October 1, you would go back to the wool hat. Now, see, (laughter) when you think about it, though, that's how professional they were. When I got there, they had a list of restaurants, and this is before McDonald's had really come into downtown Chicago [Illinois], and said, "Here are the restaurants we expect our people to eat at lunchtime. We don't want you hanging out at the joints." They didn't call 'em joints. They had a different word. But there are some undesirable restaurants that professional people don't frequent. So, we had to go to certain restaurants for lunch and you had to dress a certain way, and carry yourself a certain way, and initially I looked at this like what is this! But, I realized this is what the business world is all about, and I, although today you have casual dress, you have a lot of other things, but being a professional means an awful lot, and I think it's helped me quite a bit as far as what I've done in my business. But, Arthur Andersen was interesting, but when I first got the job, and this was an interesting story, my Aunt Virginia [ph.], one of my mother's [Alberta Cunningham] sisters, she died probably ten years ago, maybe fifteen years ago. She said, "Well." She was so excited. "You're gonna work for Arthur Andersen! If you see, go see Leonard [Paul] Spacek and tell him Jenny said hello." Leonard Spacek was Arthur Andersen's first partner. At this time, he was retired, but still active. They were giving him money. He didn't want any more money, but he was still trained and he was up in the ivory tower, the 35th floor. This was all at 69 West Washington [Boulevard], where the [Cook] County [Administration Building, Chicago, Illinois] fire was. That was the old Arthur Andersen building. So, I grew up, my first day of work. I go look up Leonard and I said, "Well, I'm not sure if you--this means anything to you, but my Aunt Virginia wanted me to tell you hello." He said, "Jenny? Jenny Cunningham is your aunt?" It turns out that my Aunt Virginia was Arthur Anderson's maid, live-in maid, lived in his house from 1936 until he died in 1947, eleven years. So, she knew Leonard from all of the times he, you know, they would always be there talking about different things, and he was almost in tears. He said, "My God! We have come so far because in the old days I would have never imagined that we'd have a black person on the steps." I was only the tenth black person they had ever hired in Chicago [Illinois], and so, so, we made--and he had a nice little book and I'm sure--where he sent her a nice little note on the history of Arthur Andersen, he sent her a nice little note on the book [The Growth of Arthur Andersen & Co., 1928-1973: An Oral History,' Leonard Spacek], said, "Jenny, I'm so proud that your nephew's with us, blah, blah, blah." Story_ID: 218924 Speaker 1: Arthur Andersen [Chicago, Illinois] was a very special place to me because you've gotta understand, corporate America in 1971, they weren't ready for black people. People were giving lip service to, if you remember, there were riots in the streets in 1968, and I used to, my first volunteering now, in addition to the work I did in Cairo [Illinois], in the summertime, I've been volunteering at [Operation] Breadbasket [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] at the [International] Amphitheater [Chicago, Illinois] when they used to have the tradeshow at PUSH Expo, and also I would march, they would march on A&P [The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company]. I would march on A&P, trying to get black produce managers, and this is 1968, so we are just three years removed from those marches and here I am downtown working for Arthur Andersen, and the challenge to that whole process was corporate America was still not ready. They thought that just by having you on the staff, you should be happy, and there's a [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] speech that speaks to that whole, you know, when will you be satisfied. You know, you should be satisfied. Now, boy, you got a job downtown is not enough! And, it wasn't enough for me because they still, they hired about thirty people, started about the same time I did, you know, St. Charles [Illinois], the whole thing, and all of those people had been assigned and went out on jobs, and I'm still in the office, you know, doing filing, you know, just menial tasks, and I go talk to my people, now I'm on the small business staff. I said, "Now why is it that I'm not getting any assignments?" Said, "[HistoryMaker] Ralph [G. Moore], to be honest with you, we have some clients who have never seen a black person in a professional way, and we don't want to put you in an awkward situation." I said, "Well, wait a minute. I signed up to be an accountant. You know, I've been black every day of my life, okay, you know. This is nothing new. I know what it is to be black. Don't try to protect me; but, at the same time you're denying me the experience that I'm gonna need to grow as a professional." So, really it took 'em about four months to finally get me out of the office; I ended up transferring out of that to the general audit staff. But, I learned a lot, but I also, initially, I got so far behind I realized I was never gonna catch up, and just like the accounting teacher that says four out of five, you're not gonna make, pass this class, at Arthur Andersen, only three out of 100 stay to make partner and I'm not sure if that was gonna be the best thing for me anyway, so after a couple years I left; I left Arthur Andersen, but it was still a great experience. Story_ID: 218925 Speaker 1: So, what did you do next? Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting. I spent about six weeks (laughter) and, again, it was an incredible. Again, I've been very fortunate in my life. Speaker 1: This is 1972, I guess, now? Speaker 2: This is the end of 1973, November '73 [1973]. I, again, the board, the Chicago Board of Trade [Chicago, Illinois], they're at a point, they're getting ready to decree their own internal examination and audit staff, because they were saying that the SEC, Securities and Exchange Commission, they were concerned about some of the same stuff that's happened today with trades after hours, and all kinds of things like that. They wanted to audit their members at the Chicago Board of Trade and they were creating their audit staff and all of them were going to be (unclear) people. So, I went over there and I got there and the guy I was working for was--was a screamer; I mean, you know, again--(laughter), my disposition, my personality would not let me work with a guy like this, so for six weeks it was just a miserable mistake. I mean, like, I shouldn't even be here. How do I, rarely do I even mention that on my resume, 'cause it was just a mistake. But during that same period, there was a gentleman named Warren Howlett, who owns a barbecue, or used to own a barbecue restaurant in Evanston [Illinois], goes to the same church, Second Baptist Church [Evanston, Illinois] in Evanston. He said, "[HistoryMaker] Ralph [G. Moore], there's a guy with a minority business program and he needs somebody to work for him and I thought about you. Why don't you check it out?" Long story short, this was a gentleman named Ben Duster [Benjamin C. Duster], and it was a Chicago Community Ventures [Chicago, Illinois], which was a MESBIC, Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company, and that, I became the vice president, although there were only five people who work there. I was the vice president and it really was my entree into my life's work, because the focus of that organization was to make loans and investments to minority businesses and I took that all in, I guess that was right at the end of 19--really beginning 1974. Story_ID: 218926 Speaker 1: Now, was Ben Duster [Benjamin C. Duster] black? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Is he related to the Dusters that are related to Ida B. Wells? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Ida B. Wells is his grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. It was the Minority Business-- Speaker 2: Minority Business--MESBIC--Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company. It's really a licensure, it's an affiliate of the small business administration, partially funded by SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What I did was--and it really gave me an opportunity to really use all of my skills. I introduced--when I got there [Chicago Community Ventures, Chicago, Illinois], they had not really, my goal, my job was to manage the existing loans and investments that were on the books, as well as to help analyze incoming loans and Ben Duster and I, it's interesting and there's a streak in me that (laughter) actually not a streak, it's a part of my personality, let me put it in a more positive way, that I would challenge authority where I don't think it's right, and there were some points there where Ben and I didn't get along. I introduced the whole concept of let's make sure we have business plans in place, they weren't using business plans to analyze the loans and I brought that to the table. But, at the same time, what was interesting, Ben was a very conservative investor, and this was really an opportunity to make investments in emerging minority businesses, many of the black businesses. So, I looked at a deal. It was Essence magazine. We had the opportunity to buy 20 percent of Essence magazine for 500,000 dollars. It was gonna--as a matter of fact, it was 250,000 dollars, 20 percent for 250,000 dollars. Ben's conclusion was magazines aren't gonna make it. They're gonna grind us. I said, "Ben, this is a tremendous opportunity. You know the history of that." We had an opportunity to invest in the first Pepe's Mexican Restaurant [Chicago, Illinois], and the guy says, "You know, he already is in place." He says, "I want to franchise this concept." "Oh, no. Nobody's eating Mexican food." I said, "Ben, I think this is what we should do." Didn't do it. Speaker 1: And Pepe's is all over Chicago [Illinois] now. Speaker 2: Yeah, they're all over. So, we had a lot of deals like that. And, so we really, we really didn't get along, and it got to a point where, and this was two years into it, I was really enjoying the national exposure with other people who did the, there were about sixty of these kinds of organizations around the country. I got to know a lot of the people who are running; matter of fact, I met, what's the gentleman, you know, my mind is blank here that, Reggie Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis], who, Reggie Lewis was the general counsel for the MESBIC in Boston [Massachusetts], and I got to meet him at some of the conferences and you could tell--this is the kind of guy when he walked in the room and you talked to him, you said, this guy is gonna go places. You just knew he had a special somethin' about him and I saw him at another conference many years later and we talked about how he grew up in this business. So, it's really a tremendous potential, but it got to the point where I was just too frustrated and we just couldn't get along, so I left there and went to work for Daryl [Freeman] Grisham. Now, Daryl Grisham was on the board of directors of the MESBIC, and Darryl, probably of all the people, I mentioned a lot of people, but of all the people who really instilled a sense of community and the need to contribute to community, Daryl Grisham is the one person I'd have to point to as he made that very clear to me, that if you're gonna be a part of this community, if you're gonna, matter of fact, even if you're gonna comment on community, you need to be part of it, you need to make some contribution. So, that was at Parker House Sausage Company [Chicago, Illinois], I was the comptroller. That was 1976. Story_ID: 218927 Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you do in a community to give back? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The list is probably too long for me to remember, or to go through. Even while working with Daryl [Freeman Grisham], I was the treasurer for the Rainbow PUSH [Coalition]--well then it was Operation PUSH Foundation. Let me just go through--a couple things happened there. While working with Darryl, I also got involved with Chicago United [Chicago, Illinois]. I was--the Chicago United has a two-tier structure where they have a principal and a deacon. Darryl Grisham was the principal, I was his deacon, and Chicago United, I'm not sure if you're familiar with it, it's probably thirty-five years old now, but at the time it was relatively new, and their focus was to bring the major corporations of Chicago [Illinois] together with the minority businesses in Chicago, to talk about issues relevant to making Chicago a better place to live. So, you had the, it was like the Who's Who of Chicago business history there. You had Tom Ayers [Thomas G. Ayers], Commonwealth Edison, and Dean Smith of Sears, [Roebuck and Co.]. You had just the heavy weights. You had [HistoryMaker] John [H.] Johnson, [HistoryMaker] George Johnson, Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner], who would come together once a month and be very candid about what we need to do in Chicago to make it a better place, and at the deacon level, which is the second tier of people like myself, I became very active in the whole issue of minority business development and how to create more minority businesses. So, it was a very, it was a great entree for me to get involved. A matter of fact, I'm still involved with Chicago United thirty years later. Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't think a lot of people know about Chicago United unless they're in the business community, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. They've had their ups and downs. Unfortunately, it was, and I say this on camera without any hesitation, there was a black guy, Bill Sampson [William Alfred Sampson], who was responsible for Chicago United, almost went out of business, and it was, it was a classic. I was always a deacon and I wanted to be a principal. You know, I had my business and I was doing a variety of things and I said, "Bill, I'd like to be a principal of Chicago United." And he says to me, "[HistoryMaker] Ralph [G. Moore], I think we have too many black principals now." I said, "Well tell--now Bill, let me understand this. You're telling me I can't become a principal because I'm black?" This is the first time anybody, I mean I know I've been discriminated. I mean I've seen white only signs, but this is the first time somebody black has told me to my face I can't do something because I'm black. It was incredible. Anyway, an irony of Bill Sampson, here's a guy that didn't really help a lot of minority businesses when he had a chance to, and he, when they finally fired him realized that he was a cancer to the organization. The first thing he does is goes out and tries to start a minority business, and where he was basically, I'm not sure if he, how much of it he owned, but there was no greater contradiction for a guy who didn't believe in helping black businesses, then tried to start a black business. I don't think he was very successful, and nor did he have a lot of people he wanted to help him, but going back to the things I've done in the community, I worked at Parker House [Sausage Company, Chicago, Illinois] for three years, then I started my business in 1979, so there's a variety of things that I have done. Early in my career, or even while at Parker House, I got involved with Junior Achievement, and Junior Achievement is something near and dear to my heart because it was Junior Achievement in [Evanston Township] High School [Evanston, Illinois], when I was still hanging out in the pool room, the after school program, I got introduced to business. That was the first time I ever knew what a business was. So, by being a volunteer at Junior Achievement, and then becoming a board member, it really was full circle, and I really felt a need to that and it's so special to help other people be introduced to business as I was so many years ago and I missed it. I also worked, became a board member of the Chicago Enterprise Center [Chicago, Illinois], which was a, another group to help develop entrepreneurship in Chicago. I worked closely with the Gateway Foundation [Chicago, Illinois], which is a, an agency focused on drug abuse and other people that had problems, but the best work I've done in this town was an agency called Habilitative Systems [Inc., Chicago, Illinois], HSI, on the West Side of Chicago, very small. When I got involved, a matter of fact, they were one of my first clients. In a simple manner, you could go back and let me give you the background when we started our business. But HSI was, we were doing the audit for them and then we transitioned from auditing to consulting, and they put me on the board. This was probably 1986, I joined that board, and after, I would say, probably three years later I became chairman of the board, and during the period of time I was on the board and chairman of the board, the agency grew from probably seven or eight programs and a budget of about three million dollars, to about fifty million, fifty programs and sixteen million dollars. Story_ID: 218928 Speaker 1: HSI [Habilitative Systems, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], again, it was very important to me as an agency, because it, what we did was create a very professional organization. At one point, we had up to three hundred employees, and it took these, a lot of these small programs where you're living from grant to grant, you're not sure if you're ever going to get your money renewed. We made it a, took social service and made it a career, and there was a gentleman, Larry [T.] Byrd, who was one of the great visionaries of social service in Chicago [Illinois], but unfortunately, my first introduction to AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] was when he died of AIDS 19--it had to be 1989, and I didn't know what was happening. It's really kind of sad, but then we-- Speaker 2: Was he the director or something? Speaker 1: He was the founder and director, and we had a, at the board, you know, we had a big gap to fill and there was a gentleman, Donald [J.] Dew, who is his number two person, and this is one of the times, one of the things I love about getting old, or just being confident is if you can admit when you're wrong and not even, you know, it's a good thing to know when you're wrong, 'cause you learn something. I was one of the people who said I don't think Donald Dew can do this, and there was a vote eight to seven, and I was one of the people who voted seven against his taking the job, and the people who voted for him, including the people like [HistoryMaker] Michael Scott [Sr.] and others, and Donald Dew has been the greatest thing that happened to that agency. He's been in charge since 1989, and has taken it way beyond where I ever thought it was gonna go, but I'm so proud to have been a part of that. I know--I got off the board about four years ago, but I'm still very active, very supportive. It's now the largest African American controlled agency in the state, and well-respected for the work that they do, so that one's been very special to me. Other things that I do in the community, I'm a trustee at City Colleges [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I've been there since 1984, appointed by the mayor [Mayor Harold Washington], very proud of the work we do there, 100,000 students, the third largest city college district in the country, [HistoryMaker] Wayne [D.] Watson, an incredible leader, our chancellor. Story_ID: 218929 Speaker 1: I'm also trustee at the University of Chicago [Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] hospitals, and we have a president there, [Michael] Mike Riordan. Interesting, he didn't bring me on. It was really [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett, and I hope you guys, if you haven't talked to Valerie Jarrett, you gotta talk to Valerie Jarrett, because interesting, her grand--just a historical note, her grandfather was Robert Taylor, or Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], one of the first, highest ranking executives in the Federal Housing [sic. Chicago Housing Authority (CHA)] back in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], but Valerie Jarrett, quietly behind the scenes, has really done a lot for black folks in this town, and she's very prominent in social circles, very close to the mayor [Mayor Richard M. Daley], done very well business-wise, but whenever she's on a board, whenever she's in a position of influence, she's bringing other blacks to the table. She's making sure blacks have exposure to contract opportunities, but they're benefiting from the services of the organization. I can't say enough for what she's done, and how she does it. I mean, she's not, you won't see her out there with a picket sign, you won't see her in any kind of confrontation in any way trying to make things happen, but she's like quiet, behind the scenes, a strategist--so Valerie, who got me involved with University of Chicago hospitals, and I've been involved there for six years. There's a new president, well he's not new anymore, Mike Riordan. His focus is let's make the hospital relevant to the community. Did you grow up in Chicago [Illinois]? We just talked about this. You were from--Ohio-- Speaker 2: Dayton [Ohio], right. Speaker 1: Dayton, okay. But if you talk to anybody black that's outside of Chicago, they have a negative story to tell you about the University of Chicago hospital. Either they couldn't get a job there, or they had a person trying to get admitted, couldn't get admitted there, something. So, we have a lot of baggage as the hospital, and Mike Riordan's committed to making a change with that and I'm very pleased to be a part of that, that movement on the board of directors. Story_ID: 218930 Speaker 1: So, I'm involved; also, the Cosmopolitan Chamber of Commerce [Chicago, Illinois], and this is where the clock kind of swings around. In 1972, I passed the CPA [certified public accountant] exam. That's another, I'm one of those stories. It's hard to imagine and it just speaks to how we've been denied opportunity, but in 1972, I passed the CPA exam, November. I was the 68th black CPA in the state, in the history of the State of Illinois. Now, I mean you can celebrate that, but it means, to me it's a tragedy. Now there are hundreds of black CPAs, but at the time we were less than 100, and you know Lester, and [HistoryMaker] Jim [James] Hill [Jr.], they came before--[HistoryMaker] Lester McKeever, they all came before me, but in the history of the state, to be number sixty-eight tells me that there's a problem. But, what happened, and even there it speaks to the whole issue of race, again about Arthur Andersen [Chicago, Illinois], and there's another brother there, Reggie Burton [ph.], who was another black person who started the same as me, University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], M.B.A., Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] undergraduate, very--I wouldn't call it arrogant, but very full of himself. Well, [HistoryMaker] Ralph [G. Moore], he went to SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]. That exam should be pretty tough for a year but, you know, you should do, you know, study hard, you might do okay. You might make it through. So, we took the same exam, right. Long story short, the results came out. I passed it the first time and, a matter of fact, it was one of those tests November '72 [1972] test, I look back and look at the statistics, only 12 percent of the people who took it the first time passed it. Reggie Burton, who was, needless to say he didn't pass it, not only did he not pass it that time, he took it another seven times before he passed it, so I was very, that was one of those moments. I said, we partied, but we got a couple things done. Speaker 2: You said accounting is an exact science, so you know it or you don't. Speaker 1: You either know it or you don't. But I think the other issue, I mean the reason I go back and tell that story is that just to be an accountant, you know, not to, to be able to use these tools for the betterment of the community really is what makes it so good for me. So, I volunteered, I've done work with the National Association of Black Accountants [NABA]. We formed a group called the National CPA Society [ph.], which were the first CPAs, and is trying to help other accounting students come through the program, accounting programs. So, it's been a number, I've done a number of things in the community. Story_ID: 218931 Speaker 1: We've also, with my business [Ralph G. Moore & Associates (RGMA), Chicago, Illinois], and obviously we're gonna spend some time talking about that. We have worked with probably, we've done probably eight hundred engagements with minority businesses, raising capital, business plans, over the--we just celebrated our twenty-fifth year in business. So, I have been--again, now who's had more fun than me? To be able to do, I've been trained as an accountant, but also as a consultant to help businesses, but I'm able to do that and do it for a living. And then at the other side of my business is the whole issue of supply and diversity, but we're working with companies around the country, major companies. And plus, I've done a variety of things with that too. Speaker 2: Now, that's in terms of hiring people, or structuring-- Speaker 1: It's all businesses. The whole issue is supplier diversity, and I guess we can get into my business. We started around 1979, when I left Parker House Sausage Company [Chicago, Illinois] as an accounting firm, and the first client, well, the number one client was Parker House Sausage Company, and there was a gentleman who was with me today, Lance Foster [Lancert A. Foster], who is one of my best friends. We both started this company together and about three years into the firm, he went off on his own and ten years after he went off on his own, he came back and now he's my vice president. You know, we're no longer partners, but we still work together. Speaker 2: What's the name of the company? Speaker 1: The company is Ralph G. Moore & Associates, and we call it RGMA. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we are looked at as one of the leading, if not the leading consultants in the area of supplier diversity, and supplier diversity is the science of positioning minority in women-owned businesses to work with, to work with major companies and suppliers. This is nothing to do with employment, this is mainly getting minorities and limiting corporate supply chains; not just corporations, but major organizations. For example, one of our clients is Major League Baseball [MLB]. We worked with them for over the last six years, put together a program called the Diverse Business Practice Program [sic. Diverse Business Partners Program], which is the most robust supply diversity process in sports. A matter of fact, my picture was in the Ebony magazine last month in the August issue, as one of their important suppliers. Story_ID: 218932 Speaker 1: And do you understand the significance of our [Ralph G. Moore & Associates (RGMA), Chicago, Illinois] work with [Major League] Baseball [MLB], and I'm going to show you, you know, some of the pictures talk to it, I'm a big sports fan, but my father [William Eiland Moore] loved baseball, and he would work nights. He worked nights for twenty-five years in the summertime. I'm seven years old, I would meet him, he would get out--his shift would be from eleven [p.m.] to seven [a.m.], and we would take him to the train at 9:30 at night, so he would have to take different trains to get down to the LMR Central, Cross Street Station, and he would get off the bus at about 9:00 in the morning, and in the summertime, I would meet him at the bus stop, and this was, again, at seven years old, you know, my mother [Alberta Cunningham] would have left for work about a half hour before, so I would kind of have a window there by myself but I would meet my father, and instead of going to bed, he would take me to the park and we'd play baseball, and there was no greater Jackie Robinson fan in the history of baseball than my father. I mean, it's interesting, he would tell me the story, and a matter of fact, when Jackie played for the [Brooklyn] Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], that famous World Series in 1955, my father went to New York [New York], no ticket, no room, and got tickets for every game; again, he went to every game of the World Series in New York. It had to cost him two weeks' salary, 'cause he wasn't making any money. He had to be leave--he must have been sleeping in the street, but he was at the game, that famous game when Jackie Robinson, September 28, 1955. Again, I know the day because it, he would tell me the story. I mean, it was interesting. At least twice a year he would tell me the story and tell it like he had never told me before. So, let me tell you about Jackie Robinson when I was at the game. I don't have to act like it was the first time. Oh yeah, tell me more. And then what happened, then what happened? But, it was amazing. He loved baseball that much, and he would not miss a game. When the Dodgers were in town, he would take me to the game; again, not getting any sleep at all, so for me to be, for one of our most important clients to be Major League Baseball, is so special and I can't even tell you what that means to me. Speaker 2: Now, your father was, was he one of the, I know there's a certain segment of black men who were loyal Dodger fans. Speaker 1: Oh, no doubt about it. Speaker 2: Because of Jackie Robinson, and no matter where they lived, from that point on they were Dodger fans. Speaker 1: Exactly right, that's right. And when-- Speaker 2: And they would sit in front of the TV set and the Dodgers, wherever the Dodgers, they're for the Dodgers. Speaker 1: My father was one of those folks, and when the Dodgers were in town those summers, he would take me to the ball park. I mean, I remember seeing Gil Hodges and Sandy Koufax, and [Donald Scott "Don"] Drysdale, and it wouldn't make it, I mean I would wonder how he would sleep because, well he would sleep maybe two or three hours, 'cause it was a game day. He would come home and say, "I'm gonna take a nap and we're gonna get up at--." He would get up at about 11:40 and we'd get on the train about 12 and go down to the park. He'd bring me back home and we'd go home about 5, understand, you would never leave a game before the game was over. I don't care if it was 15 to nothing, you're stayin' till the last pitch. Okay, it's all over and we go get on the train, come back. We get home maybe at about 5:30, 6:00, he'd take a nap for a couple hours, get up and go to work, but, no he was solo to the Dodgers. Speaker 2: That game you're talking about, is that the game where Jackie Robinson steals home plate? Speaker 1: Exactly right. And what's special, and I meant to bring the Ebony and I left it, but the August Ebony, there's a picture of me standing next, I have a picture, you know, a huge picture in my office with Jackie, of that play with Jackie Robinson stealing home. I'm standing, I'm holding a baseball bat and this picture was in the background in Ebony magazine, so that's very special for me. Speaker 2: That's one of those incredible moments of the sport. Speaker 1: No doubt about it. And if you ask, Yogi Berra to this day says he was out, and in no way did he make it. (Laughter) But no, I, so I've been very, again, I have all these moments to reflect on-- Story_ID: 218933 Speaker 1: It's interesting, and I always tell my daughter [Avery Moore] you can celebrate the past without living in the past. And, so she's a big historian like me. It's interesting. I think that the two seeds I've planted inside of her are sports and history, and she's a huge fan of history. A matter of fact, the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois], I don't know if you've ever been there, but they have this huge bicycle. I have a picture of her on this bike, I have probably five pictures of her; one when she was about just old enough to hold on. She might have been four years old, and there's another one when she's seven, another one when she's ten, and another one when she's like fourteen. So, again, she's grown up in history. I mean, she's probably one of the few kids, if you just casually asked her, "When was the [Great] Chicago Fire?" "Well, it was a Sunday." It was--you know, she'll just talk about it. It's very interesting. Speaker 2: That's a great tradition to have. Story_ID: 218934 Speaker 1: When did you meet her [Moore's daughter, Avery Moore] mother, I mean, did-that chapter we haven't talked about yet. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a book. I'm gonna write a book on that, because her mother, Michele Thomas [ph.], from the Bronx, New York [New York], I met her in 1981. Matter of fact, it was, it could be a movie. There was a party at Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois], one of those big, huge parties, you know, one thousand people, and we just happened to make eye contact and we, long story short, we started talking and started going out and it was a great relationship like most relationships; again, my business [Ralph G. Moore & Associates, Chicago, Illinois] is only two years old. I'm working eighty hours a week. It's difficult to maintain a relationship when you're working like I'm working. So, the relationship kind of faded, and we finally broke up, and two weeks after we broke up, she said, "[HistoryMaker] Ralph [G. Moore], I'm pregnant." And, it's interesting because, you know, at this time I'm living in River Plaza downtown [Chicago, Illinois], driving, I got another [Chevrolet] Corvette by now and Corvette driving, living, just started my business, living the life of a bachelor, professional person, and so you go through a lot of self-evaluation during that period. Okay, and she said, "Okay, I'm pregnant and I'm having this baby." And, the first happened, by that time, by the time all this happened, I was going out with someone else, and we had gotten pretty close, and I had to tell her what was happening and she couldn't deal with it, so that broke up. The second thing was, you know, you go through that, it's all like a, when someone tells you that you have a fatal disease and I say this, you know, again, let me qualify this if anybody watches this and turns it off right now, I can tell you there's no father that loves their daughter more than me. I've got the pictures to prove it and I got the--and she'll tell you the same thing. Speaker 1: I can testify that-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no doubt about it. But, at the same time, Julie [Julieanna Richardson] knows it too. It's interesting. She knows Julie very well, and everybody who knows her, you know, knows us. That's all, you know, again, the next eighteen years of my life really was built around her, the last eighteen. But what happens, you go through denial, anger, self-pity, but you're up to four stages and the fourth stage is acceptance. I said, "Okay, Ralph, you've always thought you could save the world. You've always wanted to be Mr. Community and all these other things. Now, if you're who you think you are, you're gonna be a great father." So, when she was born I was in the hospital. I wasn't in the, you know, again, there was a lot of tension. Her mother, my baby's mother's mother was there and she was lookin' at me with daggers like, you know, who are you, are you gonna do the right thing, and long story short, it has been an incredible run. The book I need to write is how to be a non-custodial father of a great kid. Because reality is, and what I finally, what I understood early on, and even to the point on child support and all of that, I was the person to make sure we had the court agreement in place, because I wanted to make sure I could see her when I wanted to see her, and the judge had to say, "Now, Mr. Moore, you know you're paying more than you have to pay. Do you know that you're paying more than the law would require you to pay?" I said, "I understand that. But this is my daughter, and I've always been that way." But the reality is the mother of your child, when she's right she's right, when she's wrong she's right. So, I just eliminated all conflict. So, and people can tell you who have seen me, have seen this whole thing evolve, it's been an incredible process. But I give her mother a lot of credit. There were times where she, her health hasn't been great. There were times where she was in between, her health caused her to lose her business. At one point, she had a business that was making two million dollars a year, and she lost all of that and a lot of things happened. But, through the whole process, she never turned her back on Avery and she's always loved Avery. She's always done a great job with Avery. Story_ID: 218935 Speaker 1: The process of being a dad has been the most fulfilling of my life, and again, it's interesting. I was already having a great time and this took me somewhere I couldn't believe, and it's interesting and I see so many people, so many fathers who walk away. I'm sure you have friends who pay them money, but they spend no time with their kids. I mean, they're missing something that you could never replace, and the reality of that is, and people always come up to me and say, "Well [HistoryMaker] Ralph [G. Moore], you've been a great dad." I guarantee you, I've gotten more out of this than she [Moore's daughter, Avery Moore] has, 'cause she's too young to even understand and appreciate all of this. Speaker 2: It's an aspect of life, I think, that people don't fully appreciate for some reason, and I've never understood why, but being a parent is about a love that's a little bit, it's more deep than anything else you can experience. Speaker 1: No doubt about it, no doubt about it. It's interesting, being anal-- Speaker 2: I understand what you're saying. Speaker 1: Most CPAs [certified public accountants] are anal, and I can't deny that I'm not, so we're, and I've computed that we've had Avery 6750 days, and we got four left. She's leaving Friday for Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], so, I'm excited for her, but at the same time, I'm sad, but I'm real excited for her. Speaker 2: Now, has she stayed with her mother [Michele Thomas (ph.)] there most of this time or-- Speaker 1: She stayed with her mother. She went, every other weekend, she would be with me, but then, we would travel. It's interesting, baseball, and some of the pictures I didn't want to show you, two things--Chicago Bulls. I've had season tickets for the Chicago Bulls for twenty-five years. She's been the number one person who has gone to those Bulls games with me. Michael Jordan's last game, I could have sold those tickets for 7500 dollars. The guy next to me sold two tickets for 7500 dollars. Now, Avery and I have a picture, I don't know if I have it here, but we were at the last game, at Michael's last game, and she, and then with my work with baseball, we used the All Star game as our annual trip, so we went to the Atlanta [Georgia], we went to, a matter of fact our first game was Denver [Colorado], 1999, and when we were in the town, we would explore the town. We'd go to the museums, we went to the Black [American West] Museum [Denver, California] in Denver, so we would turn it into a trip. We were in a car and we just really had a great time, but we've been, we really bonded over these last--we were always bonded, I mean, from Kiddieland [Amusement Park, Melrose Park, Illinois] on, but these trips have really been great, and the biggest trip we had, it's interesting. It wasn't sports. I'm at the, it was the Urban League. I'm at the Urban League golf outing about four years ago, and this was before 9/11 [September 11, 2001]; matter of fact, it was right before 9/11, and they had auctioned a United Airlines trip anywhere, two first class tickets anywhere in the world. Long story short, I get the, I win the auction, and most people are like, "Oh, you gonna take your girlfriend," and I said, "No, I'm taking Avery." So I said, "Avery, where do you wanna go?" She said, "Well..." And this was when she was fifteen or sixteen, when we finally took the trip. I said, she said, "Well..." I said, "We ought to go to Paris [France], we ought to--" She said, "No, Dad, I'll get to Paris. Let's go to Hong Kong." I'm saying, "Okay." I mean, I love her confidence, and if I hadn't done anything else, she has such confidence...She said, "I'll get to Hong, I mean I'll get to Paris." So, we went to Hong Kong, August 2002; trip of a lifetime. And again, with her sense of history and plus she's a museum fanatic; I mean, if you don't want to spend three hours in a museum, or five hours in a museum, don't go with her because, you know the roll of placards that describe the pictures? She's gonna read every word on every exhibit, so, which is good, and I'm the same way, but don't go if your feet hurt, if you're in a hurry, but I love it, we were in the Hong Kong Art Museum [Hong Kong Museum of Art, Hong Kong] five hours, doing the whole museum, but at the same time we were in a village, a five hundred-year-old fishing village in the backwoods of Macau, which most people would have been like, "What's this?" and, you know, she's looking under every rock and looking and going through the church directory and just a fascinating person; so, I say all that to say her mother has been a great mother. We've had our moments, but, you know, we're gonna take her to college together on Friday and send her off. Story_ID: 218936 Speaker 1: One--the one thing that I've spared her [Moore's daughter, Avery Moore] from is she has, we all have had our moments, but she didn't go through any, since I've never lived there, she never went through that experience of daddy leaving, and she has rarely--I mean, we all have had our moments or worries, but she's seen very little friction or ill will between us and she knows for a fact that both of her parents are madly in love with her and madly, I mean, so strongly support her aspirations that she really is a fortunate child. Speaker 2: Okay. That's wonderful. I mean, you're truly blessed to sustain that kind of relationship. Speaker 1: No doubt about it, no doubt about it. Plus, she's gonna be one of the great women of the world. I mean, she, she really has great ideas and, like I said, I'm just impressed. I can't wait to see what's gonna happen. I took her to the, I took her to the [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton, the second Bill Clinton inauguration and the parties and I took her to the [1996 Democratic National] Convention when it was here in Chicago [Illinois], '96 [1996], and I have a picture of her there with her (unclear) and I just took her one night, understand she's ten years old, so I'm like, okay, let's see if she's gonna, how she enjoys this. She's like, "Okay, Dad, this is great. Are we coming back tomorrow?" I mean, she wants to hear all the speeches and, so I mean, this was at ten years old, so now she's a volunteer for [HistoryMaker Barack] Obama, she's a deputy registrar, she's out registering people, eighteen years old, registering people to vote, and one of the things I would highly recommend people do as a kid, she's still a kid, but when she was real young, I had taped all of the 'Eyes on the Prize[: America's Civil Rights Years]' series, so we went through, we had looked at 'Eyes on the Prize three or four times, and so she understands, and when she sees [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Dr.] C. T. Vivian on the steps getting beat down, trying to register to vote, and I remember, she couldn't have been any more than eight or nine years old, saying, you know, that's not right. They shouldn't do that. But it was really interesting, just today, and I'll show you how this history thing always keeps coming back. She was having lunch, and one of the things that I think, one of the things I'm very pleased that I'm very pleased that I've done, I think after you get especially a daughter, you get a daughter through sixteen or seventeen years old, there's nothing else for me to do. I mean, I want her now to get to know other great women, or not other but just great women. Her mother's [Michele Thomas (ph.)] a great person, but other women. There's a lady, again, she knows Julie [Julieanna Richardson]. I wanted to make sure she knew Julie, knows her, what her project is doing, what, you know, the things that she's accomplished, so I've got, I'm making sure she does things with professional women. [HistoryMaker] Valerie Norman[-Gammon], I don't know if you know Valerie Norman-Gammon. She used to be the producer of Common Ground [ph.], and she's done a lot of great things. Speaker 2: I've heard of her. Speaker 1: She's a good buddy. They were having lunch together today at East Bank Club [Chicago, Illinois], so I was over there to make sure everything worked out and [HistoryMaker] John Lewis, Congressman John Lewis from Georgia, is in the lobby. So, I introduced Avery and Avery remembers him from 'Eyes on the Prize.' So, I'm just saying that history, it always comes back and he's like, well, you know, obviously I'm telling him that she's going to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], "Oh, yeah, Howard... why don't you come by Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], come by and see me." So, I'm just saying it's those kinds of connections and that kind of, she was so far beyond...now, think about this. When I was eighteen years old, I was trying to figure out, "Now where's the pool room, where can I play my guitar?" She was hanging out with congressmen. So, it's...I'm so pleased with how she's turned out. Speaker 2: Oh, that sounds wonderful-this is a wonderful story so far. Yeah, that is something. Story_ID: 218937 Speaker 1: Tell me about the business [Ralph G. Moore & Associates (RGMA), Chicago, Illinois]. I don't think we got fully into it. Speaker 2: We really didn't-- Speaker 1: But we can go back. I just wanted to--black businesses suffer, usually because they're not really in the chain, the food chain, as you say, and so-- Speaker 2: Let me just give you a little bit of background on why, the business is my crowning jewel. We are one of the leading consultants in the whole area of supplier diversity. There are just two things happening out there. There are black businesses and minority businesses, and the definition of minority, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, or black African American. Then there are also women that are in this category of minority and women businesses. We are one of the experts in developing that category of business. We're also an expert in the, so that's minority business development. That's one pool. The other pool is supplier diversity, where you're matching these minority and women in their own businesses with opportunities in corporate America. In that second area, our RGMA is the leading trainer of people who have the title, Minority Business--or, supplier diversity program manager. The people who run those programs in corporate America, we have done, we've trained more people in that area than anyone else in the country. We work with an organization called the National Association--I'm sorry--the National Minority Supplier Development Council [New York, New York]--NMSDC, headed up by Harriet [R.] Michel. For the last twelve years, we've been their resource, their major resource for training and that's allowed us to train more people with that title than anyone else. Story_ID: 218938 Speaker 1: So you were explaining the National Minority-- Speaker 2: The National Minority Supplier Development Council [NMSDC, New York, New York]. That's the leading group for, the leading advocacy organization, really a trade association of the major companies and they have the desire to work with more minority businesses and suppliers. So, we're [Ralph G. Moore & Associates (RGMA), Chicago, Illinois] their main training organization, and we've conducted, we have a national training group. They have like four hundred national members. Every July, we have a two-day training session for the national members. It started out with about eighty companies that would come, back in 1993 was the first one. This past July we had 195 companies in Chicago [Illinois]. So, we have become the subject matter expert on this whole area of supplier diversity strategies, training, a variety of things that we do in addition to working directly with minority businesses. So, we have done a lot on both sides of that equation. Speaker 1: There's a lot of money to make once you get in a chain like this, right? Speaker 2: Most definitely, most definitely. Speaker 1: A lot of people wouldn't think to make some of the things or supply some of the products or services that would get 'em in-- Speaker 2: Well, you know it's interesting. It's really more, and this is where, what excites me is the process. One of the things we talk about, it's more than strategy. You have to align, if you're a minority business, you not only are gonna have to understand what companies are buying widgets, but you have to allow your strategy, your structure, and your culture to work with that company. There's some cultures where, if you don't know how to approach a business, you will not be successful; I don't care if you have the best widgets in the world. You have to sell it a certain way, there's a follow-up that you do a certain way, there's a customer service model a certain way and part of what we do, we help translate, or transform minority businesses to the point where they can be successful suppliers to major companies. One of the things we're doing now, and again, we've been very, again very pleased with the things that we've put together. One of the things we put together, we developed a benchmark for this whole process on the five different levels, we call it the five levels of supplier diversity program management from beginning to world class, and what the characteristics of those are, and we have written articles, I think I brought some articles for you to look at, so we've written articles about it, we've lectured about it; matter of fact, I've been on two missions to South Africa in 1995, '96 [1996], where we were talking to South African businesses about how to work with black businesses in South Africa. I was at a conference in the UK [United Kingdom], in the Midlands [England] area of the UK last year talking about it, so we're, it's very gratifying to recognized as a subject matter expert, and my next endeavor, and it's interesting, [HistoryMaker Anthony] Tony [Preston] Burroughs is pushing me and I am welcoming his push, but I'm gonna write a book. Avery [Moore]'s off to school, I can now--and again, she's gonna always be right there, and still be part-time, but my next major project is to write a book on the topic. Story_ID: 218939 Speaker 1: Can you give us for instance about a, I mean a specific example of a business that, a minority business and the major business that they're supplying and what they actually have to do? Speaker 2: Let's see. What, let me just take you through-- Speaker 1: Then you could, I mean, you don't have to give the name-- Speaker 2: No, no, I don't mind giving the names, but--they like to give the names. There's a gentleman, Joe Wilson. This is a great story. Joe Wilson, this is New York City [New York, New York]. He had a company called Integrated Packaging Corporation, and what he was doing and what many companies do, he was a broker. He was working with PepsiCo, and because PepsiCo has one of the leading minority business programs in the country, and let me, after I finish this story I want to come back and talk about the value proposition, and why these companies feel this is very important. But, he had a contract with PepsiCo and this was in the mid-'90s, [1990s] where he would sell them boxes, but what he would do is to determine what would you need in corrugated packaging. He would then go to a manufacturer and order the boxes. They would make it to his spec and ship it directly to PepsiCo. He would bill and get paid, but he would take his cut for being the broker. Now corporate America in the mid-1990s got very smart and said wait a minute! Not just Joe Wilson, but all, let's look at all of the things we buy from middle men. Let's get rid of the middle man and we can get rid of that one or 2 percent that they get paid and let's go directly to the manufacturer. So, but they loved Joe Wilson. They said, "Well Joe, let me just tell you what's getting ready to happen, and it's gonna happen not just to you but all of our middle men. The fact that we spend billions of dollars on products, if we can save 1 percent on a billion dollars, that's, 1 percent on a billion dollars is ten million dollars. So, if we can save that on every, the billions that we spend, that's a lot of money. So Joe, you need to create a new business model." So, what he did, long story short, he went to a strategic alliance to a company called Jefferson Smurfit; matter of fact, they bought the Stone Container Company [Smurfit Stone Container Corporation] here in Chicago [Illinois]. So-- Speaker 1: Smurfit Stone, right. Speaker 2: Exactly. Now it's Smurfit Stone. Speaker 1: That's a strange name. Speaker 2: Exactly. So now, they, they have an alliance where they have built some corrugated plants together. They now own manufacturing plants, so instead of being the middle man he is now the manufacturer and processor of corrugated boxes. So, he is still supplying PepsiCo, Jefferson Smurfit, and at the time, now Smurfit Stone. They really didn't have a lot of business with PepsiCo. By working with Joe, they now have access to more business. Long story short, PepsiCo is getting reduced pricing because of eliminating the middle man. Joe Wilson has expanded his business model because now he is a manufacturer instead of just being a distributer, and he is making more money and he now has, I think they've built like four or five manufacturing plants. That's the new model of supplier diversity, where minority businesses are doing the same thing that non-minority businesses are doing. The other model that's become very successful are people that--you have some senior managers in corporate America; African American, Hispanic, Asian, who are leaving those companies, buying existing companies the same way as (unclear)already manages to do, so there is an acquisition of a company and they're going to turn that into a minority supply. You look at people like Carlton [L.] Guthrie. Carlton's another person you guys should talk to at some point. Carlton Guthrie has a company called Trumark [Inc.]. He's a supplier to Ford Motor Company, probably doing 100 million dollars in sales, Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] M.B.A., his brother is working with him, Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate, very bright, former McKinsey [& Company] consultant. They went out and bought a company that was struggling, turned it into one of the Ford's top suppliers, now they're making a ton of money. But, again, the bottom line, the value proposition is quality products with services being delivered to a major company, so there's a number of those models out there. Story_ID: 218940 Speaker 1: But the other issue, and let me just give you the quick, why supplier diversity is so important to corporate America. You look at the changing demographics somewhere between now and the middle of this century. The minority population will become the majority population, and those enlightened corporations, they understand that. You look at companies like Harley-Davidson [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. We did some training for Harley-Davidson. Harley-Davidson has looked at their customer base about six years ago; 96 percent, think about this, Harley-Davidson and diversity. You don't think about diversity when you think about Harley-Davidson. You're thinking of Hell's Angels and all that, but Harley looked at their customer base, 96 percent white males, so they realized and said wait a minute. Although we could sell every bike we make today, somewhere between now and 2050, we're gonna have a problem if we don't get minorities and women riding our bikes, buying our bikes. We're gonna have a problem, because the customer demographics are changing. There are gonna be more minorities buying bikes and minorities are buying Hondas and Japanese bikes, so one of the strategies is supplier diversity strategy and they opened up a minority dealership, a minority female dealer in Prince George's County [Maryland] outside of Washington, D.C. She quickly became one of the top ten Harley dealers in the country. So, Harley was shocked, but at the same time they were pleasantly surprised and, "Hey! We could do good and do well at the same time." So all that we talk about, I go back to my Arthur Andersen [Chicago, Illinois] roots. It always keeps coming back to Arthur Andersen. Let's talk about the bottom line. Supplier diversity and minority business development. This is not a social program. This is about value added and companies like Procter & Gamble [Co. (P&G)], who have one of the best programs in the country, Ford Motor Company--Ford is basically saying, hey, by working with minority suppliers, I could sell more cars and Procter & Gamble is saying by being in tune and being in focus with minority consumers and minority suppliers, we will become, it's gonna help our market share. It's gonna help build our brand. We want minorities to think so highly of us, when they go into the grocery store, they wanna own the store. They want, again, I'm not your normal supplier where I'm gonna buy, most people don't even know what companies make certain brands, but you look at Crest toothpaste; that's Procter & Gamble. You look at Charmin tissue, that's Procter & Gamble. I mean, when I go into the store, I'm buying P&G products because they have one of the best supply diversity programs. Automobiles--I would have loved to have bought a BMW, but BMW doesn't have a robust, an effective supply diversity program. I can't give a company eighty thousand dollars and they don't work with people in my community, so I bought a General Motors. I bought a Cadillac STS 2000, and going back to my daughter Avery [Moore], and I've taught her the same lesson-- Story_ID: 218941 Speaker 1: One of the stories I tell in our training, we talk about the value proposition. We [Moore and his daughter, Avery Moore] were in a grocery store. She's nine years old. Now, your daughter is fourteen. When she was nine, when you turned into the cereal aisle of the grocery store, you lose control. Whatever is going to go in that cart, she's, she already knows what she wants. She, some Co-Co this or something she saw on TV. So, when we got to the, she reached for her favorite cereal, which was from a company that was not doing that much with supplier diversity at the time. I said, "Well Avery, let's look at this. This company doesn't do much with minority vendors. So, if we give them our money, that money's gonna go straight outside the community. None of it will ever come back into the community." Now here's the--Cap'n Crunch. I always thought it was Captain but it's Cap'n, Quaker Oats. "Cap'n Crunch--now here's a product that you love. I've seen you eat it, Quaker Oats does a lot of work in the community and when we give them our money, that money, they give money back to our community and that money floats around and some of that money ends up in my checking account, and that's the money I take you to [Walt] Disney World [Orlando, Florida] with." And she looked like wait a minute! No Disney World, Disney World??? Why didn't you tell me?? She was mad that I hadn't told her before that if we buy products from, in our house there's only good companies or bad companies. The good companies work with minority vendors, the bad companies don't. So, the good companies are the ones we support. Same thing when she goes shopping. Now, you've heard about the Tommy Hilfiger problem, true or false, Tommy Hilfiger doesn't seem to do a lot in my community. So, we don't buy Tommy Hilfiger. That was a tough lesson for her because she was, you know, it was a big thing for her. My only point to her was we have to shop with companies that have, that are members, that are national members of the national supplier, the NMSDC, the National Minority Supplier Development Council [New York, New York]. Nordstrom's is a member, Express is a member, Limited is a member, which owns Express, Bloomingdale's is a member (unclear) stores, so it turned out that all of the stores that she would like to shop at are members. So, now, what's the one that had a Ghettopoly game, Urban Outfitters, they're not a member, and they, and plus after that Ghettopoly mess, we don't give 'em any of our money. But the reality is there's enough good companies out there that we can support, and the things I tell her, if you can't buy from a black company, buy from a black salesman in a white company. And if you can't buy from a black salesman in a white company, buy from a company that at least works with black businesses and minority businesses. So, she's armed and ready. Again, if we could get more people thinking like her, we could turn this around. You have companies like SONY records [Sony Music Entertainment, Inc., New York, New York], and my lawyer told me to stop calling names, probably because it's amazing how people hear what I say, 'cause I speak a lot around the country. But, you have companies like SONY records, who don't do anything with supplier diversity. How dare you take all that money out of our community with rap music and not do anything with minority and black vendors! It's crazy. So, there's another point in my career, after I get to this plateau where everything's working fine. I get the book written, I'm going on a one-man crusade to help educate black consumers, minority consumers, so we can start buying from companies that do business with us. And that's really been, that would be the final chapter of my career; that I've done very well in creating the strategies for companies who get it to do well, but now we have to go after those companies who don't get it. Story_ID: 218942 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: We always ask a question like this-- Speaker 2: No, that's good, that's good, because understand, I--there's a lot of things and I wouldn't know where to start. I think being a student of history, I think we're losing a generation, we probably lost a generation, and it's interesting. I prob--my answer's going to be different than most. It's amazing, people talk about wow, look at the people on drugs and the people in prison. That's a tragedy, a human tragedy, but the reality is in most cases, and this is gonna sound too blunt. I don't mean to sound this way. Even if they weren't on drugs, they probably didn't have--they weren't able to impact a lot. It's a tragedy they were on drugs, it's a tragedy they are in jail, we gotta get 'em out, we gotta get 'em back into the work force, but the greatest tragedy we're losing are those educated people of influence who are in a position to do something and are not doing anything. Again, there are black CEOs in corporate America and Fortune 500 companies who are not doing what they're supposed to do. That's a greater tragedy to me than one brother in prison, because that one brother in prison, the best he's gonna ever impact is his family by getting his act together. A black CEO could impact thousands of people if he put in his mind that he's gonna make a commitment to make something happen. So, we really had to get people of influence, people of power. I mentioned [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett, wonderful person, tremendous commitment to the right thing to do, but has helped so many people behind the scenes. We have to get more people thinking like that, because if you're in a position to do something, you gotta do it. We have, I know of too many white, I'm sorry, too many black executives who hire only white in corporate America, trying to show the white man that they're, okay, I know how to do this. I'm not gonna--you know, don't worry about me. Don't worry about me. I'm not gonna do a diversity thing on you. We have too many--we have black--you know, it's nuts, I mean, you know, you are of no value to us because, it's interesting-- Story_ID: 218943 Speaker 1: --When I first went to Arthur Andersen [Chicago, Illinois] there was only ten of us, and there were 1200 staff people in the Chicago [Illinois] office, ten black, and the partner in charge of personnel called me into his office one day and said, "Oh, [HistoryMaker] Ralph [G. Moore], I'm really concerned. You seem to just, I want you to get to know some of the other staff members. You seem to just be spending time with other black staff people." I said, "Well, I beg to differ, you know: 1) I'm doing nothing different than the other folks are doing. It's hard for you to see it, but the white guys are hanging out with the white guys they know too. These are people of the same fraternity, same schools, we have same interests; I mean, this is what socialization is. We're doing the same thing that the white guys have done for the last fifty years; just that we stand out. And, you know, this guy has, he has a red face now because I've embarrassed him because I've challenged him because just by having me sit with white guys, that's not the issue. You gotta get me to work with white guys, and that was the point I challenged him, saying, in that same conversation. Is that gonna get me out of the staff room faster? Because the reality is too many of our folks get to those kinds of settings and they don't want to be around black people, and a matter of fact the same guy is from University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. He wouldn't sit with us, he wouldn't study with us; oh no, they're looking. So what? What are you talking about? You're doing your work! So, again, you take these people now, they get to be a senior manager and they have all white assistants. It's crazy, and the same thing happened to me, you get people in a position to hire contractors, minority vendors, they're hiring now, minority vendors, so I say all that to say there are two major issues we have to deal with; one is, I just hope black people can stay black. We have too many black folks who have turned their black on being black in some kind of distorted, a distorted definition of success. Well, I'm so successful, I don't have any black people working for me. You see, I'm seeing 'em out at Ravinia [ph.]. You know, black folks have all white folks serving 'em, pouring wine. I said, "Are you crazy? There's a black caterer who would love to have this business. What is wrong with you?" We don't have to do, it's a very distorted situation. Story_ID: 218944 Speaker 1: The other piece that I think is, and you'll appreciate this, and this is why this project with [The] HistoryMakers is so important, what you're doing is so important, we have to teach our history. We take for granted that people know our history. That's why, again, the 'Eyes on the Prize[: America's Civil Rights Years]' is such a valuable tool. I'd go back and just watch it myself. I mean, my birthday's Fourth of July, right? Every year for the last, matter of fact, Daryl [Freeman] Grisham gave me the speech, or gave me a book of Frederick Douglass' speech, his speech was in 1975. Every year, I go back and read that famous speech to the slave, What Is Your Fourth of July ['What to the Slave is the Fourth of July?'], that Frederick Douglass delivered in Rochester, New York, in 1852, because he talks about the fact that, how dare you invite me to speak on the Fourth of July to celebrate what is the most hypocritical day in American history. How dare you talk about Independence Day and black people are not free! I say the same thing about teaching our history. We're getting ready to lose a generation of kids who don't, all they know is [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]. They don't know anything else about history. [HistoryMaker Anthony] Tony [Preston] Burroughs was teaching his genealogy class at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois]. This was about five years ago, and he was talking about the importance of the Pullman porters and their role in taking the Chicago Defender back down to the South and how that was a very important tool for teaching blacks about what was going on in Chicago [Illinois], and one of his students, twenty-one-year-old black student, girl, stands up and says, "Mr. Burroughs, what's a Pullman porter?" Now think about that. Is that her fault? That's not her fault. No one's taught her. So, we're not doing our job. Same thing happened, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis was here back in April at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] to speak. I was sitting at a table of teenagers and said, "Well how many of you are going to see Angela Davis?" Angela Davis? Who's that? Now, that's too--and I took the opportunity to teach. My daughter [Avery Moore] knew Angela Davis, and it's interesting that she got in trouble that night with me 'cause she used that, she told me she was gonna go see Angela Davis, and she went somewhere else and got busted. It was an interesting evening, but kids will be kids, but she knows Angela Davis. I say that to say we have to start teaching and we just can't assume that kids understand, and we talk about the movement in our generation, especially my generation. You know, I've seen that white only sign. Story_ID: 218945 Speaker 1: I think one of the moments that sticks out in my mind, there was an exhibit 'From Fields to Factory[: Afro-American Migration, 1915-1940]' about twenty years ago at the Smithsonian [Institute, Washington, D.C.], and it traveled around the country, but it was one of the best exhibits of the black migration. It documented and really had a lot of things on black migration, but they had a heavy discussion about Jim Crow, and what it meant and how it felt to be, come face to face with that kind of discrimination. So, you're going to the exhibit and you're reading about it and you get the next part of the exhibit. There are two doors to keep moving, right? One says "white" and the other one says "colored" and it was amazing. People froze. They didn't know--the white guys looked back at me like, well if I go through the white door, am I gonna insult him? I don't want to go through the colored door 'cause I'm not colored. It was the first time, interesting, it was the first time white folks had to think about race in those terms. It was a powerful moment. Now myself, even for myself, I said, well, I'm going through the, I'm colored, it's like Denzel [Washington] just recently said, "Hey, I'm a slave," [sic. "I'm an ex-slave."]. And people think it's such a controversial statement, he said, "Hey, I will always be a slave in this country." And so, hey, I'm colored. I walk through the colored section, but I walk through with pride, but at the same time I realize: 1) I didn't have to. How the meaning that had to be for all of our parents and grandparents, and a whole generation of folks. We can't lose that teaching, so, like my nephew, and I love him. He's very successful. He's out in Lake--Lakeland Hills [Illinois]. He is selling homes. He's a top, and I'll show you how this guy, how smart this guy is. He went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], he was number six in his class at Hoffman Estates [High School, Hoffman Estates, Illinois], went to Northwestern, worked at Allstate, quit there. He is now selling homes in these big subdivisions out by Elgin [Illinois], all white customers, right? So you wonder how a black guy sells homes to white folks, right? There are twenty-eight salesmen. Last month, he sold more homes than the other twenty-eight combined. He's just a natural guy, but the problem I had with my nephew and I've told him this and I feel bad by saying this, he doesn't know he's black. And, he's gone. We've lost, I think he would be "fair" to blacks, but he feels, he has no feeling, no passion that we have having grown up black. I mean, he grew up in Schaumburg [Illinois], never really understood, matter of fact, I remember he was offered a fellowship at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and was offended. He was like, "Why would they call me? What's this all about?" I mean, he just didn't have that orientation. So, if we don't teach history to our kids and, again, I was pleased that my daughter [Avery Moore] knew [HistoryMaker] John Lewis. My nephew wouldn't, not only would he not know who John Lewis is, would not appreciate what he's done. So, I think if we don't teach that, we're gonna lose the--I think of Haki--I can never say his last name--[HistoryMaker Haki] Madhubuti, he said it well. He said, "All black people should be angry, but we should channel that anger into positive actions," so I'm angry, I will always be angry that my father [William Eiland Moore] had to work nights his whole career, and that there are so many opportunities that they didn't have that I now have, but what would have happened had he had the opportunities he should have had. But my anger is channeled into positive actions and positive, you know, getting up--I'm gonna make a difference. I mean, the work I'm doing at City Colleges [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], the working I'm doing at the University of Chicago [Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] hospitals, the work I'm doing in my business, all very positive as it relates to what's going to happen with black folks--the work I've done with Avery. Story_ID: 218946 Speaker 1: So you're saying actually that we can be conscious of, at different, I guess, levels where you're consciously angry about something you should be angry about, but you're consciously joyous about other things at the same time. Speaker 2: No doubt about it. Again, who's had more fun than me? I've, I mean, I've seen the Grand Canyon [Arizona]; I was in, I saw Yannick Noah play in Monte Carlo [Monaco], the first match he played after winning the French Open [Paris, France] in 1984, and that was the warmest welcome I've ever seen any athlete get. I've seen Tiger Woods tee off at the Masters [Golf Tournament, Augusta, Georgia]. I've done a lot of stuff, but all that stuff is kind of on the surface, you know, to see my daughter [Avery Moore] go off to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], to see [HistoryMaker] Barack [Obama] and that incredible speech he gave at the Democratic National Convention. I mean, there's, I've seen a lot happen, which gives me hope, a lot of hope. But I think the reality is, and I'm going to quote something from [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson since I'm a big Jesse fan, Jesse said work, no I'm sorry, he said, "Prayer without work is superstition" and we've got so many folks just feeling good and not prepared to put in the work. I'm prepared to put in the work and I'm prepared to work with others, again going back to the point that we're all in this together. I had a wonderful call today from a friend, but more importantly, a business associate who I introduced to a couple of people that I'm on boards of and she's followed through and they're about to get a significant contract. That's why I'm here. I mean, those are those good feelings where I see people maximize their opportunity because I've helped open a door, or I helped make something happen. Story_ID: 218947 Speaker 1: Yeah, that kind of raises a question, another question we always ask and that is at this stage in your life, and you're still young, 'cause I might be-- Speaker 2: Fifty-five. I'll take that young (laughter). Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy. That's a great question. That's interesting. I talk about legacy a lot. My legacy is yet to be written. Obviously whatever Avery [Moore] does is going to be, I'm gonna take credit for, okay, and she knows that. But I think my legacy is gonna be based on, on teaching and networking and connecting the dots. At some point, we have to start working together, and one of the things that we do very well is put together alliances with grouping businesses together and work in larger groups. We put together an alliance in Houston, Texas, called Service Everywhere, where they want a national contract in the facilities management business, put together another alliance working closely with Dennis Archer, Jr. Matter of fact, I'm gonna be a part owner of this company in a marketing services company. The reality is we have to come together to create larger organizations. My, I think my legacy is going to be tied to advancing the cause of minority business. Story_ID: 218948 Speaker 1: We were discussing off camera your parents' [Alberta Cunningham and William Eiland Moore] reaction to some of the things that you were able to do at a young age, and can you talk about that for a second and talk about your mother's reaction to your success. Your success wasn't the first success in the family, because your brother [William Moore]-- Speaker 2: Well, my brother too, but it's interesting and it was really a very touching moment. We just, you know, we put my mother in an assisted living home back in March because of Alzheimer's [disease] and I'm the power of attorney and I went to clean out the safe deposit box, and in the safe deposit box the only thing there that was not part of, that wasn't, you know, financial documents or something that, well, and things like that, was a letter from Southern Illinois [University, Carbondale, Illinois], the first letter, the first time I made the dean's list, 1968, and I'm like, you know, why would she keep this, but again, that's the reaction. The reaction was I got a son that's doing stuff and it was very moving to me, so how could, this was so important that she would put it in a safe deposit box, but it was interesting. She had no idea that I was fooling around, you know, in the pool room and all the other stuff. I never told her. I was always gonna tell her but I was so proud to have done the things that I've done because she, there was no prouder mother than my mother, and there is no prouder mother, although the sad part her memory is gone now. She doesn't remember any of that, but she really is, without her I know I wouldn't be sitting here, but her reaction was like any other mother--study your books, stay out of trouble, and she thought I was doing that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was, but it's been good. I think she's very proud. Speaker 1: They know, somehow, they at least infuse you with the values that really kept you out of trouble, that and luck, I guess. Speaker 2: No doubt about it, no doubt about it, no doubt about it; I mean, again, you can go to Second Baptist Church in Evanston [Illinois], it's interesting, even with her Alzheimer's I took her to church on the first Sunday so she could play her monthly contribution, but when she walks in that church she lights up and, you know, I haven't done the medical research, but there's something about that church. She's been a member of that church for sixty years and there's a picture of me from 1956 in the Sunday school in that church, and I go back to, I'm sure, had she not taken me there and made me go I wouldn't have been there and the values that I had, again, there's a lot of people who mentioned Daryl [Freeman] Grisham and Charles Thomas [ph.], but had she not instilled a sense of right and wrong and community at a very early age, I'm sure I wouldn't be sitting here where I am. Plus, she was so close to my daughter, Avery [Moore]. It's difficult for her because she doesn't know how to deal with the fact that Grandma's memory is gone, and I know there are times she wants to pick up the phone and call her, and I see her struggling with that, but that's just something else we're gonna have to deal with along the way. Story_ID: 218949 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's good. I've always joked about it, but I think it's real. There's a phrase that I use, "Did you see me?" I can tell--again, no one's had more fun than me. I have, I've played in a band, our band has opened up for the Funkadelic at a show in Carbondale [Illinois], I've had four [Chevrolet] Corvettes, I've driven a car at 150 mph and I shouldn't have been on the highway. I've been to [The Championships] Wimbledon [London, England], my fortieth birthday we were at Wimbledon Centre Court watching Martina Navratilova play tennis. I have helped hundreds of minority business people. I mean, I'll walk down the street and people will come up to me, you know, you don't remember me, but you did a business plan for me fifteen years ago, and that turned my business around. Who's had more fun than me? Hopefully I'll be remembered for having maximized the opportunities, having made a contribution, but at the same time kept my feet on the ground, no big head, no cocky, none of that other stuff. Really, I just want to be remembered as a great father, a great businessman, and someone who's made a difference in the community. Speaker 1: Okay. Well thank you, sir. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 218950 Speaker 1: This is winter, I would say, this is the winter of my sophomore year in high school [Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois], something like between '64 [1964] and '65 [1965]. That's Bill Bost [ph.], who was my best friend, got killed in a motorcycle accident in 1975, and myself, Junior Achievement. This was my first introduction to business, which led to what I'm doing right now. Speaker 2: That's my high school graduation picture, really at a time where I still was trying to find myself. I had not discovered myself academically. I had not discovered my sense of community, but that's June, well the picture was probably was taken about spring of 1967. Speaker 1: That's me and [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton. I turned out to be very active in politics during his tenure. Interesting, anybody you see in a picture with Bill Clinton means that they've written a check to the Democratic Party. This is not Bill, ol' buddy Bill, this is Bill saying thanks to somebody who made a contribution to the Democratic Party, but I think people always like to have a picture with the president and it really meant a lot for me to give my mother [Alberta Cunningham] a picture of me with the president of the United States. Speaker 2: This is my Michael Jordan picture, and a matter of fact, that was [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett. I was her escort that evening. Michael and his [ex] wife, Juanita [Vanoy], my one Michael Jordan story is I know Michael but I used to do some, matter of fact, I used to play tennis with his agent [David Falk]. He had an agent that, Michael had his own Nike agent, a guy named Henry Smith; was it Henry? Yeah, from Nike. And I met Michael, a matter of fact, I met Michael's father [James R. Jordan, Sr.] playing tennis with him and I met Michael and I saw Michael about a year-and-a-half later. This was Michael Jordan at a big gathering and he says, "Hey, how's your tennis?" I'm like (laughter). I said the dumbest thing I ever said in my life. I said, "With a memory like that, you're in the wrong business." He said, "I'm in the wrong business?" (Laughter) I said, "Okay." (Laughter) "You win." But, no. That was interesting. Speaker 1: This is my, this picture means so much to me from standpoint of what it really meant. I was the president of the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], and I'm not sure how many are in that picture, probably about fifty people. We had a total of about sixty people that were Kappas, and what I found in those four years and everybody was wearing their dark glasses, and obviously in '71 [1971], this is, you know, we were pretty militant in those days, but what it was, what this represented to me was the ultimate in leadership. I was the leader of these guys. We were making a serious contribution to the community breakfast program for kids in the northwest side of Carbondale [Illinois]. We were leading the marches in Cairo, Illinois, we were some of the leading academic, some of the leading academics on campus and some of the people in this picture have gone on to be, you know, pretty significant people around in different places. And, there are some others who aren't that significant. I won't put out that many of 'em, but there are some lawyers there, there are some engineers, I'm trying to see, there was one brother on here; no, he's not on this one, Howard Peters, who was the former director of corrections. He was head of, he was there the year before this picture was taken. We had a little bit of everybody on this. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Where are you? Speaker 1: I am right here, right in the center, probably thirty pounds ago too. That's probably about forty-five pounds ago. That's the problem with these kinds of pictures, but, they call it the Polemarch, but really the president of the fraternity. But, that's me. Speaker 2: This is a very special picture. That's, the lady in that picture is Harriet [R.] Michel. She is the national president of the, she's president of the National Minority Supplier Development Council [NMSDC, New York, New York]. That's the group that has the, the leading group in supplier diversity with corporations. She is a dear friend. She has been president for about seventeen years and through her leadership is how I got to South Africa for two trips, how I got to UK [United Kingdom]. She's one of the most dynamic leaders in the minority business community. Speaker 1: This is the group, it's interesting though, after going to South Africa, they brought the group that we interface with in South Africa to the United States, so this is the group that we met in South Africa, and now I'm here on the end, legs crossed; again, that was at the request of the photographer, I'm not sure if that was my normal pose for that, but, and I'm sitting next to the gentleman there who is Steve Smith, [Steven] Steve Sims, who is the vice president of the group, but this was celebrating our work with South Africa. Most of the people that I'm with are from the South African delegation. Speaker 2: This is a, one of the very special pictures with my daughter, Avery [Moore], and I don't know if you see--you can look at the hands. It's interesting. I heard some people the other day talking about how the hands are so expressive, but she's probably no more than three or four years old in this picture, but we were so close and she's so comfortable just in my presence. This is what, again, it just kind of speaks to, and I love the confident look in her eye in this picture, because it speaks to how comfortable she is with me and the confidence we had already started to instill in her. So, very special, this picture. Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] Ralph [G.] Moore in July 1971. I had just started with Arthur Andersen [Chicago, Illinois]. That's taken at the Daley Plaza [Chicago, Illinois], right outside of the Brunswick Building [Chicago, Illinois], 69 West Washington. That's where Arthur Andersen's headquarters were when I first got started. Hair was a little longer at the time, fashion was not quite what it was, what it is now. Unfortunately, it's the same color suit. I assure you, it's not the same suit that I have on today, but that's probably about six sizes smaller than what I'm wearing. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I guess we'll start on the left. Speaker 1: This is, this is really a funny picture. It looks like Bill and I are hanging out at the White House [Washington, D.C.]; matter of fact, this was at the [Chicago] Bulls celebration. They had just celebrated one of their championships. What you can't see there, is there's a rope between me and Bill Clinton right there, that (laughter) and he was looking at somebody else and I just told the person to take the picture. So, it looks like me and Bill have been talking basketball and-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just take the pictures (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) And I, had I moved one inch toward Bill Clinton, the Secret Service would have had me in a full Nelson on the ground face first. (Laughter) That was, I don't tell the whole story when I show that picture. I show this picture only because I had mentioned the All Star Game, you know baseball being one of our clients, at the All Star Game in Atlanta [Georgia], all of the mascots came to the party and my daughter had one of the best times in her life dancing with all of the teen mascots, and this was just one of 'em, but it was just a wonderful trip to hang out in Atlanta. We did a lot of, we went by the King Memorial and a variety of other places, but she just had a good time dancing with the mascots of various Major League [Baseball (MLB)] teams. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Might as well start on that. Speaker 1: This was a special day. I had just received a community service award from the Bank of America, and Avery, she is holding it there in her left hand, and she was there to witness me getting the award. So, I was very proud to have her there and have her, and I was taking it at what used to be the Continental [Illinois National] Bank [and Trust Company], now it's the Bank of America building, 230 South LaSalle. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: And this was interesting. One of my dear friends is [HistoryMaker] John Rogers [Jr.], Ariel Capital [Management Corporation; Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois]; matter of fact, one of the things, I didn't get enough, one of the things we have to talk about were black, talk about the end to work with black businesses. Wherever we can, we want to support black businesses. All of my 401K is in Ariel mutual funds. So, at the time, John's daughter is about three years younger than Avery, so he had the opportunity to have someone from his company be the ball person. His daughter really was too young to be the ball person. Avery, being a big Bulls fan, and that's Bill Whittington [sic. Bill Wennington] of the Chicago Bulls, that was really a big night for her, a big thrill to be the ball person. She spent the whole game under the basket, helping mop up sweat when they spilled, she was really excited (laughter) so--I always look at that picture, again, as just one of the moments we've had together. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's exciting. Avery--did she spend some time here, like last summer or something, helping out? I-- Speaker 1: She was part of the Kids Smart Program. I don't know if you were part of that a few years ago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, yeah. Kids Talk. Speaker 1: Kids Talk; yeah, she was on that program. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So I have met her. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Well that's it. She was part of that. That was what, seven years ago? Eight years ago? I don't know. Story_ID: 218951 Speaker 1: This is Avery [Moore] at the 1996 Democratic National Convention in Chicago [Illinois], and the group that I'm involved with, and I didn't really spend a lot of time talking about it, and one of the other things I'm very proud of, is a group called ABLE [Alliance of Business Leaders & Entrepreneurs], which is a group of black business leaders. I was one of the co-founders of that group with Don Jackson. I think that Don's office used to be in this neighborhood, if it wasn't in this building. Speaker 2: Don Jackson of the-- Speaker 1: Central City Productions [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Central City-- Speaker 1: But, this is at--ABLE was a co-sponsor of the convention, so we had access and we were one of the sky boxes, so I brought Avery to the convention. She's ten years old, and I'm saying, "Okay, maybe she'll not get, maybe she'll get bored and we'll have to leave, but there'll be food and balloons," and this is when I realized she really had, well I knew she was kind of into history and politics before, but she really got the buck here and she, she listened to all the speeches, didn't want to live until it was over, and insisted on coming back the next day and, again, went through all the speeches and just amazing how she is into this. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Take down the ones with the glass first. It makes me nervous. More pictures of the convention, the same background. Speaker 1: That was the same night at Bill, at the [Chicago] Bulls, right before she went out on the floor, Bill Whittington [sic. Bill Wennington] just took a picture together. You can see the same outfit she had on. Speaker 2: Avery is a tremendous chess player and I wish she had pursued it more; hopefully, she'll get back into it at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], but she had won a medal when she was playing here, but she, she has a kind of intuitive kind of thinking to play chess. Speaker 1: That was at a tournament. Matter of fact, that's a medal from that tournament. She was very, she was very proud of that. And again, I think it's, being a parent, you have to feed the ego and feed the confidence and it comes at different times and different places, but anytime you can celebrate a victory, you want to celebrate, and I didn't bring all the pictures from her basketball and soccer. She was a soccer-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): But he tried to, I think (laughter). Speaker 1: She was president, she was captain of the soccer team at JV [junior varsity] soccer team at Whitney [M.] Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois] when they won city championship, so she's really, she's really into it. And she loved Chicago [Illinois]. I mean, it's interesting. She--the reason I show this, she probably, I wish she could be a tour guide. She loved Chicago. She speaks about the skyline all the time and she knows the buildings and, again, she's gonna be a great ambassador if she comes back. I'm not sure if she's gonna come back to Chicago. I hope she does. Speaker 2: This is an important night. I took her down to Colonial Williamsburg [Williamsburg, Virginia]; again, being a history buff myself and she's certainly one, these were the slave quarters, real slave quarters at a plantation in Virginia outside of Williamsburg [Virginia], and again, I want Avery to feel, to understand her history, the history of black America, and she, it's interesting, when I going through the pictures and I showed them to her and she said, "Oh, yeah, that's Williamsburg, and that's the slave quarter." I mean, she knows this stuff, she remembers it and I think it's important that more black kids are exposed to this. Speaker 1: (Laughter) This was a great picture and I love, I tried to have a little, my attitude, the look I have there is that "She can't touch my fast ball." (Laughter) We were down in Atlanta [Georgia] at the All Star game, and they had this, the fan fest for Major League Baseball [MLB] and you could put on uniforms and look like, and take a picture for the headlines, so this was a special picture. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): She's done everything. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. She's had a good time. Speaker 2: This was an Easter Sunday and it was interesting and you could see she has her Easter bonnet on, but I tried to do as many things as possible. Again, there's a book I need to write on, on how to be a non-custodial father. Now, that's her mother [Michele Thomas (ph.)] in the picture, and as much as possible, I wanted her to see us supporting her. You know, it doesn't have to be all me, all her, because I was very sensitive to the fact that her mother had been sick, didn't have a lot of income at times. It shouldn't be that I'm the fun dad, and she's the--I'm the recreational dad and she's not. So, I thought it was very important that we do things together like that. Speaker 1: I wanted to show you this one. That's a picture of what [HistoryMaker] Linda Johnson Rice. She is a CEO at Ebony magazine. She's a dear friend and a dear supporter, and I think it's, I've been blessed to have so many close friends who, and again, it's interesting. We don't talk business, and my policy with Linda, and I say this not to, well people understand how Linda and I are dear friends. If we go anywhere for dinner or whatever, I'm paying. I'm insist. But, I've been at her house for dinner so many times, I've been in, I met Michael Jordan through her, and so I insist, and it's not about who has what. I mean, that's the least I can do. But, she's really a wonderful person. That's another person who's done so much for people that many people would never understand. Speaker 2: And this is when the, I didn't know how famous this picture was gonna be, but that's Senator [William Warren "Bill] Bradley from, former Senator Bradley from New York, and [HistoryMaker] Barack Obama. Barack had just announced that he was running for the [U.S.] Senate and was starting to raise income. You know, this was before the primary race. But, and again, once again, if you see yourself in a picture with a politician, that means you made a contribution. So, I made a contribution enough to get the picture, but I'm very proud of Barack. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. This is another night. [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton, again. Speaker 2: Did we do that one? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, we already did that. Speaker 2: It was different one, it was a different one. Speaker 1: I have more--I didn't bring all the Bill Clinton pictures. Speaker 2: This is at the convention again, and that's Kweisi Mfume. She didn't even know she had taken that picture. I just showed it to her the other day. She hadn't remembered that. But again, doing my job of exposing her to famous people and one day, hopefully she is going to have another picture with him where it's gonna be of more significance. Speaker 1: That is, you know what? I can tell you who that was. That was just [HistoryMaker] Ralph [G. Moore] out having fun. I still have that same sweatshirt. I was never one of the people who wore sweatshirts all the time, but this, you say how would I like to be remembered? (Unclear) I had fun. At the same time, I like to think I made difference. That was one night just out. I just wanted to show that because I was just out having fun. Speaker 2: This was another, this was Avery's birthday. Whenever her birthday, we tried to celebrate her birthday together whenever I have at least fifteen of those pictures at different times. I was on my way to another event. That's why I was in a tuxedo, but you made a point and I can't remember where that was. That might have been Gino's [East, Chicago, Illinois] pizza. No, that was at the--what was the famous restaurant with the people, all the movie starts owned it and it out of business... Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, Planet Hollywood. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Planet Hollywood. Speaker 1: That was at my surprise fiftieth birthday party. The lady sitting there next to me is Josette Wright [ph.]. We dated for a number of years while many of my close friends from years and years and years are in that picture, but I'm one of those people who hates surprises and you can't surprise me if you wanted to, and she surprised me, so-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Jim Lowry [ph.] there-- Speaker 1: Yup, Jim Lowry's there. I mean, there's a lot of, a lot of people in that picture who were, who go way back. Jim and I go way, way back. Speaker 2: That's Josette Wright. She was my significant other at the time, and she surprised me. So, she was so--she was pleased having pulled that off, 'cuz I knew that you couldn't surprise me. You can't surprise me. And sure enough--it was a shocker. Matter of fact, the place was at the Green Dolphin [Street, Chicago, Illinois] restaurant. Speaker 1: That's my Aunt Inez [ph.], who died when she was ninety-seven. My brother's--my father's [William Eiland Moore] little sister, and she's a fire, she's a fire plug, 'cuz she had stories about young, she would captivate you with stories years and years and years of things that were happening, but that was many years ago, but her and Avery were very close. Speaker 2: That was Atlanta, with, just hanging out with my daughter. Again, what people always will come up to me and say, "You know she seems to be so comfortable with you. My daughter doesn't hang out with me anywhere." I said "Well, you know, we're just buddies." And one of the things I think that's important, and you're gonna go through this very soon, when you don't talk to 'em in baby talk and you don't treat 'em like babies, as they grow up you start talking like adult to adult, and they really, they really value that. So, we're just buddies at this point. Speaker 1: This is a great picture and you're gonna appreciate this as a camera man. I was getting ready to take a passport, it really was a VISA ID photograph in Ghana, and they had a camera that was, I wish I brought the picture with the camera. The camera was like eighty years old, and it had one of those that had the flash, like a gun powder "Poof" and this was to reflect the light. It had this big light thing, that when it went off it would just actually flash in the, like those old time pictures, but that was-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's a beautiful picture-- Speaker 1: This is the photographer here in the red. The photographer was getting ready, I was just laughing and saying no how are we gonna do this? But, he was trying to make it happen. Speaker 2: Real quick, this is my best friend, [HistoryMaker Anthony] Tony [Preston] Burroughs. We spent New Year's Eve 2003 in Las Vegas [Nevada]. We were at the Mandalay Bay hotel [Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada] and I had just broken up with my girlfriend and said, "Well, hey, I'm not gonna spend New Year's alone." So that was it. Speaker 1: That's a family shot. My brother [William Moore] and his family, and my niece and nephew, his wife, and a child. So that's the whole family. Speaker 2: And this is my father and my mother [Alberta Cunningham]. I'm not sure what years they were taken. My father, William Moore, he died in 1964. A matter of fact, he died at 2 a.m. on the day after Christmas, 1964. Speaker 1: He's only sixty-four years old. Speaker 2: Right. Had kidney problems, died at the Illinois Central Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] up on Stoney Island, up there by the museum, and good man, loved the [Brooklyn] Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], and loved Western movies, but then that was it; 'Gunsmoke,' and Dodgers, and that was it. He's done. He's happy. Speaker 1: And that's my mother. She came to Chicago in 1938. She was a, quite a fox in her day, but one point we didn't talk about was that after my father died, she remarried in 1970, 1970, to a gentleman named John Bell [ph.], and unfortunately, he died like two years later, but I've never, I've never seen her laugh, I've never seen her be that happy 'til she remarried. I didn't--you know--but she was a good woman. She's still alive, eighty-eight years old, out at the nursing center. But, very blessed to have had her as a mom. Speaker 2: That's very important. My daughter, at the [Chicago] Children's Museum [Chicago, Illinois]. She invented the crutch pouch. This was part of her, this was a science experiment for her science class, and it's now part of the permanent exhibit at the Chicago Children's Museum. So, if you go over there today, you'll see the crutch pouch as an invention and, again, her mother had a broken ankle and she invented this so her mother could carry her things around. It laps around the handle of the crutch, like a purse. So, they thought it was very innovative, and she's very pleased about it. We're together? Speaker 1: And my mother at a younger age and, again, my nephew, I would say, I couldn't tell you what year this was. Obviously I had more hair than I have. Speaker 2: My brother William Moore and his wife, Leanna [ph.], his daughter, Ashley [ph.], and his son, Eric Moore [ph.], and my mother, Alberta, her name was Bell after she remarried, so she's Alberta Bell, now...