 Story_ID: 640094 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, it's Wenda, W-E-N-D-A, Lee, L-E-E, Weekes, W-E-E-K-E-S, Moore, M-O-O-R-E [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore]. Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind your name, Wenda. Do you know-- Speaker 2: (Audio disturbance) My mother [Sylvia Means Weekes] saw it in the newspaper when, just before I was born, she and my dad [Leroy Weekes] were going round and round about--'cause I'm the oldest, about the name, and she saw it and liked it. And my dad liked it too, so, yes. It's not a family name though. She just saw it in the newspaper. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 24, 1941, Fort Devens, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Now, can you spell Fort Devens for us? Speaker 2: Yes, F-O-R-T, D-E-V-E- D-E-V-E-N-S, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Okay. And, ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a foundation trustee. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're currently associated with the Kellogg Foundation, I believe? Speaker 2: W.K. Kellogg Foundation in Battle Creek, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is January 15, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at 7236 Lewis Ridge Parkway, my home in Edina, Minnesota. Story_ID: 640095 Speaker 1: Now before we got into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions we ask as a warm up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, my chicken. Speaker 1: As opposed to theirs (laughter). Speaker 2: The chicken I cook, yes. And my kids [Lynne Moore Nelson, Jonathan Moore and Meredith Moore Crosby] agree too, and my husband [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore]. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, blue-green, kind of aquamarine. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Christmas. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Savannah, Georgia. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Never give up. Story_ID: 640096 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Leroy Weekes] side, but we're gonna ask about them separately. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, Sylvia, S-Y-L-V-I-A, Mae, M-A-E, Means, M-E-A-N-S, Weekes, W-E-E-K-E-S [Sylvia Means Weekes]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 25, 1912 in Roanoke, Virginia. Speaker 1: Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and--? Speaker 2: You know, my mom was from a generation that didn't do a lot of talking about the background. So what I got, we kind of pulled from her. But I knew my grandmother [Annie Graves Means] and my grandfather [Wilson Means]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And heard various stories about, about the past. My dad's, my grandfather's mother, Katie Means [Katie Horne Means], was a slave in North Carolina and had a little area of farm, a little farm area that she used to farm. And my mom told us stories about going down there when she was a girl. And they would--she'd spend the summer with her brothers and sisters, and they'd come back with all kinds of fruit and vegetables that would be in the root cellar and the ham and what not from Katie Means' farm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So she-- Speaker 2: But not a lot, didn't know a lot, didn't tell a lot. Speaker 1: Are there any stories that are passed down about the end of slavery and what that was like and-- Speaker 2: Not really (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On that side. Speaker 2: My mom had a part of her family who passed. And she told a couple of stories about even, in fact, being in an elevator once with her cousin, who she recognized in Washington, D.C. Her cousin was a government worker. And it was just a very hurtful thing for my mom. She used to--that was one of the few stories she told about growing up. But my mom and my dad both did not talk a lot about, you know, their family and the family history. What we got we kind of pulled from them when we were interested. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So your paternal grandmother [sic. great-grandmother] had been a slave in North Carolina? And-- Speaker 2: No, my maternal. Speaker 1: Your ma- your maternal. Okay, maternal (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maternal. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 640097 Speaker 1: My dad's family came from Barbados. And my grandmother--my dad's father died when he was young. And he was the oldest and really took care of the family after that, worked while he was in high school, worked his way through Howard University [Washington, D.C.] as a cab driver and worked his way through medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] too. And his mom [Oneida Weekes] took in laundry in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they had been tailors in Barbados. My grandmother, my grandmother's family had been tailors in Barbados. And we were just always so excited about being able to trace our family back to Barbados through my grandmother who would tell us stories. But my dad was never interested in going back to Barbados. And we never went back to Barbados as a family until my dad had died. And it was the cousins and my brothers and sisters who decided they wanted to go back. So it's very, very interesting. It's like there wasn't much interest--my dad didn't have any interest in going back. But we certainly were fascinated because when we had, in class, when you stood up to give your family history, if you were African American, folks could go back to well, "My family came from Mississippi." "My family came from Georgia." But it was a big deal to be able to get up and say, "My family came from Barbados, you know. We know that we came, we know as far back as the island." And then my grandmother would tell stories about how important it was to be educated because they can never take knowledge away from you and how the strongest and the fiercest slaves were always dropped off on the islands because the work was the hardest. And if you were the slightest bit rebellious, my grandmother used to say, you know, they really--they liked to leave down in the islands so they didn't contaminate the folks who were up in the United States. Speaker 2: Now how old was your father when he came up from Barbados? Speaker 1: My dad was born here. He was-- Speaker 2: Okay. So his-- Speaker 1: --born here, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. His parents came up before he-- Speaker 1: His parents came, yes, like seventeen and eighteen. They came to Atlantic City. Speaker 2: Okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: But he still never had an interest in going to see where they-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --they came from? Speaker 1: No, and didn't wanna talk about it. It was like, you know, that was, it was--for my dad, it was always about just get on with it. And he never spent a lot of time thinking about it or, now it's very interesting. Speaker 2: Now, were his parents literate? Now you said they were tailors, but were they-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think so. I never asked my grandmother. My grandfather died long before we were born 'cause my dad was in high school, I think, when my grandfather died. But, so I never asked. But Barbados has the highest literacy rate of all the Caribbean islands because it was an English colony and they needed folks to be literate to help with all the--to support the companies and what not so-- Speaker 2: Kind of like so many of the people or letters on the East Coast back at the turn of the century time were from the West Indies, from Barbados and Jamaica. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Now give us your father's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 1: Leroy, L-E-R-O-Y, Randolph, R-A-N-D-O-L-P-H, Weekes, W-E-E-K-E-S [Leroy Weekes]. Speaker 2: Now is the Randolph from the maternal side of the family or of his, of his-- Speaker 1: I have no idea. It is a family name because there were others in the family named Randolph. Yeah, it is a family name. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In fact, his dad's name was Randolph [Randolph Weekes]. That's where it came from. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right. Story_ID: 640098 Speaker 1: Now your father [Leroy Weekes], you said he worked his way through school and he graduated from Howard medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that it? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So did he talk about those days and how-- Speaker 2: He talked about it being hard. He had an ulcer and, you know, he did about everything he could to--my dad just worked hard all of his life as the oldest in the family. It was very much the West Indian thing. He was the oldest and also a male. So when his dad [Randolph Weekes] died, he was, you know, the one who really had the, to shoulder the responsibility for the family, even though he had, what was it, four brothers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So he would have been at Howard in the 1930s-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --then? Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And did he have stories about the Howard medical school staff or-- Speaker 2: He did and held in high regard. Julian Ross [Julian W. Ross] was one of his professors. Was Montague Cobb [William Montague Cobb] there? Speaker 1: Yeah, W. Montague Cobb. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. And he did his residency, internship at Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital], there on the campus in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Wasn't Jack White [Jack E. White] a surgeon and--well, I don't know-- Speaker 2: I don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) who all was there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but those are some of the names of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, okay. So I know that's a rich tradition, Howard medical school. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And, in fact, the medical clinic that he started in Los Angeles [California] was composed of physicians from Howard and Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. And there were more Howard physicians in the center, but there was always a healthy kind of rivalry between the Meharry physicians and the Howard University physicians. Speaker 1: Okay. And I think, yeah, the poe- people like Jack White and John Clark [HistoryMaker Dr. John Clark, Jr.] would have been his contemporaries, right? Speaker 2: I guess so, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I don't know those names. Speaker 1: Okay, but, okay. Is there--was--so I just wonder if there was any particular story that he told about Howard medical school that you remember? Speaker 2: Well, one thing I remember that really stands out in my mind, when I was about eleven, we all went back to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. He took all three of us. And he was starting a scholarship. And my brother and my sister and I were trying to figure out, you know, dad worked so hard, why we were giving some of our money, you know, that dad had worked so hard for, to Howard University. And I guess I was the only one who had the nerve finally to ask, you know, Daddy, "What's the deal here? I mean why are you giving," (laughter), "your money to these people?" And he just talked about the fact that he was able to go to medical school because someone had provided scholarships to help him. He couldn't have done it otherwise, even as hard as he worked. And he felt it was payback, and it was necessary to do. And that's what you did, and so that's why he was doing it. So it was an important lesson in philanthropy for all of us, be- long before it was called philanthropy, you know, the sense of having an obligation to give back. Story_ID: 640099 Speaker 1: How old were you when the family moved to Los Angeles [California]? Speaker 2: I was probably about seven, around seven. My dad [Leroy Weekes] and mom [Sylvia Means Weekes] were part of that migration of folks. The only thing my mom, growing up in Roanoke, Virginia, my dad growing up in Atlantic City [New Jersey], the only thing they really knew for sure was they didn't want their children growing in segregated schools. And, so dad, from what they, the story they told, was--put out a lot of inquiries. And there was a physician who had a clinic in Los Angeles who had graduated from Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. And he invited my dad to come out as--he was a general surgeon. My dad was an obstetrician-gynecologist. And, so he joined Dr. Taylor's, Taylor Medical Center [ph.]. Speaker 1: And what was Dr. Taylor's full name? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Piram. Speaker 1: Piram, okay. Speaker 2: Piram, and I don't--I'm not sure I know how to spell Piram Taylor [ph.]. But the medical center was the Taylor Medical Center on Jefferson [Boulevard] and Western [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay. And that would be in South Central, Los Angeles there? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 640100 Speaker 1: Before I get too far away, is there a story that your parents tell about how they met? Speaker 2: Not really, not really. My mom [Sylvia Means Weekes], what they used to tell was my dad [Leroy Weekes] was working as a short order cook and driving the cab. And he used to bring food to my mom. And I guess she liked him (laughter). I guess that's what started the whole thing, but it started at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Was she a student at Howard, too (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a student at Howard too. She was a student at Howard too. They were both students at Howard. And then she left to teach 'cause that's what she was--she was in education. So she left to teach while he finished medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Now did she teach out in the Los Angeles Unified School District (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, unh-uh. She taught out in the country, North Carolina, yeah, North Carolina I believe is where she taught. Speaker 1: But she didn't teach when you moved to-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --Los Angeles [California] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She never did because she had three children. And she took care--'cause my--I'm the oldest so my, when we moved out there, my sister [Anita Weekes Hibler] would have been--if I was six or seven, my sister was probably five. My brother [Lee Weekes] was probably three or four. My brother was born in Tuskegee [Alabama] 'cause my dad was a flight surgeon during the war, World War II [WWII]. And the next-- Speaker 1: Okay. So he was part of the Tuskegee Airmen, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was, yeah. Speaker 2: He was one of the physicians when all of that was going on in Tuskegee, and then my older sister, the one right under me was born in Riverside, California. So they were traveling a lot 'cause I was born in Fort Devens [Massachusetts]. Then they moved to California. Then my dad was in Tuskegee. Story_ID: 640101 Speaker 1: Well, can you name your brothers and sisters for us then? Speaker 2: Yes, my sister who's two years younger than I am is Anita, A-N-I-T-A, Mae, M-A-E, Weekes, W-E-E-K-E-S, Hibler, H-I-B-L-E-R [Anita Weekes Hibler]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my brother is Lee, L-E-E, Randolph, R-A-N-D-O-L-P-H, Weekes, W-E-E-K-E-S [Lee Weekes]. And then my sister, Beryl, B-E-R-Y-L, Lynne, L-Y-N-N-E, Weekes [Beryl Weekes], and her twin is Gerald, G-E-R-A-L-D, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N, Weekes [Gerald Weekes]. And then I had a younger brother, Julian, J-U-L-I-A-N, Keith, K-E-I-T-H-- Speaker 1: O- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Weekes [Julian Weekes]. Story_ID: 640102 Speaker 1: Since you mentioned Tuskegee [Alabama], and we're on the verge of a major movie about the Tuskegee Airmen (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm looking forward to seeing it. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Red Tails,' I think it is. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Are there any stories about Tuskegee Airmen that your father [Leroy Weekes] tells? Speaker 2: Well, my dad, the only thing that I really remember my dad talked about--how poorly equipped they were and how the worst part was having so many of the flyers die because the equipment was so poor and-- Speaker 1: Now this is during training then? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yeah, yeah. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he would know being a surgeon that, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so-- Speaker 1: All right. Anything else? Speaker 2: I'm anxious to see the movie, yeah. Well, he, you know, he talked about the disappointment of serving the country and being in uniform and still every time, whether it was Alabama or wherever you were, you still were not treated with any sense of dignity. And there was the sense that it just seemed to be common sense, if you were serving the country that people would treat you with some kind of dignity. In fact, he used to talk about when they were going, I think when they were going to Tuskegee driving, and they stopped at a restaurant. And everybody was served except my mom [Sylvia Means Weekes], dad and me and my sister [Anita Weekes Hibler]. And my dad said, I started putting up a fuss about not getting any food, and that's when he got up and said something to the people about the fact, you know, "I'm in the service. I'm, my family and I are going to a base, and we need food, and, you know, service," (laughter). "We have money to pay for it." But there was always that reality of segregation. And that didn't change, whether you were serving your country, enlisted in your, your uniform. And he said, he purposely, you know, traveled in his uniform, but it didn't make any difference. Speaker 1: So when he made the move to Los Angeles [California], this is like 1948, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes, 1948 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So then he was really looking for a new, I mean, a new situation-- Speaker 2: A new start. Speaker 1: A new start. Speaker 2: Yes, a new start, a new start. Story_ID: 640103 Speaker 1: Now before we, I move on to your early memories, what can you tell us about your parents' personalities? Start with your mother [Sylvia Means Weekes] and maybe go to your father [Leroy Weekes]. Speaker 2: Well, my mother was, my mother was a very dignified woman who had a great sense of culture, and she taught English and, so all of us grew up speaking English correctly. You understood matching nouns and verbs even though we didn't get the grammar lesson at home. When we finally got the grammar lesson, we realized, oh, that's why mom corrects you every time you (laughter) so forth and so on. And she loved her children, she loved her children and was a community activist and did a lot of community volunteering, was a Girl Scout leader and on boards and a lot of that, worked hard for Tom Bradley. Ethel [HistoryMaker Ethel Bradley] and Tom were family friends, and it was, you know, a wonderfully remarkable period in Los Angeles [California] history to be a part--for our family to be a part of all of that. And she served as a docent downtown in city hall [Los Angeles City Hall, Los Angeles, California], and toured, you know, gave people tours and told them about the history of city hall and all that type of thing. It was a wonderful period of time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And your father? Speaker 2: My father was a very, very hardworking man. He worked hard, really worked hard all of his life. I think all of us got our sense of work ethic from mom and dad 'cause both of them were hardworking, and they didn't spend a lot of time bemoaning anything. It was about getting on with the work, keeping your eyes on the prize and you just stay focused and you, you know, you just kept working. And I remember as a little girl being in the car with my dad when he would make house calls. And he had a big spot light on his car that he could, when he made night calls that he could kind of turn to shine on to light so he could see the numbers and know where the person was. And he loved what he did. And we had mixed emotions about it because there were more--there were always babies born on Thanksgiving and Easter (laughter) and Christmas. And we used to call, we used to call 'em dad's ladies because they would always be calling and wanna have these babies when we were sitting down to dinner, you know. And my mom would say, "Eat fast before somebody gets ready to have a baby," (laughter), "and your dad has to leave." But we would have Thanksgiving dinner at all kinds of strange hours, depending on when dad got back. And it wasn't until I got older, and I started meeting women and, in fact, when I was here in Minneapolis [Minnesota], I met a lady who told me how she almost died. And every time she kind of came out of it, my dad was sitting there by her bed, and how much it meant to her, you know, that her doctor cared that much. And when my dad died, the minister said at this big funeral because the place was packed, "Would all of Dr. Weekes' patients and the babies that he's delivered, if there're any in this room, you know, any of his colleagues and patients." And we looked around, it was almost the whole place standing up. And I told my mom, you know, I said, "Mom, you gotta turn around and see this because dad would be so proud. Dad would be so proud." So it was always just an honor to be their children because they were such outstanding people who really worked hard. They were one of the first people, first black folks to move into our neighborhood where I grew up in Gramercy Park [Los Angeles, California]. And it was really hard 'cause people started moving out as soon as they realized that we (laughter) had moved in. But mom and dad just never complained and never let us get into a--they have a lot of nerve or angry or ever be disrespectful to the white people who did stay in our neighborhood. It was always about, you know, being your best and, and working hard. That's what I grew up with. That's what we all grew up with. Story_ID: 640104 Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Oh, I guess earliest childhood memory would be--and I'm not even sure where this is, I'm not even sure where this is. But I was playing with a puppy and, but it seemed to be kind of like out in the country somewhere. So I don't think it was up in Boston [Massachusetts], yeah, maybe down in Roanoke [Virginia] somewhere. But my dad [Leroy Weekes] was always--my dad always had a special place in his mom's [Oneida Weekes] life because he was the oldest, and he was her first son. And, so I was his first child and, so I always had a special place in her heart too. And, in fact, my mother [Sylvia Means Weekes] used to say they really spoiled me. And I said, "No, I was well loved, mom. I wasn't spoiled. I was well loved," but she said, whenever she went to visit, they would never let me cry. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: They would never let me cry, and there were so many arguments about just leave the baby. Let her cry for a minute. And my grandmother said, "No, no, Wenda Lee [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] will not cry; no, she will not cry in this house." There's a fair amount of tension between my mom (laughter) and my grandmother about how to attend to Wenda. But my grandmother came to my graduation from Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. When I got married in Los Angeles [California] to Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore], she came out. It's, it was a big deal. And that's very West Indian too, that special, if you're the first, you are the first. You have more responsibility than anybody else in the family, but you also have a little special place in everybody's heart because you were the first. Story_ID: 640105 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Of growing up? I guess a lot of noise because I had these brothers and sisters all around. And, so we always had something going on. And one thing I remember is my mom did a lot of cooking. It was in the old days (laughter), you know, when people did a lot of cooking. And, so we always had oatmeal, not instant oatmeal, but it was oatmeal that, you know, my mom got up early. And you wanted to get up early and get it because if you were late, it just was cold, and it was awful. So you had to get up, you know, you wanted to get up early and get it while it was hot and not so hard. And my mom was one of those cooks that whatever she cooked, you had to like it and you ate it because I remember my cousin came one summer for a visit. And she said--my mom was making scrambled eggs, and my cousin said, who was maybe about nine or ten, she said, "Aunt Sylvia [Sylvia Means Weekes], I can't eat those eggs unless there is cheese in the eggs." And we all got deathly silent because nobody told my mom how to cook anything. You just ate whatever (laughter) she cooked. And she turned around with a smile on her face and she said, "Antoinette [ph.], you will eat the eggs this summer as long as you're here any way I cook them. And I'm not cooking them this morning with cheese. Maybe tomorrow morning we'll have cheese." And she did eat 'em that way. But it was a noisy household because there was always something going on. And we had a dog who was always, you know, a big dog running around. So I don't know if that's what you mean, but that's kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, all this is-- Speaker 2: That's our life. Speaker 1: What kind of dog was he? Speaker 2: We had a boxer who was a sweet, sweet dog, sweet, sweet dog. And it was the kind of neighborhood where we played. There were kids all around, and we played all day. This was before summer camps. So in the summer, you just played all day in the summer 'til it was time to come in. And I remember we'd make peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and put 'em in the wagon and, or, you know, skate up and down the street, whatever. It was just a great time to grow up in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay. And this is in (pronunciation) Gramercy Park [Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Gramercy Park. Speaker 1: Gramercy Park? Speaker 2: Gramercy Park, yeah. Speaker 1: Gramercy Park, okay. Speaker 2: And then The Mills Brothers. That was the big, the big notoriety. Donald Mills who was the lead singer for The Mills Brothers lived around the corner from us and our backyards were kind of adjacent. So we grew up with the Mills kids. And that was the big, big kind of notoriety and special thing about where we lived because every now and then, you know, Ella Fitzgerald or somebody would come. And then my dad [Leroy Weekes] treated because it was, you know, kind of the way it was out there, Duke Ellington or folks like that when they came and needed a doctor, my dad would treat them. So it was kind of interesting growing up with the Mills family so close. Story_ID: 640106 Speaker 1: Now we were talking about some of the celebrities-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in your neighborhood. This is Gramercy Park, and the people who would come to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to do shows, and your father [Leroy Weekes] would treat them. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. I think probably because Donald Mills--and it was just a kind of a network of physicians 'cause dad would laugh about how, what's the phrase, oh, that Duke Ellington was a little bit of a hypochondriac. And, so it was just a matter of kind of telling him everything was all right, kind of a deal. Speaker 1: So your dad, basically, he was a general pra- I know he was (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, obstetrician-gynecologist. Speaker 1: Obstetrician. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Obie-gynie [obstetrics and gynecology]. Speaker 2: He took the boards. He was one of the--well, he was the first African American as an adjunct faculty member of the University of Southern California medical school [University of Southern California School of Medicine; Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] because of his clinical position. He was the first African American to serve on the medical, the California State Board of Medical Examiners [Medical Board of California]. He served in that capacity until Ronald Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan] became governor, and he put dad off, even though my dad was kind of (laughter) a Republican. The only way--that's why my mom [Sylvia Means Weekes] said she always had to go vote to erase my dad's vote. So-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So every time he went to polls, she had to go then. Speaker 1: So he never became a Democrat like most black people in those days? Speaker 2: No, he didn't, and it's because he grew up in Atlantic City [New Jersey]. And Republicans really kind of ran Atlantic City government. Story_ID: 640107 Speaker 1: Now just kind of tell us what the political climate was in those days. I know we discussed it upstairs, but as we speak in 2012, the parties are so po- polarized, and I'm sure they thought they had differences then too, but what was it like? Speaker 2: Well, I don't, I--there was just a level of civility, I think, in politics that's left now. But my dad [Leroy Weekes] was a part of--my dad was a gentleman and so he just thought, you know, there ought to be a way to work this stuff out. So he was in the Urban League, for instance, and was president of the Urban League and he just believed that was the route. I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. I never will forget. I called one night all excited because I had heard Malcolm X, and the wonderful thing about going to school in the early '60s [1960s] and Howard University, there was this incredible shift going on in the country. And the main players in that shift came to Howard University to talk to us about it. So this was not second hand stuff. We were hearing first hand from Whitney Young, from Malcolm X, from Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I mean you name them. They were coming to Howard. They still go to Howard University. And [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin came for a seminar, was there, and I changed my minor to history after I heard him 'cause it was just so exciting. And all this stuff that I'd never learned in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. But at any rate, it was a very, very exciting time, and I heard Malcolm X, and he made so much sense to me, and it was just so exciting. And I was just--and I never will forget. I came back to the dorm, and I called my dad, and I said, "I've heard this man, and he's just so remarkable, daddy, and you should hear him, and it's Malcolm X." And I didn't get another word out. My dad said, "I did not send you to that school to become a black radical. You're there to get your education and come home, and you don't need to do any more of that. You just focus on your books and go to the library. That's all you need," (laughter), "to do." And I thought, whoa, you know, whoa. There's this big difference here in philosophy and how you face this new time in our lives and the sense of--although, I, and I still believe that there were parts of what Malcolm X said that my dad would appreciate if he had been quiet long enough to hear what he was saying because he did believe in supporting the black community and pulling yourself up and working hard, and so much of what Malcolm X was telling us as a black community, we needed to do. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --but it was interesting. Story_ID: 640108 Speaker 1: Tell us about going to school. Now what was your first school? Speaker 2: I went to elementary school at 24th Street School [24th Street Elementary School, Los Angeles, California]. That was right around the corner at Gramercy Park [Los Angeles, California]. And we could, from my bathroom window, hear the first bell and get to, still get to school on time. And it was a great school because it was an integrated, integrated teaching staff. And-- Speaker 1: Now was that unusual for L.A. [Los Angeles, California]-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: --in those days? Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: But was the school po- population integrated? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was. We weren't a big percent of the kids, but I remember having friends who were black and white and everything. There were a couple of Hispanic kids in my class. So there was a nice diversity in the school population which was nice. And I was a good student, and I liked school, so it was a very, very positive experience for me. And my mom [Sylvia Means Weekes] was active on the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and, so it was very common for her to be at school. I was in the orchestra. I played the piano and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, now you--I read that your father [Leroy Weekes] played the violin (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A violinist, yes. Yeah, he did. Speaker 1: He played at an orchestra in-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the doctors symphony [Los Angeles Doctors Symphony Orchestra]. Yes. And in fact, the Medical Dental Pharmaceutical Association used to have talent shows. And our family performed. My--I played the piano. My dad played the violin, and my sister [Anita Weekes Hibler] would play the violin. And we had several appearances as (laughter) now that I think about it. I hadn't thought about that in a long time. It was fun. Speaker 1: It appears, the Weekes family-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, exactly. And then I went to Mount Vernon Junior High School [Los Angeles, California]. And the outside of Mount Vernon looked just like [President] George Washington's home with the pillars and all. And again, I had a, I had a great experience. I was editor of the school paper and had a good experience. Speaker 1: Now this is high-- Speaker 2: This is junior high-- Speaker 1: Junior high school, junior high school, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Mount Vernon Junior High, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Is that in the same neighborhood? Speaker 2: No, I had to get on a bus to go to Mount Vernon, yeah. And then L.A. High School [Los Angeles High School, Los Angeles, California] was on Olympic [Boulevard], and that was two buses to get to (laughter) L.A. High School. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I really had a good time at L.A. High School and-- Speaker 1: Now, both of these schools are integrated as well? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, everything was integrated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was active in student life and president of this and that and just really had a very full, academic life-- Speaker 1: Now when-- Speaker 2: --at both. Story_ID: 640109 Speaker 1: Were there any, you know, special teachers or mentors along the way or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Mr. Williams [ph.] in high school [Los Angeles High School, Los Angeles, California] was the history teacher. And he encouraged me, and I remember Mrs. Aaron [ph.] in high school also, was an English teacher. And she was the first person to ever tell me that I wrote well and that, and she would do things like, she would give me a B, and tell me, you know, you really could have had an A. Next time, do it one more time, do another editing and, but I know you can get an A. So it meant a lot when I got A's from Mrs. Aaron because she just--that just really gave me the motivation to work a little harder at it. But just the fact that she would think that I was capable of doing that made it, made it exciting to try. So, and I remember being really excited about civics. I had a great civics teacher in high school who talked about the responsibility we had in a democracy and how it wouldn't work if we didn't work at it. And we had to learn how to be good citizens. It wasn't something that just floated down. You had to work at being a good citizen. And we had practiced voting. We voted for student body president. Everybody had to vote. And, so we had that just actual working at learning how to be a good citizen that I think was really worthwhile and set a good example. Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You had to register, you know, so we were practicing how to go out in the real world and be good citizens. Story_ID: 640110 Speaker 1: Now were there any black elected officials then in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] that you knew or knew about in those days? Speaker 2: No, not really. There were people on the city council [Los Angeles City Council] but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause Tom Bradley at that time, and he was a family friend, left the police department [Los Angeles Police Department] and was city council, on the city council. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we knew that's-- Speaker 1: So you were in high school [Los Angeles High School, Los Angeles, California], this is from '55 [1955] through '59 [1959]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: All right. So this is, so Tom Bradley, and there's another--there's a couple other names I know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I know that--oh, what's his name? Speaker 2: I know, I know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I should know them too. Speaker 1: I think I got-- Speaker 2: And if you call them, I'll know them. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Yeah, oh, here's a friend, I think I know here, yeah, Byron Rumford [William Byron Rumford]. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Eugene McAt- McAteer [J. Eugene McAteer]? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know that name. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I never heard of him either, but he's, some little poster here. Speaker 2: There was a very dynamic black press in L.A. at that time, the Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel] and Mrs. Lomax [Almena Lomax] had another newspaper [Los Angeles Tribune]. But they were very dynamic in terms of really being the voice of the people in the community and not being afraid to take on the mayor or the city council or whatever and-- Speaker 1: Was Gus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, just tell us what you know about, you know, what-- Speaker 2: Well, I know that he was--my dad [Leroy Weekes] had a lot of respect for him. And I think it was probably because my dad was a physician and had so many patients that, you know, he was helpful. It was just helpful for Gus Hawkins to know dad and for dad to know Gus Hawkins and to be supportive of Gus, even though we didn't live in his district. It was just important for them to--and then they had a lot of respect for each other. Hahn, what's his name? Kenneth Hahn-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was the, and Yvonne Brathwaite [HistoryMaker Yvonne Brathwaite Burke] is another one and [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters. I met Maxine Waters at a Children's Defense Fund down at Alex Haley's farm. [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman had a New Year's Eve and New Year's Day special gathering one year. I went down to the farm, and I was coming out of something and saw Maxine Waters, and I said, "Oh, it's nice to see you, blah, blah, blah. And I think you might know my dad," and she said, she said, "I don't, not only know your dad. I love your," (laughter), "I loved your dad. He was always so good to me, and it was just always great to see him at things because he was not only, you know, committed to his medical practice, but he was committed to the community." Story_ID: 640111 Speaker 1: So you have this, you say, like this great civics class in high school [Los Angeles High School, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then your family's immersed in all this civic activity. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And everybody respects your parents [Sylvia Means Weekes and Leroy Weekes] and their activities and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So this was-- Speaker 2: And then I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and in freshman orientation, I never will forget this, they said, "This school is different from a lot because we're here to train and to educate leaders. And the leader isn't the person on the right or the person on the left. You are the leader, and this is your time to be educated and trained so you can go back and, you know, work for our community because there are a lot of black people who can't be here, who never will be here and they're dependent on you to take advantage of it." And it was the first time anybody had, right up in my face, said, you know, "This is your responsibility to be the leader." And there was a--I really felt like a shift in the way I was thinking about myself and my life. Speaker 1: Now that's quite different from the, I think there's a scene from--and it's, they say it's true, that at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], they tell you to look to the left and right and one of you is not gonna be here next seme- (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, I know, I know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I felt, Howard, Howard is--Howard then, the facade was kind of hard because they said, you know, "We're not going to knock on your door and tell you when you haven't turned in your papers. If you don't do your work, you're gonna be flunked, you flunk out, and that's not our responsibility." But even having said that, there was a sense of engagement that the faculty had with the students that was different than anything I had experienced in Los Angeles [California] going to school. Toni Morrison was my English professor. Rayford Logan was my history. Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown], I mean all these people I had read about and hadn't read about, once I started to get to know them, it was like, whoa, there was this--it was the first time we, I had a book and the author was the person standing in front of me. It was really, really something. It was really an experience, and it shaped my life and really shaped, shaped me. Story_ID: 640112 Speaker 1: Now just back to high school [Los Angeles High School, Los Angeles, California] a minute, when you graduated from high school, did you graduate with honors or anything like that or did you have--? Speaker 2: No, I just graduated, you know--well, I--no, I don't think so, not any--no. I did well. I did well, and my mom [Sylvia Means Weekes] and dad [Leroy Weekes] decided since I was the first in the family to graduate that I should go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: Now did you-- Speaker 2: --because that was their school. Speaker 1: Was there any question that you were gonna go anywhere else? Speaker 2: No, really not, really not, 'cause I was the first. So I went to Howard. Speaker 1: I think that-- Speaker 2: And I was a little concerned. In fact, I went, the first time I got there, my first day, when I called home, I said, you know, "I don't know about this. It's just black folks everywhere." I didn't say black folks. We were Negroes then (laughter). It was like there are just black folks everywhere. I mean there are no Asians, there are no, you know. I don't know. And my mom and dad would say the same thing every time I called the first couple of months. It was like, Wenda [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore], Wenda, you can do this now. Let's just, let's just, you know, take it day by day. It'll be all right. And pretty soon I kept, I stopped calling so regularly. I think they realized I had made the transition, but it was different. It was very, very different for somebody who'd been in an integrated setting all of your life. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: It was very different. Story_ID: 640113 Speaker 1: Now the president of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] I think was James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] then? Speaker 2: Mordecai Johnson-- Speaker 1: Morde- okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) was president when I first got there. Speaker 1: He--those were, those were the last days of Mordecai. Speaker 2: Days of Mordecai Johnson. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And Mordecai was kind of like the quintessential, if you were casting the president of the black university [HBCU], the, you know, the most prestigious black university, it would be Mordecai Johnson because he, and he--I still remember the way he kind of sauntered across the campus. It was a--and the president still had his home right there on campus too. So you saw him going back and forth to places. It was really, really something. Speaker 1: I know other peo-- Speaker 2: Quite an experience. Speaker 1: --people have described Mordecai Johnson as knowing everything (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: That he appeared to know everything. Speaker 2: And with that air of, you know, from God's lips to my ear, you know, kind of deal. It just (laughter), that's the way it was. So it was just, it was an incredibly rich experience-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --in so many different ways-- Speaker 1: Did you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) so many different ways. Speaker 1: --W. Mor- Montague Cobb [William Montague Cobb]? Speaker 2: Yes, well, only through my dad [Leroy Weekes]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes, only through my dad (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I know he's been described as a genius too. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but very arrogant, yeah, too. Speaker 1: And maybe that's what you need, you know, maybe that's part of what it is. When I think about my dad and how, you know, as a surgeon, you're making some life or death decisions, if you don't--and very quickly, if you don't believe in yourself, you know, how can you comfortably make those decisions. So maybe that's part of what you need in order to do that, and I don't know. Story_ID: 640114 Speaker 1: I know you mentioned when you first started discussing Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], the fact that Toni Morrison was there. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now this is pre-'Bluest Eye' ['The Bluest Eye']-- Speaker 2: Oh, please (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Toni Morrison. She didn't, she hadn't been-- Speaker 2: Oh, please. Speaker 1: Uh-huh? Speaker 2: Yes. She was young. She was an instructor. I don't even believe--or assistant professor, and she was teaching freshman English. And the--what I remember about Toni Morrison is (laughter), she never learned any of our names, but every guy in the room, she knew. You know, she would say, "Oh, Mr. Johnson, Mr. So and So," and then she'd point at us, you know, the women in the class. It was so interesting. And she always wore a sheath. She was very shapely, you know, and she'd stand not at--she wouldn't sit at the desk. She would come around and kind of sit, and, you know, sit up on the desk or whatever, whatever. And it was like I just can't believe it. And the first time I read one of her books, I was like, I can't believe that this woman had these incredible stories running around in her head as she sat there reading our crazy little, you know, freshman compositions. It must have been torture (laughter) for her. I mean utter, utter tor- torture, but that's my memory of Toni Morrison. Story_ID: 640115 Speaker 1: You mentioned Sterling Brown [Sterling A. Brown]. Now he's the venerable-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --writer, poet. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, that-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, and a wonderful man, gentle, and just wonderful, just wonderful. Just engaging and encouraging and wonderful experience. Speaker 1: Yeah, and likewise, Rayford W. Logan [Rayford Logan], the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --contemporary of Woodson [Carter G. Woodson]. Speaker 2: Although I have to tell you, Dr. Logan was, you know, esteemed as a historian, but when you were in his classes [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], it was like he was, he--it was a long recitation, and it was almost like he was writing another book. That's the way he taught (laughter). There was no time for questions or--he really didn't want--you know how some people, like Sterling Brown, it was always a dialogue, you know. Dr. Logan, it was like all rote, and it just came out every word just like you would write it. It was a very different experience. Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: And we all had so much respect for him, because he had this deep knowledge about these periods of history that were silent. It had all been silent for me growing up in Los Angeles [California]. Story_ID: 640116 Speaker 1: You said it was [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin that really got you excited about history (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah. We had a, he came for a weekend. It was a weekend seminar, and a few of us who--in fact, Dr. Logan [Rayford Logan] had encouraged us to go. And again, it was just his engagement and the way he talked about this history, making it come alive. And all through this, it was all this stuff that we didn't know about. And, so you're--there's this discovery about your history. And then the more you learn, the more you want to learn. And it was just, it was a remarkable--in fact, I talked to him maybe ten years after that and told him--I was at something, and we had a little chance to chit chat. And I said, "I want you to know you changed my life." And he said, "Oh, did you--did I really?" I said, "Oh, yeah." I said, "I was a student in Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and kind of wondering around about what I was gonna do, and I had decided I was gonna major in political science, but I didn't know where I was going from there." And I said, "I did that, I took your seminar," and I, at that point, I remembered the name of the seminar. He said, "Oh, yes." He said, "I used to love and come up and do that because you students at Howard were always so engaged and so much fun to talk with, good questions." And I said, "I decided right then I was gonna minor in history," and I s- it was just, it was great, just an honor. Story_ID: 640117 Speaker 1: Now you majored in political science, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you have a mentor or a special instructor in the, in the department (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really, not really. It was a very interesting time in political science 'cause Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was in my class and, so kids were leaving in the summer to do Freedom Rides and not coming back. And I had a boyfriend at that time who was a real political activist. So we used to go over to, what was it, Glen- Glenwood [sic.], in Maryland. It was an amusement park that wouldn't let black kids in. That was the date, go over and picket at this (laughter) amusement park in Glen Echo, Glen Echo [Maryland]. Speaker 1: Glen Echo, yeah. Speaker 2: It's Glen Echo Park in Maryland [Glen Echo, Maryland], yeah. But it was a very--just foment, just a lot. It was a rich period of time to be on a college campus, to be young, to be a student, to be, you know, in that stage in your life, where you're just a sponge and really, really interested in learning as much as you could. And then to have all these first hand sources coming to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to feed that interest in learning more was incredible, just incredible (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was Howard Thurman still at Howard? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So you went to chapel, and even--you know, it was, I guess it was the consistency of the messages coming across, the responsibility to be a leader. But then all these examples of leadership up in your face over and over again. The chapel lessons were again about leadership. So I guess, when I look back at it, it is a series of powerful, powerfully consistent messages coming at you of responsibility and leadership. Speaker 1: Now were you tempted to go down south with the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] volunteers-- Speaker 2: I did, I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's the only time my dad [Leroy Weekes] had his friend come to campus to help me pack to leave 'cause I was telling him, you know, these kids are going and my friend is going. And I was really interested in going, and I didn't really understand what was at stake. And the next day, my friend's--my dad's friend came to the dorm and said, you know, "You've gotta get packed 'cause it's time to go home for school." And I said, "Yeah, I know, but I thought I would just wait a couple of days." And he said, "No, no, no, your dad sent a ticket, and you're supposed to go home. You gotta go home." And it was like, I guess, I guess my parents realized I was kind of turning it over in my mind. I wasn't quite there yet, but I was thinking, you know, maybe I've taken my last exam, but I'm gonna keep talking to these folks 'cause I think I really wanna do this. And I think I can do this. I can get on a bus and go down south. I can be part of this 'cause it's just, yeah, but-- Speaker 1: This is like '61 [1961] or so? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: And that's when they were going out of Nashville [Tennessee] to-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: When Diane, yeah, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So it was a very-- Speaker 1: Diane Nash, I'm thinking about, yeah. Speaker 2: It was, we did a lot of talking that summer. It was a very tense (laughter), at the Weekes household. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause again it was like, it was like this. And, you know, it's interesting because now looking back on it, I can see that I really was a part of a different generation, a different take, wanting the same thing, you know, equal rights and all of that, but a very different take because my upbringing and where I was in history was so different. You know that quote from 'The Prophet' [Kahlil Gibran] about your children dwelling in the house of tomorrow, where you cannot even visit. It was that kind of coming together because my dad had had a whole different set of experiences, and the Urban League to him seemed to be the way to go. That was the (pronunciation) strategy, strategy to bring across--to bring about integration and all of the--and here I was saying to him, "Well, is it really integration? Don't we wanna get ourselves together? Aren't we concerned about being fully aware of who we are as black people, supportive of each other as black people? Then as equals, we go out and integrate," (laughter) you know. But it's a little different take. So we had a lot of conversations. It's a real tense summer that summer-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) at our house. Story_ID: 640118 Speaker 1: You graduated in '63 [1963], right? Speaker 2: I graduated in '63 [1963] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Are there any stories you wanna tell us about the events leading up to graduation? Speaker 2: No, I think I was like a lot of people. I got to graduation and it was like, oh, my goodness. What's gonna happen now 'cause it just comes so quickly. And I really enjoyed being at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. And I, you know, I did well, and I graduated in four years. And, so, but then I went to graduate school at University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California]-- Speaker 1: Okay. We're going to pause (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for a couple years. Story_ID: 640119 Speaker 1: Now were you at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] when Mordecai Johnson retired? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, because James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] signed my degree. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was there, I mean how did the students feel about Mordecai Johnson retiring? Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know, it was like the end of a legacy and the end of a really important historical period because he'd been the president for such a long time. But then, you know, James Nabrit came as one of the attorneys from, who had worked with Thurgood Marshall. And, so there was this rich--he carried with him, this rich civil rights history of fighting on the front and all that. So I don't remember being alarmed that there would be a lack of intense leadership going forward with Howard. It was, I think, a pretty orderly transition. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I didn't ask you who your political science professors were, but who were some of the-- Speaker 2: Well, Professor Dorsey [Emmett Dorsey] and, oh, Professor Snowden, I had for philosophy and really loved philosophy. Speaker 1: Is this Frank Snowden [Frank M. Snowden, Jr.]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. He's the author of 'Blacks and Antiquities' [sic. 'Blacks in Antiquity,' Frank M. Snowden, Jr.] and he's a classicist. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And then E. Franklin Frazier was there when I was there. I had a couple of sociology courses from him. He was really, really good too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There were so many. I wish I could remember more. Story_ID: 640120 Speaker 1: Somewhere along this time, you meet Cornell Moore [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Now-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's a law student, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I met Cornell my senior year [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and he was in his second year of law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how you all met? Speaker 2: Yes, we met at a law school party. I had just broken up with this guy and my--it was Friday night. My friends were saying, "Come on, and go to this law school party." And I said, you know, "I don't go to law school parties." And, "Oh, no, come on 'cause you just don't wanna be sitting around moping the whole time." So I went, and I met Cornell and didn't think anything about it. And then he called and then we started going out and so forth and so on so--. But I left, I graduated, and I didn't think anything about it and went on home to California, but he kept calling me. And, so, and then I was, I wasn't at home some of the time when he called in the evenings. This is the old days when you didn't have cell phones and (laughter), so my mom [Sylvia Means Weekes] told him, "You know, Cornell, if you are really interested in Wenda [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore], you need to come out here to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and really, you know, present your case because I don't, I can't tell you too much, but she's going out with other guys. I mean life is moving on for her." And so the next thing I know, Cornell, when he called, you know, we had a little conversation. "Well, I'm thinking I'm just gonna come out" and so forth. So my mom considered herself to be the real person who brought us together because she got Cornell--and then Cornell has all these funny stories about coming out to L.A. on the plane 'cause it was his big plane ride. And all his friends in law school helped him get organized to come out. You know, somebody would loan him a sweater; somebody would loan him this or that. And he says, I don't remember this, but he says, the first morning, my mom asked him, "What would you like for breakfast, Cornell?" And he said, "Steak and eggs." And she said, "Steak and eggs." So she went to the refrigerator and prepared steak and eggs. And the next morning, you know, and she said, "What would you like?" You can see how much my mom had changed over the years 'cause she was now inviting him to say what he wanted for breakfast. Speaker 1: She-- Speaker 2: And she was fixing it (laughter). Anyway-- Speaker 1: She must have liked him. Speaker 2: Yes, she did, she did. She really did like him. And he said, "Steak and eggs," and she said, "Steak and eggs? Well, what is with this steak and eggs?" And he said, "Well, all my friends told me in California, this is what you all eat for breakfast" (laughter). And my mom said, "Let me just tell you. You ate your steak for yesterday and tonight. So this is it. If you have one more, this is it." But they, yeah, my mom really liked him. My mom really liked him. Story_ID: 640121 Speaker 1: So, okay. So you went to graduate school in Los Angeles [California] when you were at--? Speaker 2: At University of Southern California. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, in political science. Speaker 1: Now this is 1963, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I remember coming out of class--I'd been in class all day. And I came out of class, and people had, the people were standing around like listening to car radios. They were like--different car radios and people were standing around listening to car radios, and I couldn't figure out what was going on. But anyway, I was tired so I got in the car and came, went home. And my mom [Sylvia Means Weekes] was at the house 'cause I was living at home. My mom was at the house and she said, "They shot the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]." And she had the TV on, and that's when they were--and we just, and we just sat there the rest of the day with the TV on. Speaker 1: Now, this, I mean-- Speaker 2: 'Cause it was just incredible. It was the first time I had lived through anything like that. I mean I never--if somebody had asked me, "Can you kill a president," I mean I know they shot Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln], I know they shot McKinley [President William McKinley], but I mean, I would say, "No, you can't shoot the president because we have [U.S.] Secret Service now. We have so and so." And, so it was like this, and then when they shot Jack Ruby, when they shot him in the, in that tunnel when they were transporting him back-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Ruby shot Oswald [Lee Harvey Oswald], yeah. Speaker 2: Oswald, yes, Ruby shot Oswald, it was like, is this some kind of sick play that they're putting on or something. How can people play on folks, on your emotions like this at this point? It just seemed so unreal. Story_ID: 640122 Speaker 1: Now 1963 was a year of quite a bit of drama in the media, I mean in real life and it was on the news (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: And everybody knew about it for once. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And we had the--Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in Birmingham [Alabama]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the March on Washington-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --as another big event. Did you attend the March on Washington? Speaker 2: No, 'cause I was in Los Angeles [California] but Cornell [Weekes Moore's husband, HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] did. He went down, and I remember saying to him, you know, just be careful because all the conversation was about how unsafe it was going to be 'cause I think they were--well, I don't think I know. They were trying to keep people from coming, really to keep down the numbers. But again, it was just, there was just so much change. Speaker 1: Yeah, the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] was bombed that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --summer just before-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, it was really something, really, really something. People talk about how much change there is now, but, boy, those were some years to live through. Story_ID: 640123 Speaker 1: I still remember sitting in my bedroom looking at the TV, at the march at Selma [Selma to Montgomery March] when they started all of those, knocking the people down and the dogs ran and folks started running, and they were being trampled. Remember that first march across that bridge when-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Edmund Pettus Bridge in-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --Selma [Alabama] in '65 [1965]-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, nine--1965. Speaker 1: And the sense of outrage you felt that people would be treated like that in this day and age, you know. I think that's part of why things happened the way it did because through television in real time, we were all experiencing what was happening on that bridge. I don't think it had ever happened that way before. In the past, things happened, you read about it. And, so you could put a filter on it because the filter was all your past experiences, but when you see something on television, there's no filter. In real time, you were right there. And it's very different. It's very--the way you take it in, the way you process it, it's very different, very different. And I think that's why we could all be a part of the movement because you--because we were all there to see it and experience it. Speaker 2: You think TV played a role in recruiting, you know, the volunteers for the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely. I think TV played a role in why we left Vietnam the way we did 'cause my brother was in Vietnam. And he would send a letter, you know, and it would be marked Da Nang [Vietnam], and that night on television, we're sitting there. And Dan Rather shows Da Nang blowing up and everything, and my mom [Sylvia Means Weekes] would be all upset. And I'd say, "Now mom, you know it took that letter two weeks to get here so Lee [Lee Weekes] probably, you know, without a doubt is not there with all of this." But in real time, we experienced that war. In fact, I read a--it was the seventieth anniversary of Pearl Harbor this year, and they were interviewing one of the nurses, one of the women who'd been a nurse over there. And she was saying that she has so much respect for the families of the soldiers serving now in Afghanistan and Iraq because she said, those families are experiencing, just like I was saying, in real time, what's going on. She said, in the war, World War II [WWII], you heard it over the radio, but it was late, and it was two weeks sometimes before it got to the movie theater and news reel. So it didn't have the sense of immediacy that seeing this stuff in real time--it's just very different. It's just very different. I think it's had an impact on all, on the way we experience life now, all of these, all these events. Story_ID: 640124 Speaker 1: Now when Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] comes out to Los Angeles [California], this is like nineteen sixty--when your family (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's '64 [1964]. Isn't that '64 [1964]? Yeah, he'll know better. I think it's probably '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So he came out there to stay for a while and to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he stayed a weekend or a week or something like that. I think he probably stayed a long weekend or something like that. And I decided, well, maybe he really is a nice guy. Maybe this really is the guy that I should be with and so forth and so on. So then I went back for his law school graduation [from Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and met his mom [Luetta Leverette Moore] and everything. And then he went to Minnesota to take the bar, and went to--got a job at Crocker Bank [Crocker-Citizens National Bank] in San Francisco [California]. And then he commuted back and forth on the weekends to come down and see me. And then that December, we got engaged, and that following June in '65 [1965], we got married. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did you go to Minnesota immediately after getting married? Speaker 2: No, we moved to San Francisco, and he worked at Crocker Bank for a while. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the comptroller of the currency invited him back to Washington [D.C.], and he went back to the comptroller of the currency [Office of the Comptroller of the Currency]. Speaker 1: Now did you leave school [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] because you got married or what happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I just, yeah, no. I was just ready to go to San Francisco and start my new life. And, so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you never went back? Did you ever go back to grad school to try to-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't. It really--I just felt like I had everything I needed, and I just went on. So that was that. Story_ID: 640125 Speaker 1: So you went on to--you went back to San Francisco [California] with him [Weekes Moore's husband, HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore]-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --and then-- Speaker 2: And then we went to Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were only-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --we weren't in San Francisco that long. And then we went to Washington, and I worked as a researcher at the Washington Libraries, Washington, D.C. library [District of Columbia Public Library], and then we moved to Minnesota. Speaker 1: Now what kind of stuff were you researching? Speaker 2: Whatever, because people called all the time. It's just so much stuff going on in Washington, and it was a central library. So you did anything. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're just answering questions for people that call in (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Let's see-- Speaker 2: All kinds of obscure stuff. You know, I know a lot of people won't understand this, but it was before Google. It was before you could turn on your computer (laughter), and find all this stuff out by yourself. And people really did need help with certain things, especially with as many associations and government offices and what not so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a real service. I remember, it wasn't that long--it doesn't seem that long ago-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --you could call the library and ask somebody. Speaker 2: I know, I know. And it was good training too, good training. I learned a lot. Story_ID: 640126 Speaker 1: So how did you all come to move to-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --Minnesota? Speaker 2: The comptroller of the currency decided that he wanted to have regional--he wanted to divide the country in regions. And each should have a regional counsel. And it was, one of the areas was Minnesota, North and South Dakota, Michigan, Wisconsin, I can't remember what the configuration was. Anyway, Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] was the only one who had passed the Minnesota bar. So they asked him if he would come. And I think, deep down, he always liked Minnesota. And so he said, yes, he would come. And I was young and dumb and in love, so I came (laughter) very happily. I thought, why not? And then I never will forget, we drove in, and we were, we came in 94 [Interstate 94], got to all those 3M buildings on 94, and I said, "Oh, (unclear) this isn't so bad. Look at these tall buildings." And Cornell just cracked up. He said, "This isn't even the city yet. This is just 3M out here," (laughter), "in St. Paul [Minnesota]." But I had just a very happy experience. It was just, it was very nice to know that there were actually tall buildings here, lots of folks doing lots of important things and more than that, I was really welcomed into this community because it was the kind of place, where if you had something to offer, if you were smart and you wanted to work hard, folks were happy to have you. And I just really, really appreciated that. And it didn't feel that way initially because we got here kind of towards the fall. By the time we got our house, it (laughter) was winter, and I had never experienced winter like Minnesota. Every Wednesday, you had a blizzard. I mean those were the days when the snow was up like this, I'm not kidding you. They would come--I didn't understand why they did it, and tie these poles to the fire hydrants. It was because when the snow got up like this, and you had a fire, the firemen could find the fire hydrant 'cause that's where the pole is sticking up with the flag at the top. So I didn't do much. I kind of stayed in the house a lot and told Cornell, "Well, can you bring some bread and can you bring some milk home when you come?" And then one day, it was just a pretty day when the sun was shining and everything. And I walked down, came out of the house--it was freezing cold. I walked down to the street and the cars were just whizzing by. And I thought, my goodness, these people are going on living life through this blizzard and through all this winter. I went back. I got in the car, and I said, "I'm gonna do it too or I'm gonna figure out how to drive on this stuff." And that's what I did so-- Speaker 1: Now what year was this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's been a good life. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. What year was this when you moved? Speaker 2: Like '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966]? Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, no, was it later than that? Yeah. No, no, no, it's like '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, '67 [1967] we moved here. Then I got active in the League of Women Voters and wrote a program called Citizen Power [Citizen Power: Citizenship Education for Minneapolis Residents]. And then we went around the city, kind of--it was a, it was a program, we had a committee. And we were--it was a program designed to help folks reengage in their communities, to get interested in voting, to get interested in citizen participation, to get interested in the political process, in running for office; whole nine yards. And so we'd go out to community centers and different areas. Story_ID: 640127 Speaker 1: Now Minnesota, and correct me if I'm wrong, there weren't a lot of black folks in Minnesota-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --when you came out. And-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --we were discussing upstairs before I guess about three waves of migration or something. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: There was an old guard group of blacks that were already here and who-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --went to the settlement houses and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and got ensconced in what was going on. But they were a very tiny, small part of the population. And then there's a second wave that came along when you all came along, of black professionals that saw this as the land of opportunity to come with, you know, these big corporations that were trying to diversify the (unclear). Speaker 2: And it was very interesting because we all came, highly educated, highly, highly employable. And there was a little bit of tension which people don't talk about too much between the black folks who were already here and the folks in that second wave because the folks in that second wave were getting those high visibility jobs. When the governor hired me as an aide, it was like, well, why wouldn't you hire Harry Davis [W. Harry Davis] or why wouldn't you hire, you know, some of the folks who had lived here. But it was different because we had a different level of--skill set, and I think the fact that we didn't come with a preconceived notion about everything and about the community, maybe a little bit more open. I never understood why they had such tension between Minneapolis [Minnesota] and St. Paul [Minnesota], for instance, 'cause I hadn't grown up here. It's just Twin Cities to me so, but people didn't talk too much about it, but there was a very, a real tension between the old guard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I've heard about that, I've heard about that. Now what is the, what is that tension about? Do you know or--? Speaker 2: Between the old guard and the wave? Speaker 1: Well, in the St.--no, St. Paul and--well, both I guess, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, between the-- Speaker 1: Both, yeah. Speaker 2: You know, I think basically, they're very different cities in terms of culture. And I think the fact that Minneapolis has more energy. More of the companies that are on the map are in Minneapolis, and it has St. Paul feeling a little like the stepchild. And I think that's the center of a lot of it. I think the other part is people just like the familiar. If you live in Minneapolis, if you work in Minneapolis, you know the streets of Minneapolis. Why would I go to a restaurant in St. Paul, you know? Yet a lot of these organizations are Twin Cities and, so like I'm in The Links [The Links, Incorporated], and they want it--it's the St.Paul-Minneapolis, it's the Minneapolis-St. Paul Chapter of The Links [Minneapolis-St. Paul Chapter of The Links, Incorporated]. And, so the folks in there from St. Paul wanna know, "Why do we always have to come to Minneapolis for meetings?" And those of us who live in Minneapolis are saying, "Because three quarters of us live here in Minneapolis. That's why we're always here." But every now and then we have meetings in St. Paul. But it's more something that people who grew up here feel 'cause I go to St. Paul to the Ordway [Ordway Center for the Performing Arts]. I go wherever, you know, I wanna go. It may take me a little bit longer to find what I wanna find, but I don't have that sense of this is the best part of town, so I'm staying here or, you know-- Speaker 1: Now when you all moved here in '67 [1967], did you live, you lived in Minneapolis, right? Speaker 2: We lived in Minneapolis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, we lived in north Minneapolis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when those first riots came down on Plymouth Avenue, Cornell [Weekes Moore's husband, HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] was even in one of those citizen groups that walked the streets at night to get everybody quieted down. Speaker 1: Now this is in the black community-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: We were in the black community. Speaker 1: Over in north Minneapolis? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, 'cause that's all we could afford 'cause my dad [Leroy Weekes] sent the check for our, the down payment on the house. And the house was, I think the down payment was like two thousand dollars. I can't believe that, but it was--house was maybe like--cute little house. It's still cute. What was it? Like twenty-eight thousand dollars or something. Story_ID: 640128 Speaker 1: This is something that I remember from my college days, and I don't know why I remember this, but I didn't know anybody in Minnesota then. But there was a statistic that people were talking about the, about the low percentage of blacks in Minnesota, but they were the highest percentage in jail in, even in those days, which seemed kind of crazy to us, you know. Speaker 2: There's a real disparity in terms of the incarceration rates, and it continues to be that way. And they've just, there's just no doubt about it. If you cross the street the right--wrong way and the white guy crosses the street in the wrong way, you're going to do some time in the work house, and the white guy isn't. He'll get community service or whatever. It's just very not right. Speaker 1: There's also, I know in Chicago [Illinois], there's a controversy over a person, a psycholo- a psychology, a psychological test-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --that was used to determine if you're fit and qualified to be a police officer-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --and it was based on a survey of Minnesota white men-- Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. Speaker 1: --and the black police officers sued the city-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and won and basically saying it was culturally biased to-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. It's amazing. Speaker 1: And there's the concept of Minnesota nice. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Somebody just wrote a book about it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So was this a culture--what--how did, what was your impression of Minnesota culture when you got here, I mean in terms of how people treated each other? Speaker 2: Well, it was very much Minnesota nice. On the surface, everybody was very nice. But you never talked in depth about anything. And I remember when I ran for school board [Minneapolis Board of Education], and I was pro-busing because--I didn't feel I was pro-busing, I just felt like you have these areas of the city that are concentrated with young, black kids. So why wouldn't we want to expose them, why wouldn't we want everybody to grow up, all kids, to be prepared for the, for real life, to have, to grow up in an integrated educational setting. So why wouldn't we spread everybody around and have that kind of environment for all the kids growing up and the teachers too, so that everybody could have--you had a chance to have an African American teacher. Teacher, black teachers who just weren't concentrated in black schools. It made sense to me. And there were a lot of folks who felt the way I did. But it was a big issue. A lot of parents did not feel that way. And I think that was one of the issues that caused people to say--that and housing, housing was another thing, the housing patterns in the communities. But those were the two things that caused people to say, "Uh-huh, this place is not what it says it is." And this was before the influx of folks from Africa. So we're just now talking about African Americans and white people. Speaker 1: Okay. So at a certain point, there's a, there's a influx of people from the continent of Africa-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to Minnesota. And that's something that we need to talk-- Speaker 2: That was much later. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Much, much later, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 640129 Speaker 1: How long was it before you started working for the governor? Speaker 2: I ran for school board [Minneapolis Board of Education], and it was the first time I'd ever run. And I ran because my neighbors said, you know, "You ought to run" 'cause I was doing this Citizen Power [Citizen Power: Citizenship Education for Minneapolis Residents]. I was talking all over around, about, and they were saying, and I thought, yeah, maybe I should. I've been doing all this political science. I know how to run, blah, blah, blah. So I did. I ran, and I almost beat the incumbent, and it was a real big surprise. I came very close to beating the incumbent. Speaker 1: Now what year is this? Speaker 2: Sixty--well, it must have been '70 [1970]. Was it '70 [1970]? Sixty-nine [1969], '70 [1970]--anyway, then Wendy Anderson was elected governor and he--because the campaign had a fair amount of visibility. And, so he asked me if I would be the, his aide to education. And I jumped at it. Speaker 1: So this is nineteen seventy-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen seventy [1970] or '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So this-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This is Governor Wendell Anderson? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Governor Wendell Anderson. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 640130 Speaker 1: Now how did you get the job with Governor Wendell Anderson? Speaker 2: Well, it was the visibility from the school board campaign [for the Minneapolis Board of Education] because the spot I ran for was a citywide position, and I just got around and did a lot of talking and met a lot of people. And one of the people happened to be a part of the governor's team, putting together the staff, putting together his staff. And, so he suggested me and, so I joined the staff. Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you do for the governor? Speaker 2: I was the education aide so I wrote papers that had to do with education for the governor. I answered all the letters that came in from people about education. I was the governor's voice to the department of education, the state department of education [Minnesota Department of Education]. Those were the main responsibilities. I did a fair amount of talking to groups who wanted to know more and also did a lot of work in identifying people for state committees that had to do with education. And, so I worked hard to bring some diversity to some of those committees-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and boards, mostly boards. Speaker 1: Right. Now, so he was--was he pro-busing too or did he have a position on it? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that he really had a position. His main position was very important for our community because he thought that there should be more state support of local schools so that the tax base was not the only resource, financial resource for these school districts. He thought that was a fairer way of supporting schools. Story_ID: 640131 Speaker 1: Now Minnesota in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], I guess was really seen from, in fact, all through the '60s [1960s] because of Hubert Humphrey was seen as one of the most liberal, you know, states in terms of the political climate here, had just gotten over the Joseph McCarthy thing of the '50s [1950s], but the image seemed to change, shift to one of liberalism with Hubert Humphrey and Eugene McCarthy. Yeah, and now the other one--who's the other one, the one-- Speaker 2: Don Fraser [Donald M. Fraser], Don Fraser was here. Minneapolis [Minnesota] congressman and anti-war [Vietnam War] and just very well thought of. And then he came back and was mayor for a long period of time too. And then Art Naftalin [Arthur Naftalin] was mayor for a long period of time. So it's a rich history of--and then, Mondale, of course. So. Speaker 1: And Walter Mondale. Speaker 2: Walter Mondale, uh-huh. So there are a lot, there're a lot. I remember we were at our old house where our kids grew up, where we lived for thirty-some odd years, over near Lake of the Isles on Dean Parkway, lovely lake. We were walking around the lake one day, and our son was about, oh, I don't know, about sixteen or something, and he was walking with me. And we saw Walter Mondale. So I stopped to chitchat, chitchat, didn't think anything about it and walked on. And he spoke to Jonathan [Jonathan Moore]. Jonathan had a little conversation. And by sunset, we would walk by, he says, "Mom, can you believe it. Here we are just out walking and meet the former vice president and we all talked. Isn't that something, mom? He knows your name; now he knows my name too" (laughter). But it's just interesting what impresses your kids, what impresses your kids. It's just really interesting. Speaker 1: Well, I guess that is something though (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is something, it is something. Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about Hubert Humphrey or-- Speaker 2: Oh, do I have a story about Hubert Humphrey. Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] was advancing for Hubert. And I had just had Lynne [Lynne Moore Nelson], and it was our anniversary, June 27th. And Mr. Humphrey decided that he was going to be in Minneapolis, out at Waverly [Minnesota], and he needed to have everybody who was, what do you call it when you work for them, not fronting, but the-- Speaker 1: Advance-- Speaker 2: Advance work, needed all his Minnesota advance people to come to a meeting out at Waverly. And, so Cornell and I had been planning to go out to dinner for our anniversary and all this kind of stuff 'cause the baby was like two weeks old so this--I was really looking forward to--this was gonna be my first time out in two weeks. And so he called me about four o'clock or something and said, you know, "I--we can't have dinner 'cause I've got to go out to Waverly and, you know, I've gotta--this is an important, blah, blah, blah." And I'm--so I'm walking around the house just fuming, fuming, fuming. It's about 7:30 and the telephone rings. And I pick up the phone, and this voice on the other end says, "Is this Wenda Moore [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore]?" And I said, "Yes." And he said, "Well, this is Hubert Humphrey." And I said (laughter), thinking first it might be a joke, but it sounded like Hubert. It sounded exactly like Hubert. He said, "I just want you to know, I'm out here with this nice husband of yours, and I just can't believe that he chose being here with me today for just a silly old meeting instead of going out to, having an anniversary dinner with you and being there with your lovely baby who's only two weeks old." And I said, "Well, Mr. Humphrey, you're absolutely right. I can't believe he made that choice either" (laughter). But what a remarkable man. He always remembered my name. I don't know what he did with these names. I don't know how he did it. He should have written a book about how you remember names because he'd meet you once, and he knew your name, just incredible. And he didn't see me all the time, but every time he saw me, "Hello, Wenda, how are you," you know, kind of a deal, unbelievable-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just unbelievable. Story_ID: 640132 Speaker 1: Now I think at one time he probably was--he and, I guess he and Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] were the most well liked of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --politicians (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --in the black community. Speaker 2: Well, I know when they brought his body back here, Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] and--'cause Jonathan [Jonathan Moore] was a baby, Cornell and Meredith [Meredith Moore Crosby] went out to wherever they had said, because they were gonna--they talked about the route that the body was going to take from the airport to wherever it was that they were gonna have the funeral. And Cornell and Lynne [Lynne Moore Nelson] went out to just pay their respects, and it was a very--it was just a, really, Minnesota, very much grieving for a very special man. And everybody knew that because we had all watched him suffer with the illness. And I was on the Board of Regents. In fact, I was chairing the Board of Regents, and we had decided we were gonna name, we wanted to name the college of public affairs [School of Public Affairs; Humphrey School of Public Affairs] after Hubert. And, so I went along with the president [C. Peter Magrath] to talk with him and ask him and just, you know, ask his advice and see if he would be willing. And he was delighted and said that he wanted it to be not the college, but the School of Public Affairs, which is what we ended up doing. And he was very happy about that. In fact, even some of the plans, the early plans, 'cause we told him we wanted to have a memorial--not a memorial aspect, but an aspect that talked about the man, Hubert Humphrey, the man and, that would rotate. There would be different things from time to time. And he was very engaged, those last few months in the plans for that school. And I think it brought him a lot of joy to know that there would be a place at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], a school he loved where the focus would be public discourse, public science, political science, that we would have a range of courses that would invite mid-career politicians back to renew their skills and just to refine and just to develop and be more collegial and everything. It was just--he was very engaged and very excited and interested in it. Story_ID: 640133 Speaker 1: Did you have any stories about Eugene McCarthy? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I--we, we were, we were Humphrey people (laughter). We were Humphrey people, we were Humphrey people (laughter). No, we weren't on Eugene McCarthy's side. Speaker 1: Did you have to kind of draw (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's interesting to see how it split-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the split. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you did, you did. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause he, I know he came out first against the Vietnam War-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in '67 [1967], I think. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was before-- Speaker 2: Yeah, see, we were Humphrey and-- Speaker 1: When Hum- when Humphrey was vice president. Speaker 2: Yes, we were Humphrey and Kennedy, Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] people, yeah. We thought McCarthy was the spoiler. Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of people, it seemed like, felt that way. He seemed like very bright and-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) intellectual but-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --did he have, I mean, but it seemed to be a distance between him and-- Speaker 2: He wasn't as much a man of the people. You know, Hubert--and it was terrible to have those two kind of there at the same time, both Minnesotans because it was, they were, they were so different. They were really so different. And Eugene McCarthy's inability to kind of relate to every man. You know, if you saw Hubert Humphrey downtown, it could take him an hour to get, to walk down a block because he'd stop, and he'd be talking to people and really, really interested and see people that he knew. And Eugene McCarthy just wasn't that kind of person. There wasn't that kind of personal connection, wasn't interested in people at that level. So they were very, very different, very different. Story_ID: 640134 Speaker 1: So what was Governor Anderson [Wendell Anderson] like? Speaker 2: Bright and young and athletic and really open to change. He'd been a legislator, so he had a sense of what was needed to get things done at the state level. And he had a lot of friends and had respect for his friends. He didn't have a committee to review judges. He made those judicial decisions because he was a lawyer, and he knew a lot of lawyers and felt he really knew who best, you know, would be--who'd be better as a judge. He didn't need a committee to tell him who to nominate or who to--yeah, I guess they do nominate them because they have to be--no, some are just appointed by the governor so--But it was a lot of fun because he was youngest governor, and there was all that special energy that comes when you have a very different type of person come into the state capital and really decide I'm gonna put my stake in the ground. Things are gonna be a little different. Speaker 1: Okay. We have a--there's a picture in our research of him on the cover of Time magazine-- Speaker 2: Holding the, holding the fish, yeah. He hated the--going on those fishing trips. He really hated going (laughter) on those fishing trips. He was a hockey player. He, you know, he'd do that, but he didn't like those fishing trips. But they called it the Minnesota Miracle. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 640135 Speaker 1: He [Wendell Anderson] appointed you to the Minnesota Board of Regents? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So how did this take place? Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, he, when I was working for him, he called me into the office one day, and he said, there's never been an African American on the Board of Regents at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota]. And I know somebody who, and I've got four people to nominate, and I'm going to nominate because the--something, something quirky had happened. The legislature had not elected and so in the interim, the governor had the responsibility for naming the people. There was some quirky something. In the State of Minnesota, the legislature, the House [Minnesota House of Representatives] and Senate [Minnesota Senate] sit together to hear the governor's state of the state and to elect people to the Board of Regents because there's, the university has constitutional autonomy because it precedes the state, Minnesota as a state. So anyway, he said, "I know somebody, and I want to nominate her. And I know you know her, and so I want you to call her and see how she feels about it." And it was [HistoryMaker] Josie Johnson. So I called Josie, and Josie said, "Oh, no, I couldn't do that. That is not, and oh, no. That is not--tell Wendy [Wendell Anderson], thank you so much." She'd worked on fair housing and, you know, Wendy got to know her as a legislator, and so forth and so on. And she said, "No, no," she said, "but I have some names of some other people." And so I said, "Okay." I said, "I tell you what, Josie, I'm gonna give you a little time to think about this, and then I'll get back to you." And I did. A couple of days went by, and I saw Wendy in the hall. He'd say, "How're you coming with Josie? Have you talked to Josie?" I said, "You know, she's on vacation, and I haven't been able to connect, but I'm gonna try her again. I'll let you know, Wendy, just as soon as I get her." So I called her back. Maybe it'd been a week or so, and she said, "No, I've kind of talked to my family. This," she said, "and I thought of a couple of other names." And I said, "Josie, let me just share something with you so you can kind of understand. Wendy values his friends. He knows you. This is a personal thing. He thinks you would be good on the Board of Regents. This isn't transferrable to other people that you know. This is about you. This is about your relationship. This is about what he knows you stand for because he saw you in the legislature working for the fair housing. This is about you, Josie, so let me just say this to you so you understand what's at stake here. If you say, no, there won't be an African American on the Board of Regents." "Oh, Wenda [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore], why would you put it like that?" I said, "Because I know the man. I know that's how he thinks, and I know this is what's going on here. So I want you to think about that for a couple of days, and then I'm gonna call you back." And I just kept telling Wendy, "Yeah, she's--I'm getting, you know." And finally, I called her back, and she said she would do it. And I told Wendy. So, and then they moved to Denver [Colorado]. She'd been on the Board of Regents four years, and then they moved to Denver, and the spot was open. And by then, I had left the governor's office, and I was at home. And Wendy called me one day, and he said, "I've got to appoint somebody for Josie's spot, and I want you to go on the Board of Regents." And I said, "You have got to be kidding, Wendy," and I thought, oh, here we go again (laughter) here we go again. I could hear my record coming back, you know, 'cause that's the way Wendy was. It was very much about relationships. He valued, you know, and, so I agreed. Story_ID: 640136 Speaker 1: And it was so interesting because it was an interesting time in the university life because Mac Moos [Malcolm Moos] who was president then was in his last days as president of the university [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] because the regents had let Mac, about four months before I was appointed to the board [Board of Regents] and had decided they didn't want him to be president anymore. So the first meeting I went to, you could have cut the tension in the room with a knife. And we sat at the table according to seniority. So I was at the end of the table 'cause I was new, but he didn't speak or look at any of the other folks, any of the other regents 'cause he was mad at them 'cause all of them had--I was the only one. I mean he'd sit there (laughter) and talk to me. And then I think it was maybe my third meeting, and the kids were boycotting lettuce, and right, almost at the beginning of the meeting, the protestors flooded into the regents room and surrounded the table. Well, I'm sitting down at the end of the table, and this is my first experience with something like this. And I'm sitting there trying to hear what the kids are saying to figure out, you know, how do you make a decision about this? What are the, what are the issues and where's the middle ground. And I didn't know that all the regents got up and (laughter) walked out because the room, the regents room was right adjacent to the president's office. And there was a door connecting the two, and they went out. And then I guess somebody, as they were, the last one was leaving, noticed I wasn't there and came back and got me. So then we're all standing in the president's office, and they're just kind of chewing the fat and everything, and I'm like, "Hold up here. Aren't we supposed to be running the university," (laughter)? I said, "These people have a beef with the university. How are we gonna figure out what we're gonna do if we're all standing around in here looking at each other? How does this work now? Shouldn't we be in there listening to what they're saying?" And they're like, "Well, we can't, we can't start dealing, you know, rabble rousers and so forth and so on." I mean it was like--I don't know. I guess it should have been, being a regent 101. But I said, "No, you've got to learn how to listen to folks. We've gotta hear what's going on." It was very interesting, very interesting. And it was a time when you didn't have open meeting law. So the regents met like the night before at The Minneapolis Club [Minneapolis, Minnesota] downtown, and they would kind of go over all the material and decide, if there were any areas of contention or what not, you'd kind of thrash that out so that when you came, it was just all kind of neatly done for the public (laughter), for the public. Speaker 2: So it looked like a nice meeting (laughter)? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, it looked like it, and it was a very nice meeting. Story_ID: 640137 Speaker 1: And then I, I had, shortly after that we started the search for a new president. And the, I didn't realize it, but we got to one of the last meetings, and we were reviewing the three final candidates, and one of the regents said, "I understand this man's a Jew." And I turned, and I looked at him. I said, "What does that have to do with what we're discussing? How does that have any bearing on his ability to lead this university [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], the faculty and the students?" And there's just this, all this quiet. What I didn't know, and we didn't talk about it again, what I didn't know was, he had raised it at an earlier meeting of regents when I wasn't there. And I never talked about it again, but there was a senate--it got out. Somebody talked about it. And there was a senate, Minnesota Senate committee hearing on--and at that time, I don't think ever before or since then, has there ever been a senate or any kind of legislative investigation of the actions of the Board of Regents. But they had six committee meetings, six hearings because the Jewish community was just outraged that there had been this issue raised, and I testified. And they made all the regents testify, and the man who said it never realized that it was inappropriate or he never backed off. He kept saying, "I thought that was something that needed to be talked about, people needed to know what that meant." Instead of saying, "I never should have said it; it had no place in the hearing, you know." Speaker 2: He didn't get it. Speaker 1: People are amazing. No. I couldn't--I think he never got it. At one point, I was trying to figure out whether it was the ego that wouldn't allow him to say, I--but I think he never got it, honestly. I think he never got it. But to me, it was like somebody had said, "So I hear the guy is black," or, you know, "I hear--fill in whatever the blank is." They're all equally inappropriate when you're at the last stage of deciding the qualifications and who should be president of the university. But it was just very interesting to me, just very interesting. Speaker 2: About what year does this happen? Speaker 1: Let's see, I got on in-- Speaker 2: In '73 [1973], yeah, I think you came on in '73 [1973] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, '73 [1973]. So it must have been like '74 [1974], I would think '74 [1974] 'cause I hadn't been on that long. I had not been on that long, and at that time, it was a former governor who was chair of the board, Elmer Andersen [Elmer L. Andersen]. In fact, Elmer is the one who came to me and asked me to be vice chair. Story_ID: 640138 Speaker 1: So this is happening really quick. So you're elected and, I mean you're appointed [to the Board of Regents] in '73 [1973]-- Speaker 2: Seventy- '71 [1971], wasn't I appointed in '71 [1971]? Speaker 1: It says here. I don't know. This may not be right. Speaker 2: Yeah, that probably is right, '73 [1973] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It says '73 [1973] here, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, '73 [1973] 'cause I had not been on that long when I had the little conversation about the religion. I remember that. Speaker 1: So by--so you were appointed, appointed vice chair. Speaker 2: No, you couldn't be appointed. You had to be elected by the regents (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Elected vice chair, okay, elected. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was in '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: Okay, '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: Yeah, '76 [1976] or '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember that 'cause I'd just had a baby [Jonathan Moore]. Speaker 1: Okay. And then, you know, shortly thereafter you became the chair, right? Speaker 2: I served for two years as vice chair, and then I was elected as chair. Speaker 1: So you become chair in '78 [1978], is that it? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. 'Cause we had a little different timeline, but I'm making notes here. So, okay. Now what were some of the issues during your period as chairman? Speaker 2: Well, of course, a big issue was divestiture in the South--of companies, divestiture of stock in companies doing business in South Africa. That was one of the big, big issues. And it was, there was a lot of tension because at that time, now if you say we don't want to invest in companies that are--we don't want to invest in tobacco companies, there are investment firms that have a series of screens now, socially responsible screens. And they can use those, and they tell you that they can get the same returns. They do just as well as the other pools of stock will do. At that time, it was really kind of at the beginning of all of that, and there was a lot of conversation about being fiscally irresponsible when you said you were going to divest of those companies, because they were the Fortune 500s. All the multinationals, just about all the multinationals had something in South Africa because South Africa was the economic engine of Africa. So they were all there. And it was a really, it was hard, it was hard. And, so we discussed it several years before we had a majority of the regents agree to divest, but we did finally divest. Story_ID: 640139 Speaker 1: Now University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] has a long history of foreign exchange with other countries and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And you got involved in that eventually in '79 [1979], I mean well-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --be- be- be- before that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But there's a--tell us about that. Speaker 2: When they were just beginning, China was just beginning to open up and indicate that they were receptive to having their students come abroad to study. And during the '40s [1940s] and earlier, Chinese, students from China had come to the University of Minnesota, primarily in agronomy and, but also in the medical sciences a little bit. And, so the university decided that they wanted to send a group. And the, in order to go--it was gonna be a two week trip--actually, I think it was three weeks. But at any rate, the president [C. Peter Magrath] of the university said he could not be away from the university that long and that the Chinese government was requiring the highest official. And as chair of the board, if the president of the university could not come, they were agreeable to having the chair of the Board of Regents come. Speaker 1: Now what year is this? This is-- Speaker 2: I think this is '79 [1979], yeah, this is '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay. So Gerald Ford's [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] the president, right, at this point, I guess? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But before that Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] kind of had opened-- Speaker 2: Had opened up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) relationships with China-- Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: --in sev- that would've been in '74 [1974] or '73 [1973], '74 [1974], I guess. Speaker 2: Because I went to China in, I think it was like '77 [1977] with a group that Wendy Anderson [Wendell Anderson] put together. And we were one of the first American groups to go then. That's when they followed me around town 'cause folks had not seen African Americans. But this group was very different, and I told the president, I said, "I'm just gonna tell you what you have to do if you want me to do this. I need the deans to go. I need the dean of technology. I need the graduate school dean. I need the medical school dean. I need the main faculty, the senior faculty members, and I don't care how you put that together. But I'm not going with a group that doesn't have the power to make decisions about this, come back to the faculty consultative committee and have it accepted. I'm not wasting my time, and I don't think we should," (laughter), "waste anybody else's time unless we have the people who can really do it." And so that's what it was. It was ten people, I think about eight to ten of the main deans and the regents, professors, and a couple were Chinese so they spoke Chinese and a linguist, and they could make decisions and come back and support it with the faculty. And that's why we were able to do what we did. We signed three agreements with universities. And we were the first ones to explore the issue of reciprocity because we really wanted students from the University of Minnesota to have an opportunity to go to China and study art history, to perfect their language. And, so it took us about two days before the Chinese government knew what we were talking about, this whole issue of reciprocity because they were used to folks coming in saying, "Just send your folks to us," but to have us say, "No, no, no. We want our students to be able to come too." And we were able to work that out. And while we were there, we had a reunion. And somehow, just got the word out--I still don't know how that happened. But it was very meaningful because these professors who had been at the University of Minnesota in the '40s [1940s] before the curtain [Iron Curtain] went down, you know, before Mao [Mao Tse-tung] said, "No--" (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, so these are the Chinese foreign exchange students from way back in the '40s [1940s]. They know, they find out you're there, and they start, they come to the reception. Speaker 2: And it was very, very emotional because they talked about their research being destroyed by the Red Guard, going to reeducation camps, working in menial positions. These are top flight agronomists with Ph.D.'s sweeping the street as part of their reeducation. It was really, really emotional, and then without any of us doing it, they started singing the alma mater at the end of all of this, and it was just--it was so, it was so moving. It was so really moving. It was a really remarkable time, really remarkable. Speaker 1: Yeah, who would think that the University of Minnesota would have such a large footprint in China? Speaker 2: I know. I know, I know. Story_ID: 640140 Speaker 1: The first time I went to China, I went into this bookstore, and they had this--this map was up on the wall. And it looked so different. And I couldn't figure out what was different. So I went on, and I came back. And it was because China was in the middle. North and South America were kind of scrunched over here, you know what I mean. And, so I got a copy of the map and brought it back and told my kids [Lynne Moore Nelson, Jonathan Moore and Meredith Moore Crosby], I said, "There are a billion people in this world who think they are the center, not you," (laughter), "not you. They are the center. Get it together children," (laughter); "get it together." Now I feel it's very prophetic at this point. Speaker 2: So this is in '79 [1979], right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That you all went over there. And, now I didn't talk about, who were some of the black leaders here in the Twin Cities area [Minneapolis-St. Paul, Minnesota] that, when you were, you know, doing the community work, that you worked with. I know we've interviewed a couple of them. I think [HistoryMaker] Matthew Little and some others, but who is-- Speaker 1: Oh, let's see. Reverend Bill Smith [William A. Smith] and Matt Little and Tollie Flippin, Sr. was at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Mary McElroy [sic. HistoryMaker Marion McElroy], it's the--Katie McWatt, yeah, Harry Davis [W. Harry Davis]. Speaker 2: Did the black students or the black community have any, I mean what were their, did they have any demands of the University of Missi- Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] when you were on the Board of Regents (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From time to time, folks did come. And a lot of it had to do with access. The General College had always been open enrollment, and it was an opportunity for you to come if you were serious and use it like a community college and then move into the rest of the university. And people used it because it was easier to transfer from General College into the third and fourth year in the University of Minnesota than it was to do two years at Robbinsdale [Minnesota] and try to come into the University of Minnesota. So it really was very useful for those who were serious. But over time, it was also a place where kind of non-serious students hung out, a lot of athletes and, you know, they just--and so it got a bad reputation. And the statistics did not look good. And, so there was a lot of pressure on the, from the faculty to change it and to close it and what not and what not. So there were a lot of questions about access, and then the community would come and say, "No, this is an important, important portal to the university. It's important that you not deny us the opportunity for that." So that was one of the main--I don't, I don't really remember my community focusing on the poor graduation rate, for instance, of athletes. I don't really remember my community focusing on the fact that the tuition was going up fast. You know, those weren't issues. It was mostly around General College--that was the main thing. Story_ID: 640141 Speaker 1: Now in, in 1980, you were appointed by George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] to the board of advisors at the U.S. Department of Education, right? Is that true? Speaker 2: No, I was appointed by Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Yeah, 1980, that wouldn't be-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Jimmy Carter (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, that's not George H.W. Bush. Speaker 2: I got a big picture up there from Jimmy-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Somebody got that wrong-- Speaker 2: --and Rosalynn [Rosalynn Carter], yeah-- Speaker 1: I'm drawing a line through it now. Speaker 2: --from serving on that, yeah. Speaker 1: I know that, and I sat here and read it like I--yeah, Jimmy Carter is president in '80 [1980] so, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, it was my, primarily my work at the university [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], and they wanted diversity on the, on this advisory committee to the Department of Education. They wanted people from higher education along with the K through 12 [kindergarten through twelfth grade]. And so my name was given to them by, then Vice President Mondale [Walter Mondale]. So that's how I got that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and it was the very first--it was the beginning of the inauguration of the Department of Education. That was the beginning. That was the very, very first with Hufstedler [Shirley Hufstedler] as the secretary. I have a picture up there of being sworn in. Story_ID: 640142 Speaker 1: When did you join the Association of Black Foundation Executives? Now that's some- I mean we probably should start with what--how did you first get involved on the board of the foundation (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Kellogg [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Kellogg. Speaker 2: Let's see. When did I go to Kellogg? I think it overlapped a couple of years with the Board of Regents. And I wanna say '89 [1989] I went on the board--no, I think it was probably '88 [1988], I went on the Board of Regents--on the board at Kellogg. And the CEO at that time was Russ Mawby [Russell Mawby]. And I had friends from about, oh, maybe 1986 or 1985 was the first time, maybe '85 [1985]. A friend of mine called me and said, "You know, I was in Washington [D.C.] at a meeting. And Russ Mawby, the CEO at Kellogg Foundation came over and asked me if I knew Wenda Moore [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore]." And I said, "So what did you say?" He said, "'Yes, I know Wenda Moore,' and we talked and chitchatted a little bit, and he wanted to know what you were interested in. And I told him, it's easier to talk about what she isn't interested in." And I said, "Oh, isn't that nice." So I, you know, hung up, and then I told Cornell [Weekes Moore's husband, HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore]. And Cornell said, "They're probably after you, they're looking at you for the board." And I said, "No, it can't be." And I thought, oh! So then I went to look up the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, and I thought oh, this is nice. I'd heard a little bit about it; never heard another word. Four, five, six months, eight months go by. Another friend calls. "I was at a meeting, and I met Russ Mawby," and I said, "And I bet Russ Mawby said, 'Do you know Wenda Moore 'cause you're from Minnesota?'" (Laughter) She said, "How did you know?" So by then I was just--anyway, this goes on, three or four different people. And the next thing I know, Peter Magrath [C. Peter Magrath], the president of the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] said, "Wenda, I have to tell you. I was at this meeting and Russ Mawby--." I said, "Peter, please spare me." I said, "I've been hearing for two years about Russ Mawby asking people about me" (laughter). I said, "I'm gonna--," and he said, "Oh, you've heard it before?" I said, "Yeah." And he said, "Well, maybe they're looking at you for the Kellogg Foundation." I said, "Well, I might have thought that a couple of years ago." I said, "Now I don't know what to think, and I'm not concerned about it." Anyway, I'm getting my children [Lynne Moore Nelson, Jonathan Moore and Meredith Moore Crosby] ready for school one morning, and the telephone rings. And this man says, "I'm calling from the National School Boards Association. We have just received a grant from the Kellogg Foundation." I'm thinking, oh, gee (laughter). And he said, "They've suggested that as one of the advisors to the project that we've been funded for, that we contact you and ask you to serve along with three other people to be the, like the overseers or the advisors of this project because we're very interested in increasing the competence of people who serve on school boards. We think they need to be exposed to governance issues. We think they need a larger tool box of strategies to deal with the issues so that we can increase the effectiveness of school boards." And I said, "Oh, thank you." I said, "That's--what a compliment." I said, you know, I gave him my address. I said, "Please send me some information, and I'll let you know." And I said, "By the way, who was it at the Kellogg Foundation that suggested that you call?" So he gave me the name, and I said, "Okay, you send the information, and I'll look at it." I hung up the phone. Story_ID: 640143 Speaker 1: --Called information for the Kellogg Foundation [W.K. Kellogg Foundation] in Battle Creek, Michigan. I called and asked to speak to this man. So when he came to the phone he said, "This is Pete Ellis [Peter R. Ellis]." I said, "Good morning, Pete Ellis. This is Wenda Moore [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore]," and he started laughing. He said, "I bet you're calling because that man from the National School Boards Association beat me to, beat me before I had a chance to call you." And I said, "Yes, I did get his call," and he said, "Well, I wanna apologize." And he said, "I also want you to know that our president, Russ Mawby [Russell Mawby], wants to come out and talk to you. And it's my responsibility to find a date that works for you and works for him." And I said, "He wants to come to Minneapolis [Minnesota]?" And he said, "Yes, he wants to come to Minneapolis and talk to you." So, of course, then when I hung up the phone, Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] said, "Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, for sure, they're gonna ask you to--," (laughter) so at any rate Russ came. And we had this nice chat and he said he'd been, he said, "I've been asking people about you for a long time." I said, "Yes, I know. Quite a few of them have told me," (laughter), "that you've been asking about me." And then he talked about how every year they take a board trip. And he said, "And we (pronunciation) invite, invite the spouses to accompany us so that they have some sense of the work that we do." We still do board trips, but we don't have the spouses come anymore. But at any rate, Cornell was sitting there when he said it. And he said, "And last year, we were in England and Scotland." We don't do grant making anymore there, but Cornell got all excited. I could just see him, and he said, "And this year the trip, your first trip will be to Washington, D.C.," and Cornell (laughter) just kind of was like, Washington, D.C. But it's been wonderful. I've really enjoyed the work at the Kellogg Foundation. I feel like it's my postgraduate work because all of the things that were of interest to Mr. Kellogg [Will Keith Kellogg] were things that I learned at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], the background in agriculture, the education, the--having responsibility for the hospital, the college of medicine [University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], all of that really prepared me very nicely for my work as a trustee of the Kellogg Foundation because that was, that's our focus, Mr. Kellogg's interest, food, wholesome food, sustainable agriculture, leadership, education, health, healthcare, that's accessible. So it was a wonderful fit for me, just a wonderful fit. Story_ID: 640144 Speaker 1: I know there's a strong connection between the Kellogg Foundation [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan] and the historically black colleges [HBCUs]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Yes, for many, many years, for many, many years, the Kellogg Foundation has supported--in fact, we took a tour--I wish I was better with the dates, but I remember a tour, and we were at the, down south and went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. So University of Georgia in Athens [Georgia], and then we took, it was a bus to Tuskegee that we took and stayed at the Dorothy Day Center [sic. Dorothy Hall, Tuskegee, Alabama] that was in just really, really poor shape. And when we got home, and I got back to the, to Battle Creek [Michigan], and we were talking about. And somebody was talking about the fact that even in the city, you know, there just were not a lot of nice options for people who came to Tuskegee when they wanted to stay overnight. And, so we started talking about it, and I was just saying to them that it really was critical for a place, a college like, a university like Tuskegee because people didn't wanna be on the road at night going home down there. It's not like getting on a freeway in Detroit [Michigan] and going to Ann Arbor [Michigan]. It's a very different kind of travel. And, so if we really wanted to do something for Tuskegee, that would be a good thing. So we did. We did the extended learning center down there after our visit just because everybody had been so impressed with the need. Speaker 1: So you were, you were a catalyst for the building of the Kellogg Center there in Tuskegee [Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center]? The-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we did. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: The Kellogg Center, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We did that. We did that in conversation. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's what we decided. Speaker 1: Well, I know I've been part of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --two groups that stayed there, you know, that stayed at the Kellogg Center (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh! Speaker 1: And we were just there last spring. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Great. And the center is still going well? Good, good. That's a wonderful, wonderful place. It's such an incredible story to tell from, you know, those first students building, making the bricks and building the school and just wonderful, a very special place. And, you know, they gave me a special tour when I went, and I got to go to Dr. Carver's [George Washington Carver] laboratory. It's very interesting. They were showing me this tube of blue paint that he developed from the soil down there. And the man went on to tell me that there had been several offers from commercial paint companies, they kept approaching Dr. Carver for the formula, and he wouldn't give it to them. He said he was not interested in selling to the paint company. And I thought to myself, it would have been very nice if Dr. Carver had had a trusted friend who was a businessman, who could have told him, there's a way to do this so that Tuskegee will be endowed the rest of its natural life (laughter) if we can, you know, and I'll take care of doing the contract. You write up the formula so we can give it to them, you know. But they said when Dr. Carver died and they went through his desk, there were checks, his checks in the drawers that he just hadn't cashed 'cause he lived mostly there in the lab where he worked, amazing story, amazing story; amazing man, really amazing man. Story_ID: 640145 Speaker 1: I wondered how that [Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center, Tuskegee, Alabama] got (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --started. Speaker 2: Well, and I think our board trips are very important because it's collective learning. All of us are there experiencing something together. I'll be out at Cal State Pomona [California State Polytechnic University, Pomona, Pomona, California] because Mr. Kellogg's [Will Keith Kellogg] ranch was out there. He gave it to the state, and that's the campus. And, so it's gonna be, it'll be interesting to go back and see that. We were at Mount Vernon [Mount Vernon, Virginia], and just another kind of aside, they wanted to build, re- reconstruct [President] George Washington's seven sided barn. And, so we went out, and the ladies of Mount Vernon [Mount Vernon Ladies' Association] extended the invitation. We had a lovely, lovely lunch, chicken salad served by very stately African American gentlemen, all gray haired and, you know, with white gloves and everything and silver trays and lovely iced tea and everything. And no talk of the slaves, no--nothing like that, just, you know, had us--we took a tour through Mount Vernon, the building, and then had this lovely luncheon. And I left to go to the ladies' room with a number, a number of other ladies. And somebody said, "There's another one if you go downstairs." So I went downstairs and just noticed as I was going down these stairs, these steps, 'cause there were offices, there was this big chart. And the title was at the top, Slave Families of Mount Vernon. And I just looked at it for a moment, and then went on to the ladies' room, and went back up 'cause we had other programs. And I said to the woman who was sitting at the table with me, the ladies of Mount Vernon, who was our host at our table, I said, "That's a remarkable chart. I didn't know that you did that, that you're really interested in the families, the slave families of Mount Vernon." And she said, "Where did you see that?" And I said, "Well, it's downstairs in the offices." And she said, "I don't know why we would, we would do something like that because we would have no interests in doing that." She said, "I can't even imagine why a chart like that would be here in the office." (Laughter) So I, so when we went back to Battle Creek [Michigan], and Russ [Russell Mawby] was talking about this several millions of dollars they wanted for this thing, after, after he finished, I said, "You know, I just have to share an experience I had." And I said, "You know, I know it's probably political- politically correct now not to talk about slavery, but I just wanted you to know, as an African American, I'm insulted. Black folks died. The denial of their contribution to Mount Vernon, and that's what this is--if there's no conversation about it. Slaves built that barn, slaves ran that farm," (laughter), "slaves did everything there. And there's no recognition and no interest in recognition." I said, "Russ, I don't think that's right, and I don't think we wanna be a part of something like that." And, so it's very nice now. They have an area where they are recognizing--first of all, they have a ceremony every year where they read off the names of the slave families. They have an area where it was just a field. They had an architect from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] design--it's just a very lovely, it's a brick area with a, kind of like a pedestal that comes up in recognition of the area where the slave families, slaves were buried. And it's just, it's nice that there is that recognition and awareness because there is a sense that it's not politically correct to talk about it. And, so I think it's important to say, you know, in not talking about it, you're denying the fact that these folks were here, that they did all of this work. And that's not right. That's not right. Story_ID: 640146 Speaker 1: Yeah that, so, I think you know, we've had a couple of HistoryMakers that are related to the families that built Mount Vernon [Mount Vernon, Virginia], you know. But, well, what else? These are good stories. I don't wanna stop you (laughter) from rolling (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, stories about Kellogg [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan]? Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. It's been interesting. I've really, I've really learned a lot. I went to--my first trip to South Africa was the year that they were getting ready for the election. And everybody at the foundation--I went with the vice president for health and another woman trustee. Both of those women are white, and everybody at the foundation was concerned that everything go right and that nobody mistreat me or anything like that. And it was a wonderful trip. I never had any, everybody was very kind, very cordial. And just as we left, we spent our last three days at Cape, in Cape Town [South Africa], at the Mount Washington Hotel [ph.], which is very much, very English with the chintz and the puffed up pillows everywhere. And it was very interesting because the only person who was abrupt or impolite or anything like that, we drove up to the Mount Washington, and this tall, stately black man came out as the doorman and opened the door. And he looked just like my grandfather--his picture is over there, just like my grandfather. And I got this big grin on my face, I was like, you know, just feeling good (laughter), this man, you know, here I am in Africa, motherland, you know. And I see somebody that looks likes me. So I said, hello, and he was just so abrupt and just, you know, just cut me off and blah, blah, blah. And I thought, oh, that's kind of different. And the next day, this Kellogg fellow who was working there was African American, was doing work in South Africa, said, "Would you like for me to tell you a little bit about South Africa, about what's going on right now, about the, all of this?" And I said, "Yeah." And he said, "Here you're considered coloured," and he said, "And I don't know if you've had any interaction with the black staff here at the hotel." But he said, "If they're like what's going on in the community right now because I'm considered coloured, there's a lot of tension because the black Africans feel that the coloured are gonna vote with the white. And Mr. Mandela [Nelson Mandela] and the ANC [African National Congress] will not be elected president. And so there's a lot of tension right now, so don't be surprised if you are treated, not politely or impolitely or however you wanna put it." And that's exactly what happened. We decided to stay late, and there was a knock on the door, and the maid was telling me on the other side, she said, "No, you--we can't, we don't have room, and you have to leave." And I opened the door, and she saw who I was--she also was coloured, my color. And she said, "Oh, yeah, no problem, I'll go down to the desk and tell 'em that you're gonna stay a little bit longer and so forth and so on." But it was very, very interesting to have black folks treating you more, in a, in a shabby way and abruptly than they have the white who were there. So it was just very interesting. And I was glad that he had come to talk about that so we had a sense of, it's not just me. That's the way it is right now. And then after the election, that wasn't such an issue. But right then, just before the election, there was serious doubt about how it was gonna come out, I guess. Story_ID: 640147 Speaker 1: Now I don't know if this is the correct spot in the chronology to mention this, but you talked about meeting Nelson Mandela (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, our board went back, our whole board went back to Africa. And because our work in rural poverty was so close to Nelson Mandela's heart, he said, because there are not many foundations doing work in rural poverty in South Africa, he invited our board to come to Pretoria [South Africa], to the state--to the country's capital and meet with him. And to meet with him, we had--it's the equivalent of the White House [Washington, D.C.] so we walked down this long corridor, and with all the portraits of the former presidents of South Africa, the boers, you know, all these, with the big ribbons and everything, we walked down to this lovely reception hall. And then shortly thereafter, Mr. Mandela came in the room, and it was just a remarkable, remarkable moment because he's not only charismatic, there's just this--it's the way he carries himself. It's this aura of peace and just strength and his body was, you know, as I said before, his voice was very strong, but you could tell the way he moved that it was arthritis or it was, you know, he was feeling his age. And after visiting Robben Island [South Africa] and seeing where he was held prisoner for such a long time, out--they showed the rock quarries where he spent all his days. That's why his, he has the blindness from the rock dust hitting his eyes. You can tell, you understand why his body is the way it is, but he was still strong and focused. And it was a wonderful conversation, a wonderful conversation. In fact, I did even mention to him that I had been on the Board of Regents [of the University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and was very proud to say that we had voted, you know, to divest of stock, companies that had, were doing business (laughter) in South Africa. And he said that had been a very important kind of solidarity, kind of solidarity movement in the United States they really appreciated because it kept the issue upfront in America. It would have been very easy for people to forget what they were going through. So that made me stand up a little taller and feel, you know, we had done the right thing. And then the last time I saw him, because now he's, when we were there, when I was there in November, he's in his homeland and doesn't, is just in very fragile health. And he doesn't see people except for really close friends. But the time before that when I saw him, it was at his home with the Nelson Mandela, where the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund office was so-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: It's very nice though. Speaker 1: So that was, that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nice memory. Speaker 1: --fairly recently, right, you saw him? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're still on the Ke- on the Kellogg-- Speaker 2: I'm on the Kellogg Foundation [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan] board, and I'm on the Kellogg Foundation Trust [W.K. Kellogg Foundation Trust]. The trust is a three member group that has responsibility for the $7 billion trust. Speaker 1: Okay. Now in--now, tell me if I'm going too fast now. I don't wanna (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, that's fine. Speaker 1: And your father [Leroy Weekes] passed away in 1994? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) July 24th. Speaker 1: There's a foundation established-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in your father's name? Speaker 2: Yes, and we--I give a scholarship every year to the medical school at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in his name. Speaker 1: Kellogg does? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: No, the-- Speaker 2: Our family. Speaker 1: Oh, your family, okay, all right, okay. Story_ID: 640148 Speaker 1: Do you wanna tell us how you became chair of the Kellogg Foundation [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yes, I was elected by the trustees as chair of the Kellogg board, and it was a great honor because, you know, as I was telling you before about the board trips, you really have an opportunity, not only to be the presiding officer at the board meetings, but you speak on behalf of the board. So, for instance, when we were in Africa for that trip, when it was time to greet Nelson Mandela, I was the one who spoke on behalf of the board. So it's a real honor and a privilege to serve as chair of the board. Speaker 1: Now how diverse is the board. Now how many members and how many-- Speaker 2: There are ten, and two of us are African Americans, three of us are African Americans, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we are, within philanthropy, a very, very diverse board. There are three African Americans. There's one Hispanic and one Asian. And there are three women. And that's very, very diverse for philanthropy. One of the areas, and I do a lot of talking to people, especially young people. And people don't focus on boards. They talk about, you know, tell me how you get on a paying board. And I tell people, you know, figure who out who you are and work hard at it in your community, and those paying boards will come when people realize you have something to bring to the table. But you can't just go out and think that you're going to--it's like starting off and going to the big leagues. It just, it just doesn't happen that way. Having said all that, there's an insularity about philanthropy because the boards are reappointing or finding--they elect members to the board. It's not like there's an election and an open process for coming into that world. So it's very difficult, and there is a real movement now within philanthropy to make philanthropy a lot more accountable than it's ever been. We're keeping track of the numbers, the lack of diversity, especially on the, at the trustee level because policy is set by the trustees. The trustees select the chief executive officer. The tone and direction are set by the board. So the day and age when folks can do to communities without having folks from those communities who can speak directly about their experiences, it just isn't right now a days. So we are working harder, I think, than we ever have to have some diversity, not only at the staff level and in terms of chief, chief operating officers, but really, really starting to focus on these boards. Story_ID: 640149 Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about maybe a direction that the foundation [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan] decided to take because of like grass root agitation about some, some issue? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know that as much as because Mr. Kellogg [Will Keith Kellogg] was who he was, we've always been in health. We've always been concerned about health disparities. Mr. Kellogg was very, very poor growing up, didn't have health, as I told you before. They thought he was just slow, and it turned out, if his vision had been tested, and glasses made available, he would have been just fine in school and would have learned to read and all of that. But because of that, he really was sensitive to all of that and wanted his foundation to focus on those kinds of issues, health disparities. The concern about having health, quality health available to everybody was very much his concern, and that's always been our concern. In over seventy-five years that's been one of the main areas of our grant making. Speaker 1: Okay. And I heard like there's a lot of discussions lately about urban deserts, basically. Speaker 2: Well, we--I feel like the wave is really hitting the beach now because we have been supportive of the sustainable, agriculture movement for the last forty, fifty years. And now, we are seeing so much more interests and receptivity from starting at Mrs. Obama [Michelle Obama] and doing the garden. And we've been one of the foundations supportive of her and the programming that she wants to do. We've been working with Robert Wood Johnson [Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Princeton, New Jersey] to combine that with fitness and really understanding that it's a very complex issue. You cannot just shame people into eating differently. You have to provide food. If people are concerned about safety on the street, it's ridiculous to say, have your kids go out and exercise on the streets. If you aren't safe on the streets, why would you let your kids out for exercise? So it's a very complicated issue, this food and fitness, and really the issues facing our country when you talk about trying to improve healthcare. So we're trying to do a more comprehensive approach in our grant making and the funding is, we think, reflecting that now as we combine fitness. A lot of the programs are school based. But they're inviting parents to come in. It's also, a lot of the programs are combining gardens. The kids are really learning how to grow their own stuff. Then they harvest it. Then they learn how to come in and cook it. Alice Waters has a wonderful, wonderful program [Edible Schoolyard] in Berkeley, California. She was one of the first to start this. But the kids feel so much ownership. I've gone out to a couple, you know, when they, when they grow something. This is my cucumber. I know this is my cucumber and inviting families to come in and learn new recipes and try them with the kids because it is about the whole family. You can't pluck kids out of a family. They belong to a family, so it's about helping the whole family to figure out how they might eat differently and begin to substitute some things and then figuring out a way, which is another part of our grant making that we've been interested in, in getting wholesome food into these urban deserts where you don't have grocery stores. Story_ID: 640150 Speaker 1: And so we've worked with farmers. A lot of sustainable agriculture farmers to have farmer market days in, just on a block or a cul-de-sac or whatever, but bringing it in, right into that community so they--it doesn't matter that there isn't a grocery store. And the other thing that we, we've got another, they were talking about another grant in New Orleans [Louisiana] that's going to start--I don't know how this is gonna go. But start talking to some of these minimarts that have the awful looking apples and stuff, about helping them find money to increase their refrigerator system so that they might have more fruits and vegetables available because they would have the ability to store them appropriately. Some of the, like 7-Eleven, for instance, you know, because it's just--they're smaller. There isn't room to have the refrig- refrigerated sections, to have fruits and vegetables offered that are fresh. And some of them are interested in expanding the space. So if you can't get a whole grocery store, at least increase the offerings in fresh fruits and vegetables that some of these corner stores now are offering. So that's other, that's also another option. It's important to meet people where they are, not to have this frame of, you know, we need grocery stores in every--well, that's not, that's not gonna be possible for every community to have a grocery store. What are the other options and being open and supportive of that? So that's what we're trying to do now. Speaker 2: Okay. Now do you--is there a ideal project or a dream pro- project that you would like to see supported more so than it is today or-- Speaker 1: No, I don't think so. You know, we talk, we have such a collaborative relationship because our board meets once a month with the staff [of the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan], and we really talk through what's going on. And I feel like I really have an opportunity to add as the, as we're developing our strategies and deciding what we're gonna fund, we're trying very hard to continue to challenge ourselves and to meet, be out there with communities. We don't wanna be at a place where we're not taking the kind of risk that we need to be taking because we just feel at this point, that if you can't use philanthropy to try some of these risky strategies to address the issues that are really hampering communities now from moving forward, where can you go to have the opportunity to move some of these strategies forward. So that's the main thing, trying to be open, you know, when staff come with these ideas and say, yeah, even though the numbers might not be there right now, because when you say, as we are, we're focused on K through early childhood, K through three [kindergarten through third grade], and really preschool through three, you're not gonna see changes right away. But you need to be, the way we are committed to Michigan and some of these other communities where we've been for a long period of time, especially Michigan because Michigan is Mr. Kellogg's [Will Keith Kellogg] home state. Story_ID: 640151 Speaker 1: When you look back on your career, how do you think the role of women has changed in the foundation community? Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you at the Kellogg Foundation [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan], it's changed a lot. It's changed in the way we view women in the field, and the way we view our responsibility towards women. And I think a lot of it has to do with the fact that I had an opportunity here, Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] at the White House when President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was president, and this was just before the women's conference [Fourth World Conference on Women] in Beijing [China], UN [United Nations] world, women's--UN world, yeah, the world's women's conference in Beijing. It was the world conference in Beijing. I think it was ninety--'95 [1995]. At any rate, Hillary said that--no, it couldn't have been '95 [1995], '85 [1985] probably [sic. 1995], all right. I'm not gonna worry about the date. At any rate, she invited a number of people from foundations to say that the government was not going to be able to send the number of women that they normally sent to these world conferences. The last one had been at Nai- the previous one had been at Nairobi [Kenya], and they had sent a delegation headed by Maureen Reagan, but this time, they weren't--[U.S.] Congress was not going to fund that. And she wanted foundations to do it. So I went, I heard it and I went back. And Russ Mawby [Russell Mawby] who was the president of the Kellogg Foundation at the time, said that if I could go and head the delegation, that he would consider having us bring together a group of women. And it was the first time at Kellogg that they were really willing to say, maybe women might be different and might be worth some funding and some focus that would be different than in the past 'cause we didn't, we just didn't talk about it at Kellogg. And so we had staff identify women in our, who'd been grantees, who could take advantage of this, who could come back, go to the conference in Beijing, come back and share it with their groups. And that's what we did, but we did more than that because when we came back to the foundation, we decided that we were going to begin to focus more on women, the needs of women and girls; that there were real inequities, in the grant dollars focused on women and girls. And really, if you wanna move a community forward, it's the women who need to be the focus in a lot of ways. So I think it's really been different since then. And we don't shy away from talking about, at the Kellogg Foundation, racial inequities and racial inequality or equality around your sex, the fact that women are, are treated differently. So that's a good thing. Story_ID: 640152 Speaker 1: What advice would you give to some- to someone who would like to be a foundation executive and doesn't know how to get started? Speaker 2: Well, I think the first thing would be have an area--know yourself and have something that, have something to bring to the table, whatever that knowledge is. And then just go on the web and look at some of these places that are advertising because there is more accessibility now to job positions opening in foundations. And I think the other thing is, don't be so focused on what your first position is in a foundation. Just come in at any level because there is the ability, once you get in, to work your way up, I think. It's not a clear career ladder. It isn't as clear as a lot of places, but it's a lot easier to move up once you get in than it is from the outside. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there's a lot of diversity in foundation, in the foundation world. If you--that's why I said, find out what your passion is really because if you're passionate about ecology, if you're passionate about the arts, if you're passionate about newspapers and, you know, you--we were talking about the Knight Foundation [John S. and James L. Knight Foundation, Miami, Florida], I mean it doesn't matter what your passion is, there's a foundation centered around that, foundations, I should say ce- centered around that. So you can work in an area that supports your passion. And the reason I think it's so exciting to work in philanthropy is because that's where the risks are being taken. And they're open to change and really looking for different ways to address whatever the, whatever the issue is. Speaker 1: So you're saying under the, I guess the political climate we have today, especially, probably the government is not gonna take the risk to-- Speaker 2: Really not, no, really not, really not. We are the venture capitalists really, philanthropy-- Speaker 1: Of change and-- Speaker 2: Of--yes, right, of change in society. When you look at the kind of things that the Gates Foundation [Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, Washington] is doing in terms of inoculations, in terms of education, you know, it's the kind of stuff the government ought to be doing (laughter), but the government isn't, but the government can't. And philanthropy is, is really a real important partner now in the, in our communities. Story_ID: 640153 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Of course, my real hope and concern is that we just stay focused and energized and understand that it's real important to be prepared and to accept leadership. And we need real leaders now than, more now than we ever have. And I think we're in the process of an incredible transfer of leadership, a transition in leadership. And we need to have that next generation stepping up and I think my generation needs to be ready to hand that leadership or to share that leadership in a way that leads to having this next generation take it over. But I think that's one. As I look at our organizations, that's one of the real issues, this transition of leadership. But I think we just really need to be focused on what the real issues are, and those of us who are economically privileged can't forget that the majority aren't. And we still need to be supportive of everything we can that will help that part of our community become engaged and have the tools that will allow them to move forward. And I think we've got to be a lot, a lot more frank within our community about what our issues are. We're not taking responsibility for each other. We aren't taking responsibility the way we should, I feel. We're not talking. We're not having those frank conversations in the house, and I'm not quite sure how (laughter) you do that. But however you do it, we need to be talking more frankly with each other about what we're doing right and what we're doing wrong. And why are so many of our young people, especially our young men, in prison and not acting right and not doing right, not looking right, not, you know, serious about their studies. We need to be having those conversations. We need to be having those conversations, and I just keep thinking, there's so many places we need to be having those conversations, in families, in homes, you know, in church. There's so many places we need to so--I work with The Links [The Links, Incorporated] and we're trying to have those conversations in a really serious way, and trying to do serious outreach and not do to, but do with, you know, work with community. Story_ID: 640154 Speaker 1: What are some of your other favorite organizations? You mentioned The Links [The Links, Incorporated]. What are-- Speaker 2: Yeah, The Links and I did, my children [Lynne Moore Nelson, Jonathan Moore and Meredith Moore Crosby] were in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]. And I'm gonna be recognized by the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] in the, April. It's the hundredth anniversary of Girl Scouts, and there are a hundred women in, here in Minnesota and Wisconsin who will be recognized. And I'm gonna be one of the hundred. We're gonna have a big gathering. And I'm so delighted because I feel like Girl Scouting was one of those important pieces of my life, one of the important reasons I am who I am today. And for the same reasons, it was a good thing for me, it's a good thing for girls today. And the Girl Scouting is trying to reach all girls. This is a new conversation. They're really getting serious about trying to reach all girls because all girls need to grow up understanding they are important and what they do is important. And that's what you learn in Girl Scouting. It's not just about selling cookies. It's about learning your place and gaining the confidence to go out there and claim your place. Story_ID: 640155 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: (Pause) I, first of all, can I just say, I don't do that. I really just don't do that. I work very hard at trying to be, to be there, to own the moment and to own the space and, you know, I think back at so many times when I was trying to figure out, do I take exception to this comment. And it's always been, I don't ever wanna look back and say, I would a, could a, should a. I don't wanna be that kind of person. I wanna speak my truth at the moment, right there where I am. I don't wanna be ten, twenty years later, saying, man, if I'd just said then, you know. I never wanted to be that person. I can't, no, I think I would have done just about, you know, I--because even when it didn't work out, it was, it was important learning that I had to do. And I am who I am because of all of that. And I wouldn't want to change that. I wouldn't want to change that. Story_ID: 640156 Speaker 1: Likewise, if you look back at everything, you know, that you've done so far, what today would you be--would be your assessment of your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know. I think an assessment of a legacy comes from other people. I don't think you assess your own legacy. I don't know--or maybe you can, maybe you can assess your own legacy. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I, you know (laughter), I don't know. I love my family. That's always been my main focus, my family. I love my family. And I love my family outside my family, my community is my next family. And I've always felt an obligation to that family too. And I've always wanted to be the very best for both of those families that I could possibly be. And I hope I have, I hope I have. Story_ID: 640157 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family. I know we talked about your husband [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --somewhat about his career, but what about your children and--? Speaker 2: Well, we have three children, and Lynne [Lynne Moore Nelson] is an attorney with the Chicago Public Schools. She's in school administration. And she's married to my son-in-law, James Nelson [ph.], who's in business. And then our son, Jonathan [Jonathan Moore], is at Dunwoody university [Dunwoody College of Technology, Minneapolis, Minnesota] here. And he's in admissions, in the admissions area, and works with students. And then our younger daughter, Meredith [Meredith Moore Crosby], is also in Chicago [Illinois], but in suburban Chicago. And she is in communications, branch outreach for McDonald's Corporation. And they are the loves of my life (laughter), truly, truly. I'm very proud of all three, very proud of all three because they're good people. They are good, good people. They vote every election, and they're engaged in their communities, and they're good people. They're good people. Story_ID: 640158 Speaker 1: Speaking of voting, how did you feel about the election of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and what do you see--do you think he'll be re- reelected? Speaker 2: Oh, I certainly hope so, I certainly hope so. We went to the inauguration because I just, I just couldn't believe it. And I thought, I gotta go, I gotta see it so I know for sure, you know, and that nothing happens to my man because, you know, I've lived through a lot of awful stuff. And I just--so I tell you, every night after I pray for my family, I pray for him. I pray for his safety and his, you know, his family's safety because we just live in an outrageous time right now. And I think he has the kind of new thinking that our country needs. I think he's fearless enough to try some of those ideas, and of course, everything isn't gonna work. But these are big time issues that we're dealing with and none of them are simple solutions. And anybody else, you know, I think at this juncture in time--'cause he's, I think a lot like Franklin Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] in terms of what he had to deal with in terms of the economy. I don't think anybody knows how bad it was and how bad it could have been. But I certainly hope he has a second term. I think he deserves a second term. He is, you know, very, very bright, and I don't know where the energy comes from, but I think Mr. McCain [John McCain], I think the strain and stress of this, I don't see how he could have lived through this. I really don't. It--the presidency of this country more and more, I think, takes a young man, you know, somebody--and the difference is, I feel, President Obama, regardless of how bad the day is, can go to bed and get a good night's rest, a really good night, nine hours, whatever, he can be a hundred percent the next day. You can't say that after you get to--I can, I can tell you, I can verify that (laughter). At a certain age, that's not necessarily the case. But he can, he can. He can bring that, that youthful energy, reach down and get it, and that's what we need now. Story_ID: 640159 Speaker 1: Now as we're here on January 15, 2012-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I did not ask you about the person whose birthday this is, Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was killed in '68 [1968]. You were here in Minnesota when he was assassinated, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And can you tell us how you felt about that? Speaker 2: It was such a hard time because it was like two months before our baby was born, two months before Lynne [Lynne Moore Nelson] was born, and it was really hard. It was really hard because in my mind, I always felt that the world I brought my children into would be better. It wouldn't be, you know, that same old stuff. And it was just really hard because I just never thought they would kill him. And then that was in April, and then in June, I guess it was maybe ten days before the baby was born, Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] woke me up and he said, "I got some really bad news." And I just, and I remember sitting down at the kitchen table writing all these letters to congressmen about gun control because I thought, you know, I just have to do something. All this learning that I've done in political science just tells me I have to do something. I just can't sit here and have this baby and just bring it into this world. I've gotta figure out something I can do to try to make the world better. It just, oh, it was an awful time. It was just, I was just so--it's really bad when you are getting ready to have a baby, and it's your very first baby, you know. You want everything to be so nice and to have those things come together because her birthday is June 13th, it was really-- Speaker 1: So she was born just near the Kennedy assassination of the same year. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: Yeah, because first it was--all of this happened in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was first Dr. King, and then Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], and then like maybe, I don't know, just a few days later, Lynne was born, and I purposely never saved any of the newspapers. You know how you sometimes save the headlines, I never saved any of that for her 'cause I knew when she got to school and started learning history, she'd know about 1968. I didn't need to have it all smacked around her baby book. She would learn about how things had been in 1968. Yeah. Story_ID: 640160 Speaker 1: As we close out, what are some of your hopes for the future? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I just think we have to find some middle ground. We have to find some middle ground as human beings, as Americans, as--we just have to find some middle ground. We have to find a way to talk to each other, to be more respectful of different opinions and it's just so critical. And I don't understand why everybody else doesn't understand how important it is to do that. You've got to model that for our children so they know it can be different. My hope is we can have more people interested in doing that and just have a world where we can start talking to each other and really listening in a respectful way, not listening so that I hear where my--when it's my time to talk (laughter), but really hearing what you're saying, you know. And it's sad because you see the children acting out because none of this is being modeled at home, no civil discourse at home. And I've gotten to the point now, my--it just appalls my children. But I've gotten so, and I think my gray hair allows me, you know, I will say something, I will say something. I was in Target the other day, and this woman was just yelling at her child in the--and she was just calling him everything, and the chair was like that (gestures), and finally I turned around, and I said, "You know, I have to tell you, you're not even looking at me and you're hurting my feelings. I can't even imagine how this baby is taking it." And she just looked at me like it had never dawned on her that this was outrageous to be talking to this baby like this, you know. But anyway, I'm owning my (laughter), I'm owning my space. My kids say, "Mom, somebody's gonna turn around and slap you one day," and I said, "I don't--." We were walking through the lobby and these black girls in all this, loud and, you know, MF this and MF that, and my daughter, Meredith [Meredith Moore Crosby], said right away to me, "Mom, mom, don't say a word now. We're just going to the elevator. Don't say a word." Well, I didn't say anything. I walked by and sure enough one of the girls turned and looked at me, and I just gave her the eye, and my kids know the eye, and I knew she knew what giving the eye meant, (snaps fingers) like that, they got quiet. You can't just, you know, act like you don't see it and you don't hear it 'cause that's telling them it is okay to talk like that where I am. Well, it isn't, it isn't. So anyway, that's why my kids say, "Mom, I'm gonna hear about you. Dad's [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] gonna call and say, 'Somebody knocked mom out.'" I said, "Well, you'll know I went down for a just cause" (laughter). Story_ID: 640161 Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you-- Speaker 2: Oh! Speaker 1: --that we need to talk about that-- Speaker 2: Oh, I can't think of anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't think of anything. I've enjoyed it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, I'd like to be remembered as a woman who worked hard, loved her family, loved her community and worked hard for both and wasn't afraid to own her space, speak her mind when it was, when it was important to speak. Um-hm, and I love my God, and I thank Him for walking with me every day too 'cause that's what's given me the strength to own my space. Story_ID: 640162 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So if you could just go ahead and tell us a little bit about this photograph? Speaker 2: Who's in it, the year of the shot and where? Speaker 1: Oh, I imagine--that's a picture of me, and I imagine I'm about eighteen months old or a two-year old, and my family wonders why I love animals. I have always been surrounded--now you see that's a dog I'm messing with. I have always had animals in my life. My family's always had dogs. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (Unclear). It's not focusing. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Larry [Larry Crowe], I know it's been a while, but remember how much I hate this camera? Speaker 1: Yes (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) And, now you're remembering too. Speaker 1: I'm surprised I can actually. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It just won't focus, though. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Try a different setting. Speaker 1: Well, is she doing a close up? Does it have a close up setting? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, I switched it to that. Still is not working (background noise). Speaker 1: A picture of a picture--let me look for (unclear) here (background noise). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: My daughter thinks the pictures I take--she saw all these picture of me (unclear) she thought it was--like, "What are these strange looks?" Well, I'm actually taking my own pi- picture (unclear) on the camera I'm like this like looking back (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh! How many children do you have? Speaker 1: Two. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Let's go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My daughter just graduated from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and made-- Speaker 1: Oh, how wonderful. Speaker 2: --summa cum laude. Speaker 1: Hot dog! There you go! Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, just one second. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just one more second. Speaker 1: All right. Go ahead. Take your time. Speaker 2: (CORNELL LEVERETTE MOORE): Where did she go to school at Howard? Speaker 1: Oh, School of Communications [John H. Johnson School of Communications; Cathy Hughes School of Communications, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Hot dog! That's where our daughter-- Speaker 1: (CORNELL LEVERETTE MOORE): (Unclear) chairman of the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really? Is she--she came out of the school--yeah, that's right. She--that's the one that works in Urbana [Illinois]? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: (CORNELL LEVERETTE MOORE): Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: (CORNELL LEVERETTE MOORE): (Unclear). But I'm chairman of the board of (unclear) School of Communications. I've been-- Speaker 1: Are you? Speaker 2: (CORNELL LEVERETTE MOORE): Yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: (CORNELL LEVERETTE MOORE): (Unclear) smart girl. Where is she working now? Speaker 1: Well, she's working in a nail salon (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (CORNELL LEVERETTE MOORE): (Simultaneous) I'm trying to get started. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: (Laughter) She does artistic nails and stuff. Speaker 1: (CORNELL LEVERETTE MOORE): Really? Speaker 2: It's a black salon, you know, it's not a (unclear). Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: You know (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I think that, you know-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead and we'll start this photograph. Speaker 2: We're dressed up in our finery, and I imagine I was about ten, and that's our neighbor on the far left, Verna Coleman [ph.] and my brother, Lee [Lee Weekes], and my sister, Anita [Anita Weekes Hibler], and I'm next to Anita in our front steps at 2412--and you can see our Easter baskets (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: You wanna do this one the regular way? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's fine. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, isn't that wonderful? This was taken close to my birthday in 1944 because the date is on there. I like this picture. It's one of those smiles I always (laughter) remember. So I was three. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is meeting Nelson Mandela the first time in Pretoria [South Africa] when our board talked, and I think I had, I had mentioned to him about our board divesting of the stock, and he was talking. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of our board. Oh, good, you're getting fast. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Yeah, it also helps that the pictures are a little bigger (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: That's our full delegation with our Chinese representatives, university representatives of the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] when we went over to establish educational reciprocity. Speaker 1: It's 1979? Speaker 2: Um-hm, 1979. And I have just signed one of the agreements, and I'm handing it to the secretary. And that's the dean of agriculture and the dean of the graduate school behind me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Interesting (unclear). Speaker 2: And this was coming in on the campus and the little girl met and presented me with flowers. This was a photo the Girl Scouts took and that's the seal of the University of Minnesota. They were all talking about different, recognizing women for different areas, and mine was chairing the Board of Regents. Speaker 1: Now this is a big box of cornflakes here. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's just a fun box. They don't do that anymore, take your picture and put it on the box. Speaker 1: What, they give you a lot of boxes and you just ate the rest of them and (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, the first time my kids [Lynne Moore Nelson, Jonathan Moore and Meredith Moore Crosby] saw it, they said, "Oh, mom, we wanna buy one of those with your picture on it." I'm like, ah, please, really. Speaker 1: In the middle of the store-- Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. I didn't know I had such gullible kids. And this is when I was being sworn in--what was the date on that, sworn in to the advisory committee for the national, U.S. Department of Education. And that's Shirley Hufstedler, the first secretary of education. Speaker 1: This is '80 [1980]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Eighty [1980]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980]. Story_ID: 640163 Speaker 1: And this is my family, mom and dad on the couch and my sister, Anita [Anita Weekes Hibler], and Cornell [Weekes Moore's husband, HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore], and I'm holding Jonathan [Jonathan Moore] and Meredith [Weekes Moore's daughter, Meredith Moore Crosby] and my brother, Lee, Beryl, Joe and my sister's husband, Bob Hibler [ph.] and Bryan [ph.] in front of my sister. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. From--let's see can we do the back row from left to right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Back row? Okay, back row, Cornell Moore, Lee Weekes, my brother, Beryl Weekes, my sister, Gerald Weekes, my brother, Bob Hibler, my sister's husband. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And then seated on the couch, left to right again. Speaker 1: I'm sitting there with my son, Jonathan. That's my mom, Sylvia [Sylvia Means Weekes], my dad, Leroy, and my sister, Anita. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And then my--in front of me, my daughter, Lynne [Lynne Moore Nelson] and in front of my sister, Bryan, her son, Hibler. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, thank you. I, yeah--people actually have to type a captions for these (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I--yeah, I know. That was a good catch, 'cause they wouldn't have known. This was a health disparities meeting that the Kellogg Foundation [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan] sponsored, and our guest speaker was Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And do you know-- Speaker 1: And I introduced him. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): --approximately the year? Speaker 1: That's recently, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's recently. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Let's say 2000 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) (Unclear). Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: This is the Board of Regents in nineteen seventy--ooh, you got all dressed up--five [1975]. No, it wouldn't be '75 [1975]; yeah, it could be, '74 [1974], let's say. And this is the Kellogg Foundation board of trustees in 2005. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And this was taken--where was this taken, Cornell, I don't remember. This was at the dinner when I received the Howard University Alumni Achievement Award. My dad was a trustee, and he had previously received that same award. So that's my dad, Leroy Weekes and Wenda Moore, [HistoryMaker] Wenda Weekes Moore. And this is a picture taken when Wendy Anderson announced at the press conference, my appointment to the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] Board of Regents. Speaker 2: Governor Wendell Anderson? Speaker 1: Governor Wendell R. Anderson. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Did they ever get you all mixed up, Wendy and Wenda? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Now this picture, I can tell you, was taken in 1951. And that's my dad holding my little sister, Beryl, and my mom holding my brother, Gerald, and I'm standing next to my mom. And then my sister, Anita, is seated on the floor, and my brother, Lee, is sitting next to her. This is conferring an honorary degree as chair of the Board of Regents on Vice President Walter Mondale. And I'm standing there next to Vice President Mondale, and that's the president of the University of Minnesota, C. Peter Magrath. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's Chief Justice Warren Burger [Warren E. Burger], in the background, now that I'm noticing, right there (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. That's right. There's something behind you now. Out of my reach. Let's see. Speaker 2: And then those we've already done, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, we've done those. Now we're going to these. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: And now set it straight. Speaker 2: You wanna do all of these, okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay. This is from the Girl Scout [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] communication about receiving the Esther Crosby, the 1990 Esther Crosby Award [Esther V. Crosby Award]. The Esther Crosby Award exemp- is given to women who exemplify the Girl Scout ideals of resourcefulness, leadership, service and concern for the world around her. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And this is one of the magazines documenting the University of Minnesota, University of Minnesota's educational reciprocities agreements with Chinese University [Chinese University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, Hong Kong], and this is a picture of Chinese Vice President Fang Yi. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And this is a picture from the annual report of the Kellogg Foundation. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 2: And that's our board of trustees. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you know the year on that? Speaker 2: Turn it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's probably right there. Speaker 2: Yeah, just turn the back, 2000. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And that's from the, Cornell and I were 2010 Legacy Award recipients, and that was an award given by the Pan African Community Endowment. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you keep your fingers outside the border by any chance (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Is it gonna work? Speaker 1: Is that better? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And this is the family, Meredith standing next to her dad and I'm next to Cornell, and our son is next to me, and then Lynne is on the left, seated. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Let's see. Speaker 2: And this from a magazine, the Minneapolis St. Paul Magazine in July, 1982, twelfth in a series of their salute to outstanding women in the Twin Cities. Speaker 1: One more. Now for the final one. Here we go. It's a nice big one. Speaker 2: And this was the poster from the University of Arkansas Clinton School of Public Service [Little Rock, Arkansas], the Center on Community Philanthropy. I served as a scholar in residence for three days there...