 Story_ID: 619475 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer (audio disturbance) for The HistoryMakers. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me please? Speaker 2: My name is Ellis Louis Marsalis, Jr. [HistoryMaker Ellis Marsalis, Jr.]. That's E-L-L-I-S, middle name, L-O-U-I-S, Marsalis, M-A-R-S-A-L-I-S, Jr. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: November 14, 1934. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: New Orleans, Louisiana. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation or profession? Speaker 2: I'm retired from the University of New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana] in 2001, but I continue as a performing musician. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is June 10, 2010. Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: The Recital Hall [Performing Arts Center Recital Hall] at the University of New Orleans. Story_ID: 619476 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you a few questions that might seem like People magazine-ish type questions, but do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is probably blue, a particular shade of blue like sky blue. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite food? What is it that you like to eat? Speaker 2: Salmon. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: In the fall here in New Orleans [Louisiana] because it gets so hot here so I like the fall. Speaker 1: When you go on vacation, do you have a favorite destination? Speaker 2: My wife [Dolores Ferdinand Marsalis] and I like Savannah, Georgia, which is a rather consistent place that we go. However, we do go to Baltimore [Maryland], but we have one son [Ellis Marsalis III] and three grandchildren in Baltimore so we like Baltimore also. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite saying or phrase? Speaker 2: My, my favorite phrase as of lately, I never really thought about it a lot, but it seems to be always connected to a, a student that I have either had or might be--interacted with and it's, what are you prepared to do? That phrase seems to be appropriate across the board. Story_ID: 619477 Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your family and what you know about your, your genealogy and I'd like to start with your mother's side of the family. Tell me your mother's name, where and when she was born? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Florence Robertson, R-O-B-E-R-T-S-O-N [Florence Robertson Marsalis]. She was born in New Roads, Louisiana, N-E-W, R-O-A-D-S. Her age she always kept from us. I guess women's prerogative, and she passed away in I can't exactly remember the date right now. Speaker 1: Do you remember her birth day if you don't know the year? Speaker 2: No. I sure don't. I'd have to ask my sister [Yvette Marsalis Washington]. Speaker 1: So tell me about your mother. Tell me the type of person she was and your relationship with her? Speaker 2: That's--I'm still finding out things. Every now and then I'll talk to my sister and some things will emerge. I don't think I ever really knew my mother that well. And I asked my sister not long ago, I said, "Do you ever remember Mother actually hugging us?" She said, "No." But overall she was a caring mom, sometimes a little overbearing especially between my sister and I. She just wanted the two of us to be the main focus in the family situation, which in later years turned out not to be so good (laughter), especially when you get married. As I remember hearing there were nine siblings in her family, the names of which I knew some. I think there was an older brother named Frederick [ph.]; and the uncle that I knew quite well his name was Willis, W-I-L-L-I-S [Willis Robertson]; and younger than him was a brother named Horace [ph.], used to call him ti man. That's Patois, which probably meant little man. And her sister Emma [Emma Robertson Trahan] I also knew, my Aunt Emma. That's the only ones that I know. Story_ID: 619478 Speaker 1: Did she share any stories about her growing up? Where she went to school? Did they live in the city or a rural area? Speaker 2: She lived in New Roads [Louisiana] and I'm, I'm not sure what her age was when she came to New Orleans [Louisiana], but I do know I think she was about eight years old before she learned to speak English. She and my maternal grandmother who was named Leona Vincent [Leona Vincent Robertson], maiden name Vincent, they would speak Creole all day whenever my grandmother visited. At first I thought it was because she didn't want us to know what she was saying but sometime in the, in the future, I end- I, I spent two years in a little town called Breaux Bridge [Louisiana], that's B-R-E-A-U-X, B-R-I-D-G-E, as a schoolteacher and the people in that town, and this would have been in the '60s [1960s], was the same situation where they spoke Creole all day. And in teaching some of their children I realized that quite often they had problems with English and it caused me to reflect on my mother [Florence Robertson Marsalis] and my maternal grandmother and it was that she had some problems--well let's put it this way, she was more comfortable speaking Creole with my mother. My maternal grandfather, he hardly ever said anything and I think that also had a lot to do with it. Speaker 1: What was your maternal grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Charles Robertson. Speaker 1: Now, what was your grandmother and your grandfather's--what was their, their background as far as who were their parents, if you know? Speaker 2: They came from New Roads. I was never really sure what my grandfather did. I know he worked, but I'm not sure if he worked beyond what we used to call a hustle. That is, doing like handyman kinds of things, not so much the handyman that you had to have a skill you know like fixing things; I don't remember him being like that. But my grandmother, the, the la- the last thing that I heard about her was that she supposedly spent some time in an institution, not jail, just some kind of--for some mental problems, I'm assuming all of this, and as a result my mother, her sister [Emma Robertson Trahan] and another relative went to live with a li- I alway- I always heard him talk about her as being Auntie and in fact I just recently found out her name from my cousin. It was Manuel [Rosalee Manuel], Manuel I think was her last name, and I can't remember her first name, but she was--she didn't have any children and she raised them and from what my sister [Yvette Marsalis Washington] was telling me, my mother always had problems trying to--wondering why it was that my grandmother didn't raise them. Story_ID: 619479 Speaker 1: You said that they were Creole. What was--do you know the mixture of Creole as far as, they spoke French so I'm assuming that but I wanted to ask you. Speaker 2: Yeah, that which is, is called Creole, it's just a couple different definitions of that. In the process of dealing with language, it was French based but it was a language that had virtually no tenses. In other words if you are speaking French where there's il, elle, je, nous, nous sommes--there were tenses to that. If you say je quatre [sic. j'ai quatre], well I had, I have four; in Creole you know they just say mwen gen kat, and there was no you know first person, second person whatever. And it was learned orally so basically that--you know that was the, the crux of that. Now the other concept of Creole which was applied was skin color. People would refer to Creole and use it to describe somebody who was fair skinned. My mother was not fair skinned, but language wise she was a part of that culture. And they didn't necessarily consider themselves American. When my mother married my father [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.], he was from Mississippi and some of my relatives would make the comment you know that Florence [Florence Robertson Marsalis] married an American boy 'cause he was not from New Roads [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Was your father fair skinned? Was your father fair skinned? Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 619480 Speaker 1: Do you know about your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: On my mother's [Florence Robertson Marsalis] side no, I don't know anything about the great-grandparents on that side. Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandmother [Leona Vincent Robertson] she was always a homemaker? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or did she work outside the home? Speaker 2: No, as far as I know she was always a homemaker. Speaker 1: Okay. Did they own their own property? Speaker 2: That's a good point. I'm not--I would tend to think not. I remember in the later years my grandmother--my aunt [sic. maternal great aunt, Alva Manuel (ph.)] took care of her and also my grandfather [Charles Robertson]. I remember them living in the house, and I think my mother's sister [Emma Robertson Trahan] owned the house. The few times that I would go to visit, I remember there was a fireplace, a wood burning fireplace and my grandfather would sit in his rocking chair in front of the fire and I would sit next to him you know and you'd be burning up in the front, cold in the back (laughter). But he never really said much and I do remember which sort of led me to think that he had a problem with the language. I can remember he had real, real thick accident--accent and he didn't, he just didn't have a lot to say. Story_ID: 619481 Speaker 1: So your aunt raised your mother [Florence Robertson Marsalis] in her-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: My aunt? Speaker 1: No, no your mother's aunt [Alva Manuel (ph.)] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her aunt. Speaker 1: Yes, your mother's aunt, aunt-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --raised her? Is that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay and was it in the same town [New Roads, Louisiana] or did she move-- Speaker 2: Yeah it was in the same town. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about your mother's education? Speaker 2: As far as I know I think she went to the eighth grade. You know I'm not sure what that would translate to today. But I think that's as far as she went. Speaker 1: Okay. And did she work outside the home? Speaker 2: She did until she got married. And after she got married my father [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] discouraged that because he didn't want her working outside the home. She had been working for a white doctor and he always felt that well you don't need to do that because I can take care of the family. Which he did, but (laughter) I'm not looking back at it, I'm not even sure if that was a good idea because the concept of work sometimes has other connotations, other than whether or not he could have taken care of her. I think it was some things that she needed but didn't have anything to do with the money. Story_ID: 619482 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your, your father and his side of the family. Tell me your father's name and where and when he was born? Speaker 2: My father is Ellis Louis Marsalis, Sr. [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.], all spelled the same way as mine. He was born in Summit, S-U-M-M-I-T, Mississippi. He and his brother Arthur, A-R-T-H-U-R [Arthur Marsalis]. There was a sister who was I think older, wait a minute, named Carrie [Carrie Marsalis]. I don't--I forgot whether she was older or not but anyway she died at a very young age. He didn't remember much about it except he said the doctor was giving her quinine, whatever--you know whatever that was. So this would have been maybe around 1914, '15 [1915], somewhere around that time. Speaker 1: So that was around the time your father was born? What, what--was born--what year was he born? Speaker 2: Well he was, he was born April 16, 1908. Speaker 1: Okay. And did he talk to you much about his growing up? Speaker 2: There was some little anecdotes that he talked about, about he and, and his brother, you know how he would make references to the way kids were when I was growing up. He say like when they were growing up if they wanted to play ball, they just go clear off a field and play. He said now, he said kids today they don't have access to fields to play off or any of that. And there was--he didn't say specifically a lot about growing up, and I'm not sure what he did until he came to New Orleans [Louisiana]. He came to New Orleans at the age of thirteen. Speaker 1: Do you know about his schooling? Speaker 2: I think he went to--oh I don't know third grade, sixth grade something like that, you know, like that. Story_ID: 619483 Speaker 1: Do you know about his parents, your grandparents on your father's [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] side? Speaker 2: I heard about--oh wait a minute, wait a minute yeah, my father's father, my grandfather, was named Simmie [Simeon "Simmie" Marsalis]. I think that's like S-I-M-M-I-E, and I also heard that his name originally was Black [ph.], and when he was about two years old, the Marsalis contingency just took him in and raised him. I don't know what year that would have been, but that's one of the things that I heard. And, well my--you have to interview my sister [Yvette Marsalis Washington] 'cause there's too much of this that I really don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's fine. Speaker 2: 'Cause you know she spent a lot of time in the later years with my grandmother who started to open up to her when she got older. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Did you spend any time with your grandfather? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandmother, what was her name? Speaker 2: Rosa Gayden, R-O-S-A, G-A-Y-D-E-N [Rosa Gayden Marsalis]. Speaker 1: And you did know her? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. In fact I got a picture at home of she and our oldest son [Branford Marsalis] when he was about two or three years old. Speaker 1: So tell me about your grandmother? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Tell me about your grandmother? Speaker 2: My grandmother carried a lot of grief around. During the time when they were growing up the tradition was that the older, in the case of girls, the older sister, whatever that older sister wanted to do, then that's where the priority was. And the younger sister, who in my grandmother's case, she was younger than--let's see, I'm trying to think of her name and I knew her too, but anyway because my grandmother loved to sew but her mother wouldn't let her even learn that because the older sister didn't wanna learn it. All I ever knew about my grandmother's mother was that they called her Grandma Mollie [Mary Gayden]. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that would be your great-grandmother? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think, according to my, my daddy's cousin, there's, there's a young contingency his name is Darrell Thompson [ph.], he lives in Chicago [Illinois], and he's been doing all of the research to create that genealogy. Anyway my grandmother's sister married Lewis Thompson [ph.], and Lewis Thompson, they had several kids, some of which I did know: Levon Thompson [ph.] who is living in Detroit [Michigan] and L.V.--that's what they used to call him, L.V., I don't remember, not sure what his name was--Thompson, and Laura Mae [ph.] was a, a daughter in that family. And oh boy (laughter), but anyway if I'm not mistaken Grandma Mollie was born in slavery. Story_ID: 619484 Speaker 1: Your [paternal] grandmother [Rosa Gayden Marsalis], tell me more--since you were close to your grandmother, tell me about the relationship you had with her and some of the things that you might have learned or even a characteristic that you might have picked up from her? Speaker 2: She was, she was a disciplinarian, not typically in the old way but partially because I know when I was really--when I was a kid, I mean really, really young, I had gotten this drum for Christmas and I was doing something, I don't know whatever kids do, and she said, "If you don't behave, Santa gonna come take that drum away." So I didn't believe none of that you know. So eventually I looked around for the drum and it was gone, (laughter) I couldn't find it and I was really hurt about my drum and eventually--but she talked to me and eventually she gave it back. She was very religious in what the, what the folks used to call old time religion. She was Baptist at one point but she changed to A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] exactly when I don't know because I was born in the A.M.E. church in New Orleans [Louisiana]. It may have been after she came to New Orleans that she changed. But I always did like my grandmother and I remember when I started--I was a freshman in college and I went to live with her for a minute to, to get to university which was Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana] was foggy all the time and the buses couldn't run in it so I went to stay with her 'cause the buses in the city would keep running and I was a good company for her 'cause my grandfather, Simmie [Simeon "Simmie" Marsalis], you know there's a song called 'Papa was a Rollin' Stone'? Well, okay. Story_ID: 619485 Speaker 1: I was asking you about your father [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.]. You said that his last name was Black [ph.] and then the Marsalis family took him in. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay and he wasn't adopted, but they--he just started using that last name, is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess you can say he was adopted for what that meant in them days. Speaker 1: Okay. So did something happen to Mollie [Marsalis' paternal great-grandmother, Mary Gayden] that, that he was taken in by the Marsalis family, do you know? Speaker 2: Oh what to Grandma Mollie you mean? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: No, nothing. See he was not a part of that. I mean he--Grandma Mollie was the mother of--Hattie [Hattie Gayden] was my grandmother's sister's name, Hattie, and she married Lewis Thompson [ph.] and Simmie [Simeon "Simmie" Marsalis] would go and court my grandmother. And according to, to legend, Grandma Mollie liked him because he would come there with this line of flattery and all of that and so my grandmother, Rosa [Rosa Gayden Marsalis], it was somebody else that she liked not Simmie, but Simmie as they say he was a little red man (laughter) so he had an in with Grandma Mollie so whatever the combination of circumstances Simmie ended up being married to Rosa, my grandmother. Story_ID: 619486 Speaker 1: So now tell me more about your father [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] and what he did for a living? Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, at what point, early in his life, or? Speaker 1: Yes, tell me what you know about him and his life (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh okay, well he came to New Orleans [Louisiana] in 19--whatever. He was thirteen years old so that would have been I guess what, around 1920, '21 [1921] and I heard from him different jobs that he had. He worked for an electrician named McKay [ph.] and he used to speak real highly of working for him. And in 1936 he was--I don't how, how to put that. This is a little on the insides. Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis broke up Standard Oil [Standard Oil Company] and told the Standard Oil that they could not own a filling station. It constituted a monopoly. So the filling stations, there were people who would manage the filling station 'course they had to get all the oil and all of that from Standard Oil. Well he became a manager of the filling station which was on Toledano [Street] and South Claiborne Avenue. There's, I don't know, McDonald's or something there now; it's not there anymore. And he was the manager at that filling station until he brought some property in Jefferson Parish [Louisiana], which would have been what 1944. And we moved from where we were staying into Jefferson Parish and he still was managing the station at the time, but he was trying to figure out how you could start something on his own; he never did like think about working for somebody. Well his brother, my uncle, he was in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] and he stayed in the post office until he retired. Eventually by a comment that a truck driver made somewhere around--this was after the Second World War [World War II, WWII], he said, "Man if I had all of this property here, I'd turn it into a motel," which is what he did. So he started a motel (background noise). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: He started a motel and eventually he built up to a point where he had a total of thirty-five rooms. And it was at a time when black people couldn't stay anywhere in a downtown hotel anyway so he was--always reinvest in his business so he had some of his rooms had carpet floors and the whole thing which in like 1950 it was like strange (laughter) but anyway he stayed in the business. He retired from that and eventually it was pretty well gone by the time he passed away, which he was ninety-six when he passed. Story_ID: 619487 Speaker 1: He was a very interesting man. He, he was very honest. In other words the business that he was in, it would be a common practice for some of those thieves to roll up in the yard with a bunch of sheets that they stole from them hotels you know and like he said, "Nah, I don't think so," turn them around. He wouldn't buy that. Air condition units, he wouldn't buy it. You know he always believed in running a honest business and--because basically that's the way he was. And at some point, I've had discussions with people who knew him and was always quick to say, "Man, your daddy [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] was a genius." I said, "He was not a genius, that's some other kind of thing." "Yeah, but look what he did at the time man, we didn't have anything," and blah, blah, blah you know. I said look, he was honest which is what kept him in business 'cause it shows he would of start buying that hot stuff 'cause we knew people who was in the same business who was doing that and eventually the police came and carted off air conditioners out the window, you know the whole thing, so the honest part is what kept him in, in business. He was also very much involved in civic responsibilities. He was a big believer in voting and he and about four--three or four other people in the Jefferson Parish [Louisiana] area decided that they would go from door to door just canvasing black people to go and register to vote. And basically there was you know one of the things that he believed in, and he had up to nine employees at one time in the motel. You did not work for him if you didn't vote and you didn't live in his house if you didn't vote. Didn't matter who it was you voted for but you had to do that. He eventually became a Republican and I've had to explain to some people who didn't quite understand because this is oh late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s]. At the time the Democrats who was in control of everything, the area that we were living in, the tax officio in Jefferson Parish was the sheriff and he was sort of like the mayor would be in another town and all the rest of that. So he had no objections at all if black people voted. But because the Democrats--eventually Dixiecrats, but since they were in control there was never a chance for any blacks to be commissioners at the poll. So he met this guy named Thomas Fullers [ph.] who was a white Republican and he got to know him and he--they talked about you know the situation and he eventually joined the Republican Party because it created an opportunity for--through that political affinity for blacks to be able to work the polls and get paid for that. So that's all being a Republican meant to him at that time. Story_ID: 619488 Speaker 1: He [Marsalis' father, Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] built this restaurant--I'm sorry this hotel [sic. motel] right--you said in, in 1944? (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's when he--that's when we first moved there. Speaker 1: Moved in--what was the name of the area? You said Jefferson Parish [Louisiana], but-- Speaker 2: It was called Shrewsbury [Louisiana] you know, it's, S-H-R-E-W-S-B-U-R-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's when he bought the land. And he worked to be able to save the money to be able to build the hotel. Was, was he able to get loans from anyone? Speaker 2: At the time I don't think he was able to get any loans. See the property had--was sizable. It had been like a small farm. There was a barn in the backyard with a trough you know and a couple--he had some chickens, some ducks, he had a couple of cows, some pigs because it was, it was like a small farm, and he was still you know managing that filling station. But he started by building four rooms. That's how he really started, which was probably around I don't know forty- 1945, '46 [1946] somewhere around that time. And eventually from that point he was able to save his money and add to that. And the local area bank they wouldn't lend him any money and the SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] wouldn't really loan him any sizable amount of money and somebody that he got to know in the office at SBA, small business association, told him he said, "Man," he say, "these guys would rather lend four black people twenty-five thousand dollars than any one one hundred thousand," so he did eventually manage to get a pretty good loan from National Bank of Commerce [First National Bank of Commerce, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was a bigger bank and had less interest and whatever color he was, if his, if his records checked out you know. Did he pay his bills on time, you know all of the things that they look for that they didn't look for with Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] and them you know (laughter), which is another story. But basically he was kind of frugal. Now my sister [Yvette Marsalis Washington] said at some point that he liked to gamble. I don't know. I didn't see--I know he would play the horses. I went to the track with him a couple of times, but he never seemed to be somebody who's gonna bet the rent on a horse 'cause one of the times that I went, we all won (laughter). But he did like that area you know and he owned a horse at one time. I don't know if it was totally owned or partially. It was a horse named Galveston Guy [ph.] and there was a picture of he and my mother [Florence Robertson Marsalis] 'cause the horse won a race. I think it was here in New Orleans [Louisiana]. But it was, it was an interest that he had but he didn't pursue it to the nth degree. Story_ID: 619489 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Florence Robertson Marsalis] and father [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: There is and I'm trying to think (pause), I think my sister [Yvette Marsalis Washington] said they met at night school. 'Cause he did return to learn some very specific things. I mean he went to school to learn how to weld you know. But I think as I remember she said that they met at, at a night school. Story_ID: 619490 Speaker 1: Now once your mother [Florence Robertson Marsalis] and father [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] got married, where were they living? Where were they living when they first got married? Speaker 2: I'm not altogether sure. I do remember that--the first house that I remember 'cause I was still a baby, was on Telemachus Street. That's a very strange spelling of the Greek Telemachus. They spell it, T-E-L-E-M-A-C-H-U-S, in Uptown, New Orleans [Louisiana] and the address was 1303. Ironically (laughter) about a week ago, I ran into the niece of our landlady just by accident and I hadn't seen her since we were like ten, eleven (laughter) something like that. And but it was a, a duplex. I think that's up and down, a duplex, and we stayed upstairs and the address was 1303 South Telemachus Street. Speaker 1: Well tell me your earliest childhood memory? What do you remember? What was your first memory, your earliest childhood memory, what do you think about? Speaker 2: Of? Speaker 1: Of your life. Your first childhood memory, what do you remember about your childhood? Speaker 2: I remember going to a school that was not far from us. In fact we lived close enough that we could hear when the teacher would ring that bell. I'm not talking about pushing a button, I mean that old time (gesture) that bell and it was twice so my sister [Yvette Marsalis Washington] and I we could--we had time between the first time she rang that bell to get to the school before the second time and it was kind of isolated where I remember one time used to have, they had a paved fence around it. The name of the school was Rudolph T. Danneel, D-A-N-N-E-E-L [Danneel Public School, New Orleans, Louisiana], I think, and they had a paved fence and it was barbed wire on top of it. And I was late for school one day and I must have been, let's see we moved in, in '44 [1944] and I was in the sixth grade at that time, probably about the third grade I think you know. And when I got there they had locked the gate and I tried to climb the fence and got caught in the barbed wire and it started to rain (laughter). So there I was caught on the barbed wire and it was raining and I was crying you know. I can just about imagine what that looked like. But I was never much of a fighter so I used to get beat up all the time. And when I'd come home, and I'd tell my mother about some guy beating me up, she said, "You should leave them alone." So I became--she blamed me, the victim, and later you know I could see she really didn't wanna have to confront none of them parents. Story_ID: 619491 Speaker 1: Tell me more about, about your school, the first school that you went to? Speaker 2: You know I think about that school a lot. It was a public school and the methods that they used to teach was extremely pragmatic. For example, as I remember I think spelling was a class unto itself. There's a little thin, thin book, it just had words and we would have to learn. The way we learned, we learned in class. The teacher would have us pronounce each word and then we would have to write in the air you know the cursive way, the word that we just pronounced; do that three times. And periodically there would be a spelling bee. You know everybody would stand up and well you know that routine. As you missed you sat down. I was always a pretty good speller, but I was never the last one to be standing (laughter) you know. But, and I remember there was a teacher that I remember primarily, her name was Ruth Steele [ph.] and our introduction when you got in her class, she would look at everybody and she would say, "My name is Steele and if you bounce against me, you bounce back." And as I remember she's a good teacher, I can't even remember the subject right now but the one incident that stands out in my mind in the basement of the school, this was still in Danneel [Danneel Public School, New Orleans, Louisiana], there were two guys who was fighting, they was going at it and they formed a ring around them you know. And Ms. Steele was short lady, very stocky, and she used to walk you know with that waddle, and she saw the fight and she was coming towards it. And all of us on the outer edges of the, the circle saw her. The combatants never did and like she walked straight through the crowd and with the left hand smacked one, with the right hand smacked the other one and never stopped walking; (laughter) kept right on going and that was the end of that fight for that time. But as I remember the principal's name was I think was Perkins [A.E. Perkins] and I understood without any real research that he had been in the [U.S.] military in the First World War [World War I, WWI]. Story_ID: 619492 Speaker 1: There was another class that I, that we took I don't think it was a independent cla- I think it was a part of another class, but we had to draw. I never had any talent for drawing. I didn't put forth a lot of effort. So what I did I learned how to draw this little boat and every time it was time for us to draw, I would draw this little boat. So one time the teacher came over there and say, "You got one more time to sit there and just draw this boat," (laughter). And I knew there were guys in the school whose talent was far superior in, in drawing. I mean teachers used to come get them to do things for other classes you know. In today's world the stuff that some of them were doing was as good as anything that the guys in Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] were doing. Speaker 2: Okay. What was your favorite subject? Speaker 1: When I was in elementary school, my favorite subject was I think was English. I didn't particularly care for math but then I realized many, many years later that the reason why I had a dislike for math because I didn't--I never had a good math teacher. When I got in the university [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] was the first time in a remedial math class that I got a math teacher who was really excellence--really excellent and it was you know I discovered then and looked back over the years I said, man no wonder I didn't like math, and I started to think and I've had the occasion to tell students, I said, "There's no such thing as you don't like math. You can't like or dislike math. You know it's not a person you know. It's not a drink that you don't like. It's none of that." I say, "If you had a good enough math teacher and you submit yourself to what you're supposed to do, it would--it won't be a problem." Speaker 2: So what type of student were you? Speaker 1: Mediocre student. I was not a, a very good student. Speaker 2: And this school went to what grade? Speaker 1: Which school? Speaker 2: Danneel [Danneel Public School, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Well Danneel went all the way through the eighth grade, but I didn't stay there. You see we left from that area in 1944 and I think I was in the sixth grade. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we left and went to Jefferson Parish [Louisiana] and when we got to Jefferson Parish, I started to go to Shrewsbury school. Story_ID: 619493 Speaker 1: The community--well the area that we lived in was called Gert Town [New Orleans, Louisiana], and as far as I know Gert was somebody named Gertrude [sic.], I think, I don't know, but it still today you know they call it Gert Town. And there were a lot of you know quite a few homeowners in, in that area. We were not far from the bus line and there were several black businesses in that area. There was a bakery owned by the McGhee [ph.] family, and there was a shoe repair shop owned by a gentleman named Waterman [ph.] and the usual coterie of bars and churches in the vicinity. And my mother [Florence Robertson Marsalis] had quite a few friends in the area, in the neighborhood 'cause sometimes they'd get together and they would play these card games. We could go about let's see one, two, three, four, about four blocks, catch a bus and go up to our nearest theater 'cause there was--the theater was segregated but we could go there and see a movie for twenty-five cents. I don't know what the kid's price was and there was you know never any fear of going out at night to a movie and the school [Danneel Public School, New Orleans, Louisiana] was within walking distance and also there was a supermarket, which I think, I think supermarkets were kind of new 'cause most places, there were grocery stores you know especially on the corner. And the supermarket was maybe six, seven blocks something like that and sometimes a friend of mine now we would go to the supermarket and during some of that time, rationing was on; food was rationed and if you wanted to get like I think sugar and butter and milk or whatever, you had to have stamps. So I would go with a friend of mine with the ration stamps and buy whatever, sugar and then my sister [Yvette Marsalis Washington] would go with the ration stamps and she would buy some things so we were not like together. I think they call it beating the system. That's what they call it but believe me once I got old enough, you don't beat the system (laughter); it's all an illusion. Story_ID: 619494 Speaker 1: I remember down the street from us there was a young man named Alexander Dunbar [ph.], he played alto saxophone and he was going to Xavier University Junior School of Music [New Orleans, Louisiana]. He was there--I eventually did go but he was there before I was and he really used to sound good. He'd sit on the porch and practice and also the landlady where we was staying had a son named Jack, I think it was Jack Forte [ph.], and I just recently found out from the niece of the landlady that he passed away. Anyway he went to a medical school and he was our dentist for years and I don't know if it was because he retired or what, but anyway he used to play alto saxophone in the Gilbert Academy band. Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana] was a black school, coed school on St. Charles Avenue which was the most upscale rich, white area in the city and today there's a high school called De La Salle [De La Salle High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] on that same plot of land 'cause the Gilbert Academy, the board or whoever, sold the land to the Christian brothers who built De La Salle and if you happen to go over there, there's a plaque which is right on the edge of it that talks about what was there before, and the name of it, and the whole thing. But the neighborhood was, was overall it was a pretty good neighborhood. Speaker 2: What parks did you play in in that area? Speaker 1: Well I didn't play in any my mother [Florence Robertson Marsalis] wouldn't let us. Speaker 2: What parks were available if she had? Speaker 1: I don't even remember. Speaker 2: Okay. Is that not the area where Lincoln Park [New Orleans, Louisiana] is? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: Lincoln Park and Johnson Park [New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 1: I heard about Lincoln Park later on in years because they usually have bands and stuff that played there but I never went. Story_ID: 619495 Speaker 1: In 1944 where, where does your family move to? Speaker 2: We left the Gert Town area in New Orleans [Louisiana] and moved to Shrewsbury [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Shrewsbury. Speaker 2: In Jefferson Parish [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me more about that transition? How did the neighborhoods differ? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Hundred and eighty degrees. Shrewsbury was located in a rural area. The property that my father [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] bought sat right on the corner of Shrewsbury and River Road. Shrewsbury Road was gravel. River Road was gravel at the time and the levee was right there so we could go walk up the top of the levee and there was the Mississippi River. And a lot of the guys in the area, they didn't like me too much 'cause most of the people out there in some form or fashion were related to each other and I was not a part of that. We would walk, my sister [Yvette Marsalis Washington] and I would walk to school and it was from River Road all the way to, to the school, maybe six, seven, eight blocks and she was a couple of grades behind me. The class that I was in the principal of the school whose name was Grant Dennison [ph.], he was teaching sixth grade on one side of the room, seventh grade on the other side of the room and I don't remember learning very much. I got in trouble, slightly anyway, because we came to school one day and he told all the guys, said, "All right, we gotta go out in the yard and cut the grass," because it was a pretty good size piece of property. So I told him I said, "Professor, I ain't come here to cut no grass. My daddy did not send me to school to be cutting no grass," so he didn't particularly like that so he sent me home. So I said (gesture) see ya. My father made an agreement with a guy right across from the school who had a barroom so we could get lunch there. Actually I don't know if we got the lunch there or just the soft drink, but we'd have to sit like behind the bar because we were still you know young kids. And I eventually developed a hate for root beer because that's what--(laughter) we drank root beer every day and went to that school for two years, sixth grade to seventh grade. Speaker 1: Was that the only teacher that you had? Speaker 2: At that school, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At that school, yes. Story_ID: 619496 Speaker 1: At the end of the seventh grade year, there was no eighth grade there, so we would either go to Kenner [Louisiana], which was a little further up the road for the eighth grade year or we'd have to go somehow into New Orleans [Louisiana]. Well, my father's [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] business was located within walking distance from the school called F.P. Ricard [F.P. Ricard School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and Ricard was 180 degrees from that school. Well I was so lost when I got to Ricard. You know I failed the first semester. You know I couldn't--I didn't even know what these people were talking about half the time. Teacher gave me a book to read, to do a book report and it was about that thick. It's called 'David Copperfield' [Charles Dickens] and I looked at that book and I say no (laughter). You know it wasn't that I couldn't read; I had virtually no discipline. And after that first semester you know I just had a talk with myself. I said hey man this is stupid. You're gonna have to figure out how to do this. I did pretty good in math because I had a lousy math teacher. When I look back at it I can say oh okay I can see why I got a pretty good grade in that math class. The school had a principal named Eli Whitney Sorrell who I think also had been in the [U.S.] military. There were a lot of brothers who were ex-military people who were like principals of schools, and not to be chauvinistic, but see when they went and like all these women came in? I don't know (laughter). That's two or three other stories there. But we had, actually had a choir director at the school, at F.P. Ricard, his name was Elliot Von Joseph Beal, and we used to sing spirituals and he had--he was a Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] graduate which was the, the better music school in the area, in this area. And every day, or if not every day just about every day, we used to sing 'Lift Every Voice and Sing.' And my English teacher, the second semester she cut me some slack. (Laughter) That's all I can say. I did everything else that I was supposed to do but for some reason, I never could figure out how to diagram a sentence. I mean I would--that was--and that was stuff that they learned around fifth, sixth grade at that school. But I did learn how to do funda- fundamentally how to you know write like sentences and what have you and but the thing I most remember about that school, it was a hard and fast road in the English class: if the teacher didn't understand your writing, F. And it wasn't gonna be no lawyers (laughter), wasn't gonna be none of that. That was it. We studied James Weldon Johnson, Claude McKay, Paul Laurence Dunbar as a part of the curriculum. Story_ID: 619497 Speaker 1: Was music as far as an instrument, had you begun to play an instrument by this time? Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother [Florence Robertson Marsalis] had bought me a clarinet. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: Eleven I think, and I had started to study at the Xavier University Junior School of Music [New Orleans, Louisiana], which is where--near where we used to live. And I played the clarinet, or I played at it you know (laughter), all the way through college [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Who was your music teacher at Xavier? Speaker 2: My very first teacher was a student music major named Bernice Blanche [Bernice Wyatt] and it's, it's peculiar how things happen. I was in New York City [New York, New York] on my way to a performance and waiting to go into the Metropolitan [Metropolitan Opera House, New York, New York] was Bernice Blanche and her husband, Kelley Wyatt, who had also gone to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. He was a pianist and I don't even remember how many years it'd been since I saw them you know (laughter). I just sort of walked up on them because they were there but she was the first teacher that I had on clarinet, and the second teacher that I had was a nun named Sister Leticia [ph.]. They were Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament. Now Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament accepted no black people in that order, none. Nuns, black nuns went into Holy Family [Sisters of the Holy Family], which is--that's where my wife [Dolores Ferdinand Marsalis] went to, to school, St. Mary's Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana], Holy Family of nuns and I was scared of that, that nun you know. I missed a lot of lessons (laughter) because I was scared to go. Eventually I did go. Speaker 1: What was it that made you afraid of her? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What was it that made you afraid of her? Speaker 2: Oh probably a lot of combination of things. First of all she was no nonsense. I don't ever remember seeing her smile and I guess I had heard this and that and the other about her you know. And because a lot of times when you're a kid, whatever you hear you add to it on your own. Speaker 1: So this place where you were taking the lessons, both black and white kids could go to this (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Nope, segregation to the core. This was like 1946, '45 [1945], '46 [1946] and I stayed at Xavier Junior School of Music through yeah, 1947, and I went to the high school, at Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1948 in January. The, the nun who had been teaching the orchestra, because we were the head of student orchestra and I was playing clarinet in the orchestra, the nun who had been in charge of the orchestra and who had been teaching me, she expelled me from the school and she told my mother point blank that the reason why she expelled me was because my mother sent me to an atheist school, Gilbert Academy. So my mother took my sister [Yvette Marsalis Washington] out of the school and it was that particular situation was like the adage of somebody gives you a lemon you make lemonade. I was able to begin studying piano with the two best piano teachers that I ever had because I was no longer at the Xavier Junior School of Music. Had I stayed there, I wouldn't have been able to do that. Story_ID: 619498 Speaker 1: So when did you switch from clarinet to-- Speaker 2: I didn't really switch. I sort of added on. Because when the time I got in high school, rhythm and blues was really popular and I asked my mom [Florence Robertson Marsalis] I said I wanna get a tenor saxophone. So they bought me a tenor saxophone and I learned how to play all those blues, rhythm and blues song and we started to play with a little band and we'd play at school dances. And the group was called the Groovy Boys. Boy how corny is that (laughter)? Speaker 1: How old were you when you started this group? Speaker 2: Thirteen, fourteen, something like that. Speaker 1: And you said you studied piano with the two greatest piano players, who, who were they? Speaker 2: The first piano teacher I had was named Geneva Handy [Geneva Handy Southall]. She was the daughter of a Methodist minister [William Talbot Handy, Jr.] whose church was Uptown [New Orleans, Louisiana] near Dryades Street and she eventually, she got married I think to a guy named Roan, R-H-O-N-E [sic. Patrick Roan], and I went for a while and continued because she would--I used to go to my lessons in the, in the vestibule I guess you call it or the preacher's house to get the piano lessons. So when she moved, she moved on I think South Claiborne Avenue, and I would go there but I think eventually she left town. It seems to me that's the way it is. And the second piano teacher that I got had been her piano teacher. Her name was Jean Coston Maloney, and it was that piano teacher that really pointed me in a direction of how to play that instrument. Speaker 1: So the saxophone you picked it up and really did not have lessons but because you played the clarinet, you were able to-- Speaker 2: Just make the adjustment. Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me a little more about your Groovy Boys band? Speaker 2: Well, the leader of the band was named Roger Dickerson, which is someone who you need to interview. That's a name that I was planning on giving you. (Laughter) In fact I was talking to him when I came up here. And when Gil- see Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana] closed when they sold the school to the Christian brother so the last year was in the spring of 1949, so then I had to finish high school somewhere else, and I went to an Episcopal school called Gaudet, G-A-U-D-E-T [Gaudet High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], or as the math teacher used to say (pronunciation) Gaudet, and I was there for two years before I started at Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Story_ID: 619499 Speaker 1: I just wanted to step back and ask you the nuns said that your mother [Florence Robertson Marsalis] put you in an atheist school, Gilbert Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana]. What was the reasoning behind that? What kind of school was Gilbert Academy? Speaker 2: It was Methodist. Speaker 1: I see. But actually, but Xavier, the music school [Xavier University Junior School of Music, New Orleans, Louisiana], was just a school where you go in to take music lessons, is that right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: And so they just had the right to-- Speaker 2: Private. Speaker 1: --put you out. Okay. Speaker 2: It was a Catholic institution. Speaker 1: Did you have to pay to take lessons there? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I don't know how much. My folks was doing that. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. All right so were you doing better in school as far--academically? Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, I didn't do too bad once I went to Gaudet [Gaudet High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]. I had a real good math teacher at Gaudet. In fact I think it was in the last year because we finished the--what we were doing in math and there was still some days left in the year so we started dealing with trigonometry, which was interesting. I didn't get but so far 'cause you know school year was almost over. I had a good physics teacher but she got pregnant and everything went down the drain you know because there was no physics teacher following her and they sent the coach's wife you know and she would sit and read out the book and finally we just chased her away (laughter). But we did have a very good chemistry teacher. I can't think of this brother's--he was really young too and I heard some things about him in later years and I can't remember if he was a headmaster somewhere or whatever, but he was definitely a good--you know he was doing experiments in the class you know. But Gaudet was a pretty good school and the English teacher there--no wait a minute I had--we had a French teacher who was at Gaudet and we had to read short stories you know of Alphonse [Alphonse Daudet], Guy de Maupassant, we had to read those stories and come back to class and then read you know in French and talk about what it meant, and sometimes some of those students were really, really slow. So I would wait 'til it was my turn, I'd go sit and play the piano (laughter) on stage 'til the teacher would come and get me (laughter). Speaker 1: So you, you graduated in 1950? Speaker 2: From what? Speaker 1: From Gaudet. Speaker 2: Fifty-one [1951]. Story_ID: 619500 Speaker 1: I want you to tell me more about, about your little band [Groovy Boys] and you know did you play on the weekends and you said you played at dances, was this making you any, any money (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it was-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay. And before, before we leave high school, I just wanted to know if you participated in any other curri- extracurricular activities, like sports maybe? Speaker 1: (Shakes head). Speaker 2: None? Speaker 1: No. The band that we started that I was in, we did play--well let me back up just a little bit. My friend Roger Dickerson, he was studying piano. I forgot I think his piano teacher was Ms. Purnell I think; I'm not sure about the name. Anyway she had several students and she asked Roger if he could put a group together because they wanted to have a party at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]. So he called us together, said, "Hey man, you know this is a freebie," you know. So I said, "Yeah, okay." You know we went and we played for them. Usually it was like the current pop, rhythm and blues thing that was going on at the time back in 1949. Speaker 2: What music was that? Speaker 1: Oh, Roy Brown, and Avery Parrish 'After Hours,' which is a piano solo and what else? Man, god it's been so long I don't remember exactly, but it was you know, it was definitely like the rhythm and blues whatever was going on. You know lot of shuffles in B flat as they called it and at the end of that dance, the teacher, his piano teacher, they, they really appreciated what we were doing. So they passed the hat and we made a dollar and a half a piece. So I say man we can make money doing this (laughter). So we started to play for other you know schools, mostly schools in different places and started to charge. We used to make five bucks [dollars] a piece, which at that time it wasn't too bad especially when you had three hots and a cot with the folks providing it, you see. And we did that all the way through high school and into college, we were still playing together. Story_ID: 619501 Speaker 1: It started to, to, to step up where we were playing. I remember we were playing at one club called the Million Dollar Room [Don's Million Dollar Room], it was Uptown, New Orleans [Louisiana], and forgot who all was in the band [Groovy Boys] at that time, but I was beginning to go in a little different direction because I was finding out more and more about jazz and how to play it. My first experience, well live experience I'll put it this way, 'cause I used to listen to it on the radio, but my first live experience was listening to Dizzy Gillespie's band and the spring of 1949 when I was in high school [Gilbert Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana] because they came through New Orleans and you know I never heard anything like that live. So I had started to think more and more about that and about 1951 I think, Norman Granz brought 'Jazz at the Philharmonic' on tour through New Orleans and Oscar Peterson was on that tour, 'cause he and Ray Brown are playing a duo, and that really took me out to hear Oscar Peterson playing (laughter). And I started to think more and more about you know the piano because what the piano teachers that I had, I was--the, the most important thing that I learned from both of them, mainly the second one, Jean Coston Maloney, was the fundamentals of playing that instrument: the correct posture, the correct hand position, the attack, the release, all those things that you really need to know. And I, and I learned how to practice from her and I was at Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana] doing a music, education degree. So there were a lot of things that I was taking at the school that was in, in the, in the field of education--quote all right. I don't even bother with that. But at some point I started to realize to myself, I said I'm not interested in being no schoolteacher; I do not wanna do this. Story_ID: 619502 Speaker 1: When the year that we graduated, which was 1955-- Speaker 2: Before you go to where you gradu- you know the year that you graduated, you were talking more about why you decide--or how you changed your style of music that you were playing from rhythm and blues at first and bebop was something of that--in that era as well, did you play that as well? Speaker 1: (Nods head). Speaker 2: And your style started changing towards the people who you were listening to and liking their style like Dizzy Gillespie and Oscar Peterson. What was different about their styles from what you were playing? Speaker 1: Well the thing that was different about--well I need to back up a slight bit. Before I got out of high school I met a mentor named [HistoryMaker] Harold Battiste. In fact Harold just released a book ['Unfinished Blues: Memories of a New Orleans Music Man'] three days ago (laughter). And he was a student at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] in the music department, and by me going to Gaudet [Gaudet High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], the bus would pass right in front of Dillard, all the way out to Gentilly area [New Orleans, Louisiana], to where the high school was. So in my last year in high school sometimes I wouldn't even get there; I'd just get off at Dillard and go hang out with him all day. It wasn't a case of my style changing, it was that I was using the piano to learn how to play bebop. There was no jobs involved you know to speak of. Like I was still playing tenor saxophone and I pick up jobs with different people on the weekend, make a few dollars here. But I knew people who were working on things, who were trying to play you know. I'd go--oh there's a piano player that I knew named Edward Frank who had been in that orchestra under Sister Letitia [ph.] and he was playing the violin at the time and I--we met later on 'cause he was playing with a group--piano with a group and I heard a live broadcast and they said Eddie Frank on piano. I said Eddie Frank, yeah I remember Eddie Frank from the Xavier Junior School of Music [Xavier University Junior School of Music, New Orleans, Louisiana]. But anyway it was a communal effort to leave how to play this music. Story_ID: 619503 Speaker 1: A part of it, kind of on the periphery of that, there was a record shop on South Rampart Street [New Orleans, Louisiana]. I can't remember the formal name, I don't remember it, but we used to call it the Bop Shop because at that time all of the, the great musicians, Charlie Parker, Max Roach, Dizzy Gillespie, Miles Davis, they were all issuing recordings sometimes once a month but they was 78s [78 rpm record] so you had two recordings, on--one on either side of the 78, so we would go and there was a lady that worked there and she had like a phone tree so she would call up different ones of us and say look, we got a new whatever, Charlie Parker, a new Miles Davis, a new Lester Young and like we'd go down there--and sometimes we'd meet each other, sometimes we wouldn't but we knew, we'd go down and get it. You know and then we'd call up each other and say, "Hey did you get the so and so?" "Yeah," and we'd talk about it on the phone, and it was a learning process. Now one thing I miss one person that I miss bringing in when I went to that school, F.P. Ricard [F.P. Ricard School, New Orleans, Louisiana]. I met Alvin Batiste who would become fantastic clarinetist. He was playing clarinet and when we gradu- when we left elementary school, he went to Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] that had a great band, great band director. Didn't have anything to do with jazz but, but you know it was a very, very good band, concert band, and all the marching bands was basically the same. So we kept, kept in touch 'cause he eventually went to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] while I was at Dillard [Dillard University] in New Orleans [Louisiana]. But in the summertime, we would get together and, and play and I was starting to learn how to write--compose music. And bit by bit I started writing tune here. And this book that I was telling you that Harold just issued--just released ['Unfinished Blues: Memories of a New Orleans Music Man'], he was like a mentor for us--he's three years older than me, but he was writing music also. He's a good tenor player but he prefers like writing music. So after the Groovy Boys, which kind of dissipated and--when were at college, early years in college, I would play with [HistoryMaker] Harold Battiste and whenever we kick it with Alvin, because Alvin was going up to Southern University in Baton Rouge, but he was writing songs, Harold was writing songs, I was writing songs and we were playing with a drummer named Edward Blackwell [Ed Blackwell] who eventually left around 1960 and went up to New York [New York] and stayed there. But we would play all these original compositions which you--which is recorded. You could get 'em now. Story_ID: 619504 Speaker 1: Where did you play them? Speaker 2: There was two guys, one named Clarence Davis [ph.] who was a drummer and Al Smith [ph.] who really wanted to be a drummer but never put it together, and they were called Al and Bow [ph.]--Bow was Clarence Davis. They would rent the space. There was a big restaurant called Hayes' Restaurant [ph.], seated about five hundred people and eventually somebody else took it over, but in the earlier years there was a piano there. So Al and Bow would rent this space on 4th of July, Thanksgiving, Christmas; all of these you know holidays when you know we really didn't have no place to go, couldn't go nowhere downtown so it was almost like a captive audience and they would go out and put up placards. And by this time we were calling ourselves the American Jazz Quintet with Alvin Batiste on clarinet, [HistoryMaker] Harold Battiste playing tenor saxophone, Edward Blackwell [Ed Blackwell] playing drums and either Peter Bailey [ph.] or Richard Payne was playing bass, and we would play our music at this concert and we did that. We went in the studio under Harold's tutelage (laughter) so to speak in 1956 around December and recorded you know a lot of these songs that we had been playing over the years with the clarinet, tenor saxophone, piano, bass and drums. Well not long after that I went in the, in the [U.S. military] service. Story_ID: 619505 Speaker 1: Let's go back so we can finish your Dillard education, okay? 'Cause we--you did this recording in 1956 but let's go back to, to Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and talk more about how you got your degree and you told us a little bit about you didn't wanna be a teacher but you were taking music at Dillard, so tell me about any influences at Dillard? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Harold Battiste. Speaker 1: Okay. So he was the only one there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was my primary influence. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had some good teachers overall. I had a world lit [world literature] teacher named Irwin Swerdlow who was really, really good. I remember one situation we had where he was talking about a play I think by Eugene O'Neill I think called 'Emperor Jones' ['The Emperor Jones'] and there was a couple of theater students who was either in the class or was brought in so he decided, the teacher did, that we would actually perform 'Emperor Jones' you know no makeup or sets, or none of that. And I was playing a drum, a bass drum, and we--you familiar with that play 'Emperor Jones'? All right well I was creating the African thing with the drums and also when he was shot, I would do that on the drums with extra emphasis and we had only--the teacher had only planned to do I think one act as a part of this world lit class. Well the word got around and they had to open up the doors in the back of the classroom (laughter) and all of these people came. So we just--he just said, "Okay, we'll do the whole thing." And there was a woman who was on the faculty, her name I think was Cochran [ph.] I think. Anyway she came to one of the sessions and she was livid that we were doing this. 'Cause you know 'Emperor Jones' throughout the whole play would refer to the Africans as bush niggers you know and she thought this was terrible and she was a very well traveled person, who been all throughout Europe and all over the place. But we still you know went on through with that. But Swerdlow was definitely one of the better teachers that I had, more interesting teachers. Speaker 1: Now, as you were going to school your, your first thought was that you would go there to become a music teacher? Speaker 2: No, I went there primarily because my father [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] thought that his children should get a college education and he was paying the freight. Otherwise than that, I doubt very seriously if I would have gone to college at all-- Speaker 1: So tell me-- Speaker 2: --at least not then. You know maybe like a lot of people did later on you know. Speaker 1: Who was the president of the college while you were there? Speaker 2: Albert W. Dent. Story_ID: 619506 Speaker 1: So when was it that you--what did you think that you would do after you finished college? Speaker 2: I never thought about it until I was close to graduation and I realized that I was gonna have to get off of my daddy's [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] nickel, and--but then I was working in, in his business, at his motel. I was still--I was working there. Speaker 1: When did you start working there? Speaker 2: Almost from the beginning even when I wasn't being paid (laughter). But when I got to be a senior, my friend Roger [Roger Dickerson], he went to graduate school in Indiana, Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], and that following summer--. I didn't you know I was trying to hide from the reality of where I was in my life and I was still like working at my daddy's place, but I didn't do--I was sleeping my life away half of the time, which was just about all of 1955, not all of it, but you know the remaining part of it. So, in 1956 the drummer that I had been playing with, Edward Blackwell [Ed Blackwell], saxophonist in Los Angeles [California] named Ornette Coleman sent him a ticket to come to L.A. to play with him, and I thought about it and I said man, I ain't doing nothing here. I said--so I talked to Edward. I said, "Man, you know what? I might go to California with you." So the two of us got together, Edward Blackwell and myself, and we told [HistoryMaker] Harold Battiste that we were gonna go to Los Angeles and he was, "Oh man, you gonna leave me down here?" I said, "Well man you can find another piano player and a drummer, you know ain't no problem." I mean we knew that he couldn't (laughter). So he said, "Well I'm going too." So we got in his car and drove to Los Angeles, Edward Blackwell, myself in Harold Battiste's car and we drove to Los Angeles (laughter). Speaker 1: So I just wanna say that you graduated from Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1955? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay so this is the next year. Story_ID: 619507 Speaker 1: So what did you find, did you find the Promised Land in, in California when you got there? Speaker 2: No, it was some unique experiences. I met Ornette Coleman who was a unique musician you know primarily self taught but had definite ideas about what he wanted to play, and I couldn't figure out the role of the piano in that at all. But I would just you know listen to what he was doing and try to figure out whatever I could. So somehow my mom [Florence Robertson Marsalis] tracked me down and said that I ought to come home because my daddy [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] was sick. So I went--came home. I hitched a ride with a friend, a guy that I knew who was driving from Los Angeles [California] back to New Orleans [Louisiana] and when I got home you know my dad said, "Well you know I'm all right so if you wanna go back to L.A.--." Before I could do that, I got a greeting from everybody's favorite uncle named Sam [Uncle Sam]. They were still conscripting at that time. So I says well you know I can't--don't make sense to go back because then I'm gonna have to turn around and go through the physical and all of that. So I stayed and eventually went through a physical, but while I was here, I just--a friend of mine--wait a minute, how did that go? Anyway I start--I ended up teaching at Xavier Preparatory School [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana]. It was a coed high school. It's not--it's no longer coed; it's all, all girls now. But it was a coed high school and it was during football season and it was part time so all I had to do was put together a marching band and go out on the field for the halftime football show and this is another revelation that I had. There was a nun whose name was Annunciata [ph.]. She was like a liaison you know between the band and the administration if I needed like a room to practice, I'd say, "Well sister, I need a room for my brass player," she would get that. "I need some music," she would get that. The principal was a nun whose name was Sister Roberts [ph.]; everybody was scared of her. So we got ready for a football game and they had a football, small football stadium at Xavier. I think they may still have had it at that time, but they had another football field at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], so we getting ready to go you know get on the bus and go over to Dillard, and I was telling Sister Annunciata I said, "Well okay, we about ready to go. You coming?" She says, "Oh no, we're not allowed on Dillard's campus," Methodist school. So anyway you know, we went and did whatever we did, you know (laughter), whatever. Story_ID: 619508 Speaker 1: And I stayed there [Xavier University Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana] until January of '57 [1957] and after I took my physical the recruiter from the [U.S.] Marine Corps started calling me and I said, well I don't, you know, know if I wanna be going to that. So he called again and about the third time, I talked to him. I said, "Well, man, tell me, what actually are you asking for me to do?" He say, "Well, if you agree to join the Marine Corps, you know we can send you to Parris Island [Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island, Parris Island, South Carolina]." I say, "No way am I going to Parris Island; forget that." Well he said, "You can go to MCRD that's in San Diego [Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego, San Diego, California]." I said, "That's in California, right?" "Yeah." Say, "Oh, okay," 'cause my friend Roger [Roger Dickerson] and I had talked about going in the [U.S.] Army on a buddy plan but he went to grad school. So I said, "Well man, I'm a go on and do this." He said, "Because it's a two year enlistment, you go to MCRD and do your boot camp." And I say, "Okay, I'll get two years, that'll be done with," so I decide to volunteer for that and went in the Marine Corps in January of '57 [1957]. Story_ID: 619509 Speaker 1: I just wanna step back, just so that we keep the years straight as, as far as what happens in your life. We had put a pin in 1956 when you do your first recording with Alvin Batiste and [HistoryMaker] Harold Battiste, is that right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Tell me what was the name of the album? Speaker 2: Eventually it became--man, what was that name of that? I don't remember right off 'cause eventually Harold started a record company called AFO [AFO Records]. At that time I don't think he had the record company 'cause when we went to Los Angeles [California], he had tapes and we were trying to go see some people at RCA [RCA Records] you know and we was like a country, a couple of country bumpkins fell off the turnip truck. We didn't even know how to get past the people downstairs at the desk. But he had the tapes with him. And while I was in this--the [U.S.] military, he formed this company AFO, which stood for All For One, and released what he had recorded on the air for a label. Story_ID: 619510 Speaker 1: When you were talking about Parris Island [Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island, Parris Island, South Carolina] and you said no way did you wanna go there, where is Par- Parris Island and why didn't you wanna go there? Speaker 2: Parris Island, Parris Island's in South Carolina and it's--well while I was still in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, six recruits got drowned in Parris Island. I mean this is serious Marine Corps boot camp you know mosquitos, snakes or whatever. Well that didn't bother me because I'd (laughter) been around snakes anyway, but I just knew enough about Parris Island to know that that was not a place I wanted to go to. Story_ID: 619511 Speaker 1: So now tell me about your time in [U.S.] Marine Corps. Speaker 2: I left to go in the Marine Corps in 1957 in January. In fact I almost missed the train looking at a Sugar Ray Robinson fight on TV and when we got to San Diego [California], we were met by a drill instructor, put in one of those trucks and brought to the base, MCRD, Marine Corps Recruit Depot [Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego, San Diego, California], and after sixty-five people came in, that made up a platoon. Then we met--went to meet the drill instructor who was gonna train us for the next twelve weeks. And I was never really all that physical anyway you know and running around with a 9.5 pound M1 rifle was not my idea of fun (laughter), but know you we'd run the grind to--the grind up was a huge track of asphalt you know, I don't know if--I don't know how long--how much--I don't know what the circumference was you know but we would run around. And but after a while you know I was starting to get the message about what was going on and the conditioning process of becoming a Marine took on a little more significance 'cause of the training you know you go through this every day, you become conditioned, you become like, like Pavlov's dog: you know, you ring the bell, there you go, you see (laughter). And at the end of twelve weeks, we, we went through graduation ceremony, and by this time I was I think twenty-two or twenty-three, one of them. And it was interesting because I was never much of a drinker you know alcohol and stuff, but at the end of the twelve week training, we all went in the what do you call it, just like a little recreation area, they serve beer. I don't know that they serve anything else, but there wasn't but a few of us who could drink it because we were old enough. Most of those kids had come in out of high school you know and it was cruel in a way you know because we would be sitting there stacking cans and drinking and kids would be over there just rope, that--roped them off and they couldn't do it. They had to sit there and look at us drink beer (laughter). Story_ID: 619512 Speaker 1: After that, I came home [New Orleans, Louisiana] for about I don't know seven days, ten day--ten days I think then I had to report (clears throat) to a base called El, El Toro [Marine Corps Air Station El Toro, California], which was an air base, a Marine Corps Air Station, and I got my car when I came home and friend of mine and I drove back up to Los Angeles [California], he was living in Los Angeles, and I drove over through Santa Ana [California], which is where the Marine Corps Air Station was and reported and I was in the band. I was the--in, in the clarinet player and once I got in the band, you have a lot of routine stuff that you do. If a dignitary you know like a senator or somebody came in, the band would go out on the air strip and play a march or something you know while the guys got off the plane. Wasn't a lot women could do in them days; like the women in the [U.S.] Marine Corps at that time, they did office work, clerical work in there but they could march better than the guys. So that was pretty much it for them. And while we were--while I was still in, there was a flare up in Lebanon and it was, it was interesting because I found out some of the things that they do, the general public would get the news about Lebanon and some things that was going on in Lebanon. Well thirteen squadrons of airplanes was already gone (laughter) by the time the public got the news and they left from El Toro, which is closer--or is it? I don't know--to the Middle East. It might not have been, but anyway there was probably some that left from other places too, especially those [U.S.] Navy air ships. And by that time there's a sergeant had come in the band area and had heard that I was a piano player and somebody in a, in a Marine Corps group, his enlistment was up so they were looking for a piano player. So I said yeah okay, you know and I went auditioned for that and joined that group and the, the name of the group was the Corps Four, and the name--and it was a TV show that was broadcast on CBS at KNXT [KNXT-TV; KCBS-TV], which is TV station at that time on Melrose [Avenue] and Vine [Street] in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California]. Well I didn't make a lot of friends by going to Hollywood playing on television in a Marine Corps uniform (laughter). Speaker 2: What was the name of the show? Speaker 1: 'Dress Blues' because we put the dress blue uniform on and I remember they took a photo of the quartet and it was in a magazine. I can't remember the name of the magazine, but it's one of those you know hit parade type pop magazines where they put pictures of actors, actresses and what have you, and we were in it. So I called my mom [Florence Robertson Marsalis] and I said, "Look, there's a picture of us in such and such magazine, you know, you can go down stand and get it." So she went, got the magazine and I talked to her again and she said, "I got the magazine. I didn't even see y'all, where were you?" I said oh, okay; it went south and so did the picture. Speaker 2: But the picture was in a magazine in California? Speaker 1: In California, but that was it. Story_ID: 619513 Speaker 1: So you were a mixed group playing in this band [Corps Four], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay tell me who the other members were, if you can remember? Speaker 2: The master sergeant who was sort of like the lead in command was named Bill Jolly [ph.] and the tech sergeant was the drummer, his name was Don Von Buwitz [ph.]. I don't remember how Don spelled his name. The bass player was named Fred Basset [ph.] and it was me. Speaker 1: And was there a radio show as well? Speaker 2: The radio show started at the end of the year that I did the TV show ['Dress Blues'] and it was called 'Leatherneck Songbook' and I only did that for about six months because then my enlistment was up. Speaker 1: So was this your job in, in the--while you were in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] or did you have another job? Speaker 2: Well technically it was my job. My MOS, which is the military occupational specialty it's called, was a clarinet player but I wasn't functioning with the band and I got put out of the band area by the warrant officer (laughter) because he didn't really have much control over me and you know I was never the most subtle person in the world. Because he would have to ask me if I was gonna make a parade you know and then I said no, I have to go to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] (laughter). So not long after that (laughter) I was out of the band area. Speaker 1: So did your group play in the NCO clubs [non-commissioned officer club] or you know anywhere else besides the television show? Did your group play (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no we didn't function as a group at all other than the TV show. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: And some of the things on the base that the master sergeant would hook up. Story_ID: 619514 Speaker 1: So what happens when your, your time is up? Speaker 2: I got out, came home and started to play with some of the people that I was playing with beforehand. I was kind of behind because everybody had been practicing (laughter), and I was not really practicing that much in the [U.S.] Marine Corps. So I found out about the [U.S.] Air Force records which was formed while I was still in, and I started to play--there was a tenor saxophone player whose name was Nathaniel Perrilliat, P-E-R-R-I-L-L-I-A-T, Nathaniel Perrilliat, and I went to the jam session at a club called the Dew Drop Inn [New Orleans, Louisiana] and I heard him and I had been switching off and on on piano, saxophone; you know pick up a job on sax here, piano over there. After I heard him play that Sunday from that jam session, I never played the tenor again. It went in a case and that was it (laughter). Speaker 1: Why was that? Speaker 2: I heard Nathaniel Perrilliat, and it pushed me even more so toward that piano (laughter) and eventually we started to play together as a quartet. Edward Blackwell [Ed Blackwell] went to New York [New York] 'cause he had come back to New Orleans [Louisiana] for a while, and when I got out of the Marine Corps, I had started to play with him at a club in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana], it was a trio, piano, bass and drum but he left and went to New York by 1960. And we searched around--we you know trying to find a drummer to replace Blackwell, which was not that easy. We finally found a drummer named Ed- I met James Black who was really a fantastic drummer and we started to play whenever we're at a job because there was not a lot of jobs down here trying to play what we were trying to play and we made a recording under the name of the Ellis Marsalis Quartet on air for a label [AFO Records]. Speaker 1: Now in 19--and this recording was made what year? Speaker 2: (Pause) Sixty something (laughter) I'm so--'61 [1961], '2 [1962] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the, what was the name of the album? Speaker 2: The 'Ellis Marsalis Quartet' ['Monkey Puzzle: Ellis Marsalis Quartet at the Music Haven'] I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It, it, it became a CD [compact disc] and that CD became a part of--I don't know how many Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Battiste] put in there but the CD became known as 'The Classic Ellis Marsalis' so that--oh the name of the CD was the 'Monkey Puzzle.' That was the name of it, the 'Monkey Puzzle.' That was a piece that James Black composed. Story_ID: 619515 Speaker 1: You said there weren't many jobs for the type of music that we were trying to play. What type of music is this? I mean what do you, what do you, what do you call it? It's not Dixieland, it's not rhythm and blues, so what's the concept or the philosophy behind the music that you were playing? Speaker 2: Well the music was evolving and basically it was just stuck with the name of jazz, sometimes modern jazz, but there's no real definition because there were different individuals making contributions towards the music. Like John Coltrane started playing music with his quartet [John Coltrane Quartet] which had a very heavy influence on the next step towards what was taking place. Thelonious Monk had a quartet [Thelonious Monk Quartet] with different saxophone, couple of different saxophone players. Johnny Griffin was one saxophone player and what's this brother's name? Oh it's a shame I can't think of his name. But anyway there was--there were different jazz group employing similar concepts. For example the Modern Jazz Quartet, which stayed together since--forty some years, they would play music that was close to what might be called salon music in France but it was a jazz group, you know piano, bass, drums and xylophone. And John Lewis, who was the musical director, he was very much influenced by the music of Johann Sebastian Bach but he, he would use that to formulate concepts which fit the jazz group. So that was one group that was playing. And then there was Ornette Coleman who was beginning to make records with a trumpet player named Don Cherry, and Billy Higgins and the bass player, as well as I know these people, that was another influence. You see there were a lot of influences that was going on at the time, and then there were individual people who like a lot of piano players who was leading trios with the same basic concept. Tommy Flanagan was a piano player with a trio [Tommy Flanagan Trio]. Hank Jones played with lots of different people and also had different trios. In fact Hank just died a couple of weeks ago. He was ninety-one years old. There were you know, there were a lot of people who were playing and then there was you know the singers you know like Ella Fitzgerald, Sarah Vaughan, Carmen McRae and Betty Carter had an approach to what she was doing that was different from all of them. You know it was--it's gonna be a lot of years before all of that is put into some manner of, of--so that people could grasp that in ways like, like what happened in, in, in Europe where composers, performers, poets, operatic singers, all of these people formed a commune like, a community and it was a similar kind of thing with a lot of the jazz musicians, especially the ones who was living in New York [New York] and even the ones who weren't living in New York. If you were living anywhere where you got a chance to do some playing, it was real--but of lately I think a lot of the, the sense of community has kind of vaporized. Story_ID: 619516 Speaker 1: When you're playing and your style you know of cour- you know you say is, is, is jazz, but is this collective improvisation or I mean I'm still not quite understanding what your philosophy is of how you play. Speaker 2: Well I don't real- I don't know that I have a philosophy that would fit into one particular category. Speaker 1: Oh I see. Speaker 2: See the music that I play--and if you're still in town, I'm playing tomorrow night at Snug Harbor [New Orleans, Louisiana]. But the music that I play could be structured like this: I'm heavy on melodies, whether it's the melody to a particular song or whether it's the melodic content of the solo that I play. And the form that we use which is kind of standard in terms of music, well I don't--technically you know there's eight measures and eight measures and then a middle section and another eight measures in a lot of the songs that's played. Now some of the songs might not fall neatly into that form but it's a means by which to employ the use of improvisation. Story_ID: 619517 Speaker 1: Let's go back to when you come out the army [U.S. Marine Corps], okay you--how did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: How did you meet your wife? Speaker 2: I first saw my wife at a beach, Lincoln Beach [New Orleans, Louisiana], which was the only beach we could go to (laughter), and I really didn't meet her then. Me and a couple of guys, this was an interesting night. Dinah Washington was in town and she was playing at this beach and I was hanging with a couple of friends of mine and the guy who owned the beach, (Unclear), had come out with a couple of friends of his, Jose Ferrer and Rosemary Clooney so one of my friends said, "Man, that's Jose Ferrer," which we didn't expect to see him at all. So we went over to him and started talking to him about the recording that he made of the Shakespeare ['Othello,' William Shakespeare], the one that he did with Paul Robeson where he was playing the role of Iago. And this friend--one of my friends asked him about a movie he was in and I mean he's pretty blunt you know, he says, "Hey man, how did you get caught, caught up in this stupid movie you know with Rita Hayworth?" And he says, "Well I was in Europe at the time and when I came back she was the rage so I agreed to do the movie. See I went to the preview, stayed fifteen minutes, got up and walked out." I mean he was fairly blunt too you know. So the next time I saw her there was a little club--I had just played a concert with a big band and it was a small space, had a real hip juke box that--you know a lot of jazz on it and we both happened to be standing at the juke box at the same time and I remember I had seen her at the beach. So we talked and exchanged numbers I think, (laughter) or I got hers or something like that and that was basically how we met, very informally. Speaker 1: And what is her name? What is her name? Speaker 2: Dolores, D-O-L-O-R-E-S. Her maiden name was Ferdinand [Dolores Ferdinand Marsalis]. Speaker 1: So you marry in 1958 and you still live in New Orleans [Louisiana] right? Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959]. Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959]? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And-- Story_ID: 619518 Speaker 1: You have children. You wanna tell me your children's names and what they do (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Our oldest son is named Branford, B-R-A-N-F-O-R-D [Branford Marsalis]. His middle name is Iweanya, I-W-E-A-N-Y-A. That was a name that I got from a Nigerian who was the editor of the Nigerian Defender newspaper [Osun Defender]. His name was Stephen, Stephen Iweanya so we put that (unclear) on him in the middle. Our second son's named Wynton Learson [Wynton Marsalis]. Learson was my mother-in-law's maiden name [Leona Learson Ferdinand] and Wynton, my wife [Dolores Ferdinand Marsalis] wanted to call him Wynton Kelly who is a piano player. (Laughter) And I said, "No, I don't think so." So we settled for Wynton Learson. And our third son was named from me Ellis Louis Marsalis III [Ellis Marsalis III]. Our fourth son was named Delfeayo, D-E-L-F-E-A-Y-O, and that was her father's name [Delfeayo Ferdinand], her brother's name and one of our nephews, was named Delfeayo. Our fifth son is--who is autistic, his name is Mboya, that's M-B-O-Y-A [Mboya Marsalis], his middle name is Kenyata. And our youngest son is named Jason Ignatius [Jason Marsalis]. Speaker 1: And are they involved in music? All--or I mean are all of them involved? I know two of them are. Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: Four of them are. Speaker 2: Branford is, Wynton is, Delfeayo is, then Jason. Story_ID: 619519 Speaker 1: We're in 1963 about and, and tell me what's going on in your life now? Is Nat Adderley someone that you have worked with? Speaker 2: I never worked with Nat Adderley. I did make a recording with Nat and his brother Cannon- Cannonball, Julian "Cannonball" Adderley [Cannonball Adderley]. They came to New Orleans [Louisiana] and it was Cannonball, Nat Adderley, Sam Jones, and James Black, the drummer from here and myself and we recorded--oh and Nat Perrilliat [Nathaniel Perrilliat] was on that recording too. We recorded an album, this is before the CD [compact disc] business (laughter), and let's see it was, I don't know if it was called 'In the Bag,' it might have been called 'In the Bag' because there was a song on this album called "In the Bag." Story_ID: 619520 Speaker 1: So you know civil rights, of course, has been going on. We didn't talk much about when you were in the, the [U.S.] military, was there--did you have any problem as far as any race relations and-- Speaker 2: You mean directly? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: In the military? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now that you're out and you're recording, were there any problems that you would say was specific to the recording industry or you as a musician--as a musician per se? Speaker 2: With the recording industry? Speaker 1: Yeah, like you're recording records--I mean was there any problem with recording, getting time in the recording studios, distributing the albums, anything like that because you were black? Speaker 2: Well by the time Columbia [Columbia Records] gave me a record deal of six recording--this was negotiated by Eddie Randall who was our second son's manager, Wynton's [Wynton Marsalis] manager. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year was this that we're talking? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What year are we talking about? Speaker 2: (Pause) Sometime in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: I mean 1963 in civil rights time is where I wanna talk about. Speaker 2: Oh no, we--I didn't have anything other than what we did for Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Battiste] on AFO [AFO Records], that was pretty much it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because it was done here in New Orleans [Louisiana] and there was no real industry here. Not for what we were playing. Now there were a lot of, of hit records coming out of here, and the whole of the Motown sound came from there. You ain't gonna read that nowhere (laughter) but there again it was you know a very interesting period whether you're talking about Imperial [Imperial Records], which I think Fats Domino was recording on that and like the whole thing with Stax [Stax Records] in Memphis [Tennessee] and eventually you know Motown [Motown Records] in Detroit [Michigan], there was a lot of, a lot of things going on where people were trying to you know flex their muscles and some lasted and some of it didn't. Speaker 1: Did you do a lot of traveling with the, with your group to play in different places outside of New Orleans? Speaker 2: Later. When I say later, what I mean is I started to play with another pianist named Marcus Roberts. We were playing duo, pianos, and we did that maybe for a year or so. I wasn't playing a lot with the group before that. I had--I was not on the, the inside of you know major recordings or any of that and I mostly stayed here. But I started to do more traveling later. Speaker 1: All right we'll get, we'll get to that time. Story_ID: 619521 Speaker 1: Now your family moves out of New Orleans [Louisiana] in '64 [1964] is that right? Speaker 2: We went to this little country town, Breaux Bridge [Louisiana]. I had a job in Breaux Bridge and I stayed there for two years, and it was very hard on my wife [Dolores Ferdinand Marsalis] because you know she's not a country girl and all the people in--around us was Patois all the time. And after the second year I had a chance to leave there and go in Lafayette [Louisiana], which is about seven miles away, but it's more like a city. And when I talked to my wife about it, she said, "Man, I don't like nothing out here," (laughter) so then we came back to New Orleans. Speaker 1: What job did you have while you were in Breaux Bridge? Speaker 2: Oh I was teaching school. I was a band director, choral director and it was interesting. I had this club for about six months called the Music Haven [New Orleans, Louisiana], and it folded, so I was trying to figure out what I was gonna do to make a living and instead of you know getting together with my wife and us formulating a plan, I just took the first job opportunity that came which was in Breaux Bridge, and I stayed there for those two years, and when I came back to New Orleans I started working for my dad [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] again which was like 1966, and about 1967--well I was doing what I'd call odd jobs. Story_ID: 619522 Speaker 1: June Havoc came to New Orleans [Louisiana] and started the Southern Repertory Theatre [Southern Rep Theatre], and I ended up playing some of the acts that came through that Southern Rep. Speaker 2: Who were some of the acts? Speaker 1: Well the first one, it was a group of one liners that was written by Tim Rice [ph.] who eventually became famous for 'Red, White and--,' something, 'Red, White and Maddox' [ph.], or 'Red--,' whatever. And it was, it was reminiscent of a TV show called 'This Was the Week that Was' [sic. 'That Was the Week that Was'] a series of one liners and you had music to play while they were changing costumes behind the curtain and then they'd come out and, and you know they'd deliver their lines and you play again you know it was like that. And the first night it was okay 'cause June Havoc was there feeding me the music. The second night she wasn't there and I crashed and burned (laughter). And I had to go home. I had--the next day and I spent the whole day doing Act I, Act II, Act I, Act II; learning all of that stuff. You know so the next night that I went it was a lot better. I played behind a ventriloquist that was also at the Southern Rep and I forgot who else. Story_ID: 619523 Speaker 1: Do you play at the Playboy Club [New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: I played, I played at the Playboy Club two different times. The first time I played at the Playboy Club it was because the Playboy Club had signed several black artists, and at that time I think they only had two Playboy Clubs. They were working on the one in New York [New York], so they would come to New Orleans [Louisiana], and they had to hire a group, so they hired me to play behind the black artists because the law didn't permit it the other way. Speaker 1: Do you remember who some of the artists were? Speaker 2: Ernestine Anderson. Speaker 1: She was a jazz and blues singer, right? Is that right? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: She was a jazz and blues singer? Speaker 2: Kind of, yeah. Speaker 1: What did she sing? Do you remember some of her songs? Speaker 2: To tell you the truth, I don't remember the songs we played when she was singing, but, and then there was Jimmy Rushing, he came and I played behind him. And also there was--I'm trying to think, Marlena Shaw, I think, I think she came and Mae Barnes, she came. She's an old trooper you know and oh god, (laughter) it's been so long ago. Story_ID: 619524 Speaker 1: When did you meet Al Hirt? Speaker 2: I was--I had not too long come from Breaux Bridge [Louisiana] and while I had been in Breaux Bridge, I had played behind a couple of acts in his club [Al Hirt's Club, New Orleans, Louisiana]. I don't remember exactly who, but. Speaker 1: Where was his club? Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: On St. Louis [Street] and Bourbon Street. And so when I came back from Breaux Bridge, his piano player left and he was looking for a piano player so the clarinet player of the band called me and asked if I wanted to join the band. Well right around that time I wasn't even doing nothing in music at all. I had left teaching school in Breaux Bridge and I was just working at my daddy's [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] place. So I said, "Yeah, man, great," so I joined his band in '67 [1967] and was there until '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Now the type of music that he plays is considered Dixieland, is that not right? Speaker 2: Yeah kind of. Yeah, he played, played some traditional jazz pieces but it was mostly billed as Dixieland but he had three hit records that wasn't Dixieland at all. One was called 'Sugar Lips,' another one was called 'Cotton Candy' and the other was called 'Java' and you know it didn't--(laughter) it wasn't. They were hit records for him but they weren't really traditional jazz at all. Story_ID: 619525 Speaker 1: What happens next? You stayed there for three years working with Al Hirt so what's your next step? What happens next? Speaker 2: I was unemployed again. So freelance (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you still, were you still working with your father [Ellis Marsalis, Sr.] though? This is in (unclear)? Speaker 2: After I left from Al's band, no, I didn't--I wasn't working with my father. Speaker 1: Now at your father's hotel [sic. motel], there was still you know people coming--I mean who were some of the people that stayed at the hotel as they were traveling? Speaker 2: Well in the early years before they could go down town, King, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came. He stayed. And in fact there's a photo somewhere where he and an attorney from here [New Orleans, Louisiana], Israel Augustine [Israel M. Augustine, Jr.], he was an attorney, and somebody else. I think it might have been my dad. But I don't know if I have that photo or not and there's a gentlemen who's a big time black Republican named Val Washington, he stayed and there were groups of people who used to come. You know Ray Charles' band used to come. They would stay 'cause they used to work in the area like the--some of them little small towns in Louisiana so they would base themselves here and then go and play and then come back. And [HistoryMaker] B. B. King stayed one time with his group. Fletcher Henderson's brother, Horace [Horace Henderson], stayed there one time too and Dinah Washington, she stayed. Speaker 1: So it's mostly jazz and blues singers that came through there? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No I mean well you could say you know. Some of those guys like for example Dinah Washington had serious jazz musicians in her group, Wynton Kelly, Jimmy Cobb and [HistoryMaker] Keter Betts; that was her trio. Who else, god I'm--it's hard for me to remember (laughter). Speaker 1: That's fine. That's fine. Story_ID: 619526 Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970], Storyville Jazz Band? Speaker 2: The Storyville Jazz Band I got in. My wife and I were walking down Bourbon Street, just strolling down doing a--and the leader of the Storyville Jazz Band's named Bob French, who had gone to Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] with Dolores [Dolores Ferdinand Marsalis]. I mean I knew of--I knew Bob and I knew his dad, Albert French [Albert "Papa" French] because I had played some things with Albert French and Bob--the band got together and they fired the piano player who had been the leader of the band. But when they got rid of him and he asked me if I wanted to join the band, I said yeah, man 'cause I'm not even doing you know anything right now. So it probably was around '72 [1972] I think. I think it was around that time. Speaker 1: Okay. And was there a recording that came out of that band while you were (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was a recording that was made of the Storyville Jazz Band. Speaker 1: And Story- why was it called Storyville? Was it named to-- Speaker 2: Well Storyville, Storyville was an area of New Orleans [Louisiana] in the early days, I mean real early days. There was an area of the city called Storyville, which is where all the white prostitutes and white bands would play and general--and Tony Jackson would play in these houses of ill repute. They were piano players because that's what they would hire, piano player. And the area, you can just--there's pictures in the--some of the jazz history books. There was another section where blacks were. It was called just the district; same activity just in another area. So Bob evidently used Storyville as the connection between the early days and when he started his band, Storyville Jazz Band. Story_ID: 619527 Speaker 1: So after your time with the Storyville Jazz Band, what happens next? Speaker 2: I think I was--I started freelancing again, as I remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh wait a minute, wait a minute yeah this is around '72 [1972], '73 [1973]. There was a guy who came down through town from Houston [Texas] named Charles Bering, he and his wife, Lula [Lula Lowe Lewis], they opened a club called Lu and Charlie's [New Orleans, Louisiana] and I had been freelancing and I had played an engagement--was supposed to play an engagement, with an alto saxophone player named Earl Turbinton, it was one Saturday night but Earl didn't show up. So Charlie Bering asked me if I could put a group together. I says yeah, you know. So I put a group together, it's called the ELM Music Company and a lot of people thought that that was a business (laughter). Speaker 1: Where did that name come from? Speaker 2: Ellis Louis Marsalis [HistoryMaker Ellis Marsalis, Jr.]; E-L-M. And I stayed there a couple of years and eventually you know the, the band itself at least under my leadership, we weren't really evolving into a band. It was a good group at the time. There's an article written about the group for an English magazine and they, they did a feature on the drummer, James Black and me and the tenor saxophone player got upset 'cause he wasn't in it and he quit (laughter). And I got another tenor player, but he wasn't that strong so the trumpet player he was disgusted with that situation (laughter). And eventually you know the band just sort of fell apart. Story_ID: 619528 Speaker 1: While I was there at this club, Lu and Charlie's [New Orleans, Louisiana], I had already started to do some adjunct teaching at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], just part time, and the chairman of the music department told me he said, "Look, if you get a master's [degree], I'll put you on full time." So I says oh, okay. So I had two years left on my G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] because I never did use it to go to school and a couple of the customers who came in, one was the dean of music at Loyola University [Loyola University New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] and the other was a faculty member. So he--I talked to him during the break and told him about it and he said, "Well look why don't you come talk to me?" And I said, "Yeah, okay," so I went to the school and this is in the summer of '74 [1974] and he says, "Well you know if you wanna go to school, no problem." So I went through, got the G.I. Bill and all that, and I started that first session in '74 [1974] and I did the second session. So I picked up nine hours towards a master's in 1974 and then I got a call in the, in the late summer from Alvin Batiste who was still teaching at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and he had been the artist in residence for public schools in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Well there was a new school opening called New Orleans Center for Creative Arts [New Orleans, Louisiana]. He didn't wanna leave Southern 'cause it was really his job to take, so he called me and I went interviewed for it and they hired me. So the school building was only about seven or eight blocks from Loyola University where I was in graduate school. So it worked out fine because the graduate school started at four P.M. and I was about seven or eight blocks away. And I stayed at the New Orleans Center for Creative Arts for twelve years and finally got my master's from Loyola. Speaker 2: What year did you get your master's? Speaker 1: In '86 [1986] I think. It took me forever. Story_ID: 619529 Speaker 1: I had a tour, a Southeast Asian tour with a group that I had put together, a tenor player, Victor Goines; bass player, Reginald Veal; and a drummer named Noel Kendricks [sic. Noel Kendrick], some young kids. And I had been playing gigs around the city. Tyler's Beer Garden [New Orleans, Louisiana] I was doing I think Wednesday nights there and then I was doing Saturday night at I think Snug Harbor [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Or--yeah I think it was called Snug Harbor then. And after the tour that we did which was in June I think, I had gotten an offer from Virginia Commonwealth University [Richmond, Virginia] to join that faculty which would have been in '86 [1986] so I told everybody, you know I said, "Well look at the end of this tour I'm going to Virginia, and join the faculty," and so I left and went to Virginia Commonwealth in '86 [1986] in the fall and stayed through '89 [1989], and came here in the fall of '89 [1989]. Speaker 2: Well tell me about, about in Virginia, I mean you went there and--? Speaker 1: I was coordinator of jazz studies at Virginia Commonwealth for two years out of the three that I stayed there. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then the, the chancellor at this school [University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] came through Richmond [Virginia] and made me an offer I couldn't refuse. (Laughter) So we came back here. Speaker 2: And all the time you're still playing? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Are you making any recordings during this time? Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: Are you making any recordings during this time? Speaker 1: Let's see was I? Was I? I think I was. Sometime during that time I made a recording with Wynton [Wynton Marsalis] called 'Standard Time, Vol. 3' ['Standard Time, Vol. 3: The Resolution of Romance']. I also did about some of those six recordings with Columbia [Columbia Records]. I don't remember exactly. I'd have to go look, research the dates and at least a couple of them in the '90s [1990s] one or two of them I used to introduce Jason [Jason Marsalis] as the drummer on the recording. Speaker 2: What was it like recording with your sons? Speaker 1: Oh it was great 'cause they could play (laughter). Speaker 2: And, and the music that you played, did either one of them or yourself write the music or was it--who wrote the music for the album? Speaker 1: It was--a lot of it was standards. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then I recorded some of my originals. Story_ID: 619530 Speaker 1: So when you come back here--oh you said I'm sorry, that you had this six record deal with Columbia. How often did you have to record an album? Speaker 2: Well, no sooner than maybe a year because you record and then they put it out there and see how many they'll sell as it tapers off then you can do another one on your--or second, or third, or fourth or whichever you know. Speaker 1: So you finally completed your last deal with them, or did you stay with Columbia Records after that? Speaker 2: No, I just had a six record deal with Columbia and that was it. Speaker 1: Okay. So who did you record with after that? Speaker 2: Nobody really. I mean I did some independent things like--I don't remember doing much of any recording. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember Eddie Harris? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: Did you do a recording with Eddie Harris? Speaker 2: I did a recording with Eddie Harris in the middle '80s [1980s]. I was working at Tyler's Beer Garden [New Orleans, Louisiana] and this is before I went to Virginia Commonwealth [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia] and Eddie called up one night 'cause Eddie used to book himself. Eddie called up one night and I happened to be playing at Tyler's and they talked about it and the owner said, "Well, why don't you and Ellis [HistoryMaker Ellis Marsalis, Jr.] just play a duo?" Eddie said, "Fine." So he came down and we played a duo performance at Tyler's Beer Garden, and David Torkanowsky heard us and said, "Man, you guys ought to record." So David set up a studio in Dallas, Texas and we went to Dallas and recorded-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --a record called 'Homecoming.' Story_ID: 619531 Speaker 1: You talked a little bit about your sons and recording with them, but let's step back a little bit and, and tell me when your, your children began to start playing, and tell me what instruments they play. Speaker 2: All right Branford [Branford Marsalis] started to play on a clarinet because I had one. And while I was with Al Hirt's band, he gave me--this is a kind of interesting story too. We were playing at the Riverboat [Mark Twain Riverboat] in New York [New York], the Al Hirt band and during the intermission, Miles Davis and Clark Terry were there and Al and I went and sat at the table. So I asked Al for an advance since we were in New York 'cause I wanted to get a trumpet for Wynton [Wynton Marsalis] because it was a little less expensive than in New York. And Miles Davis said, "Man, don't get him no trumpet, that's too hard. Let him play something else," (laughter). But Al said, "Well don't worry about it, when we get home," he said this--the company that he endorsed, he said, "I got trumpets. I'll give you one." So he gave me a trumpet to give to Wynton and it sat in the closet for (laughter) about six years before Wynton got serious and started to practice. I don't know how Delfeayo [Delfeayo Marsalis] started playing trombone; that's still kind of mysterious to me. Jason started playing drums I think almost immediately. He--it's just something about him and drums that worked out. But we were living about six or eight blocks from an elementary school that had a Saturday string program and the first thirty-five people could get a violin for the cost of the insurance which was ten bucks [dollars] a year so I was one of them first thirty-five to get that, that instrument and, and Jason played the violin from that point until he was about--well we went up to Richmond [Virginia] and the, the last year in Richmond, he discovered when they promoted him to a middle orchestra, he discovered that they had percussion in a orchestra; he didn't know that. So at the end of that year, we came back to New Orleans [Louisiana], the violin went in a case and that was the end of that. But he had been playing snit--or snare drum, I mean a set all the while since he was about six years old. You see and now he's concentrating on vibes, vibraphone, as well as the drums. In fact he's in Jackson, Mississippi on a gig tonight playing vibraphone with his group. Speaker 1: What's the name of his group? Speaker 2: Huh (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The name of his group? Speaker 2: I guess the Jason Marsalis quartet [Jason Marsalis Vibes Quartet] I guess (laughter)...