 Story_ID: 10580 Speaker 1: Richmond S. McCoy, R-I-C-H-M-O-N-D. McCoy M-C-C-O-Y born November 27th, 1954. Speaker 2: Okay and can you give today's date? Speaker 1: Today's date is March 8th, 2001. Speaker 2: And we are where? Speaker 1: New York City, New York! Speaker 2: Okay and your profession? Speaker 1: Real estate. Speaker 2: And your middle name is actually Solomon, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Can you spell that for us? Speaker 1: S-O-L-O-M-O-N. Story_ID: 10581 Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite color is? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Corn. Speaker 1: Corn okay. Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Springtime. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Caribbean. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying. Do you have one? Speaker 2: "How do you like me now?" Story_ID: 10582 Speaker 1: Why don't we talk about your mother first? Give her name-- Speaker 2: Sure. My mom was born Dorothy Williams. She was born here in New York City [New York]. She's eighty years old actually on March 17th [born, 1921] and, she's just a wonderful, wonderful, person and woman and tremendous mother. Had nine children. I'm next to the youngest and , she had a very interesting childhood. Her, her ancestor background--she's actually Portuguese and Jewish. And yet--and she was raised by an African American woman [Mary Williams] in Harlem [New York, New York] who was a housekeeper. And we've kind of gone back and looked into the records and discovered that her mother [Molly Weisner] was actually a Russian Jew and, for some reason, she gave up two children in two subsequent years. And we believe the house--the housekeeper was the housekeeper for this family took my mom in and raised her. And so my mom is--looks like a little Jewish lady who speaks like an African American person (laughs). And she'd never met her parents or really any of her siblings and was raised by this, this lady Nana we called her. And she raised my mom and she was really her child and did a wonderful job with her. Speaker 1: Did she--your mother talk at all about growing up? You know, did she share anythings with you-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. She, she either lived in Harlem when Harlem was really thee place to be. Talked a lot about the--she had you know, a wonderful time in school. She had a lot of friends. Didn't have a lot of money. They were just kind of, you know, getting by. But she seemed to have a very happy childhood, a loving childhood and she's very loving herself. So I think that comes a lot from people's--you know, how, how they're raised. She enjoyed her life-- She was very outgoing, , had a lot of adults in the community who kind of looked after her. She was very--My mom is very short and they called her Dotty, you know (laughs). And , so everyone would look after her. And so she had a lot of friends and really developed a really strong kind of cultural background for dealing with , different types of people. And I think pretty much enjoyed , living in Harlem for you know, up until she was about twenty-five. And then she, she moved upstate with my dad [James McCoy]. Speaker 1: Did she--did she know about her background? I mean is this recent that you know? 'Cause I find that very interesting. Did she? Speaker 2: You know this information was recent. Over the last five years. One of my brothers, Steven [McCoy], is totally obsessed with looking at our family heritage and lineage to--overboard with it I think. But he went hired a--hired a company to do all this research. And, and indeed did find out, you know, my mom was born in a foundling hospital here in New York, and the whole thing and who her parents were. So it was all new. My mom really didn't want to deal with it. She had got to a point in her life she says, "You know whatever happened, happened. I have all of you now. I've had a great life. I don't want to go back. It's painful whatever it is. Don't want to deal with it." And that was really the case. There was--they did identify a brother of hers who lives in upstate New York in Rochester. My brother contacted him and he, he didn't really want to be bothered either. So you know we have a lot of information. We think most of it's accurate. We just don't know. Story_ID: 10583 Speaker 1: Now your father. Tell us about him. It's James McCoy? Right? Speaker 2: Yeah. James McCoy. He was born in the mid 1800s and--late 1800s excuse me in Camden, South Carolina. My father was one of five children. His mother [Sarah Gayton] is African American and American Indian. She had three sons and the father of those children was the landowner , there--she lived on a sharecropper's farm. The gentleman who owned the farm was Irish. His name was McCoy and frankly that's all he gave my dad was the name. And my father grew up at a very difficult time. He used to share with us. Because his coloring was similar to mine, a little bit lighter. And he used to tell us when he was young he--his hair was very light colored. It was like almost blond. They used to call--there's an expression called 'towhead.' That was what he had. He clearly didn't fit in with the blacks in school. And the white kids didn't want him around either. So he was--became very tough and was--used to fight a lot even as a--as a very young, young person. My grandmother, Sarah, she, eventually married an African American gentleman who didn't want my dad around, and literally ran him off when he was thirteen years old. My dad left Camden, South Carolina and never went back his entire life. And, made his way back up to, doing construction. He worked on tall ships traveling back and forth between the U.S. and Europe. A very entrepreneurial person and ended up getting involved in all types of businesses here in New York City [New York]. He had a--he had a funeral parlor. He had a billiard hall. He ultimately got into partnership with some Jewish folks here in New York and bought apartment buildings in Harlem [New York, New York]. And, he really created a great deal of wealth in that area. But he talked a lot about growing up sometimes. And really the pain and suffering that he went through and how hard it was for him. And his heart was hard because of what he went through as a child having to leave his family. I had a really interesting experience, about five years ago. I was on, vacation down in Hilton Head, North Carolina [sic, South Carolina] and decided I wanted to go see where my dad was from. So I got this map out and I (laughs)--drove over to (laughs) Camden, South Carolina. And , it was really a , a great experience for me. Because , I really--the first impact I had was that the demographic and the geological formations of the land and the trees that were in that area and all the hills and the, and the way the whole of the land was laid out was absolutely identical to the environment where I was raised in upstate New York. My father had gone out and literally kept that vision in his belly all those years and recreated exactly the physical appearance of what he left as a child. We owned a two hundred-acre dairy farm in upstate New York. And I'll tell you about that in a minute. But it was, it was really , a moving experience for me. I even , where I stopped the car, got out of it, pulled up alongside a cotton field. I got out and just walked. And I just imagined myself as my father as, you know, thirteen years old having to leave. What that must have had, had felt like. The fear he had and the hurt he had. So , and what he--how he carried that the rest of his life. So it was interesting. So I'm the only one in my family who has gone back there. I took a lot of pictures and, and different things. But it helped, helped us kind of connect the dots. He ultimately sent for his mother. And she came to live with us. I was very young. I don't really ever remember meeting her. But, she came up to upstate New York in Dutchess County where we lived and stayed there with, with us until she passed away. Speaker 1: Now his mother's name was is it , Gray--Gayton? Okay--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Sarah, Sarah Gayton. Speaker 1: Sarah Gayton. Okay. Now what year--what, what age was he when he was forced to sort of leave? Speaker 2: About thirteen years old. Speaker 1: So from thirteen years old he was on his own. Speaker 2: On his own. Speaker 1: And that's because she had--you said--, Speaker 2: Yeah. She, she had married an African American gentleman who didn't want a child around that clearly wasn't his. You know, racism is still a, a huge challenge today in our society. You can--I've read about and indeed our family has experienced a lot of racism. But if you could just imagine what it was like at the turn of the century, how difficult it had, had to be for an individual who was mixed. And indeed I've read stories where people who'd say, "Look just I'd rather be back in slavery than be in this middle, the middle part where I am. 'Cause I don't fit in anywhere.' And there's, there's no place to go." But my father he, you know, persevered and was a very hard worker. And ended up putting together really a tremendous professional career for himself and loved all us kids, had a lot of us, you know, (laughs) so--. Speaker 1: Now how, how did he end up in New York? That's what I'm not clear on. Speaker 2: Well I, I don't have all the details. It's just to know that he, you know, worked his way in different parts of the country. I think most of it was in the east coast, but came to New York. A lot of people came to New York because of the entrepreneurial opportunities. I think that's what brought him here. And then he--I know, he got into a lot of different businesses and different ways of making money. And he drove, drove trucks and, other things and ultimately started a few businesses on his own. And ultimately got into the real estate business, which proved to be, a very successful area for him. Speaker 1: So did he, continue his schooling? Or did he really start working (unclear)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No. He (unclear) about sixth grade, sixth or seventh grade. That was his education. Story_ID: 10584 Speaker 1: Now , how did--how did your parents meet? Did you, do you know that story? Speaker 2: A little bit. My mom [Dorothy Williams] was very attractive, still, still, still beautiful (laughs). You know and she--And my--she was about twenty years old living up in Harlem [New York, New York]. My father [James McCoy] was a big wheeler-dealer up there, you know, in the real estate business, and quite a sportsman. He rode horses and played golf and he boxed. He was quite a, quite a accomplished individual, and I guess my mom's eye--you know, he caught my, caught my mom's eye or something. Or I don't know whose eye caught who first. But , they met. What was interesting, was my father was forty-five years old when, my mom was twenty and they got married. So it was a huge difference in age. It was the second marriage for both of them. My mom's first husband was a musician and he died of pneumonia. And my dad's first marriage didn't work out. And he was divorced and they met and that was it. Story_ID: 10585 Speaker 1: Give me your siblings' names in order. You have it here but I'd like to, you know, you to go through the list. Speaker 2: Right. You have , you have Lester Williams. Lester was , my mom's [Dorothy Williams] son from her first marriage. Lester, then you have Steven [McCoy] who was their first offspring. Steven, Adrian, Adrian Gaines and they had Abe [McCoy], Marilyn [Turner] and Jimmy [James McCoy], Alan [McCoy], then I, then I was next in line and then you had Dennis [McCoy]. Okay? Speaker 1: Now describe growing up in your household. Now you, you were actually--When you were born you're you weren't living in this city. You were born-- Speaker 2: Oh no. We--my, my father [James McCoy] didn't want his family in the city. He had seen all the problems with the crime and the drugs and the different things and was very committed to raising us in a rural environment, which we did. And so we grew up in upstate New York. Story_ID: 10586 Speaker 1: I was born in, in Peekskill, New York and my family was living in Poughquag [New York]. Poughquag is a very small rural town in Dutchess County [New York] about twenty miles outside of Poughkeepsie [New York] and very, very much a rural community at the time. My father [James McCoy] had purchased two hundred acres of land. It's an interesting story actually. He bought it from Bing Crosby, who wouldn't sell it to him because he was black. So my father had a friend, who was a fireman, a Irish gentleman who actually got the house, the property and the contract. And then at the closing you know, he sold it to my father. So it was interesting. But we had a, a two hundred acre working dairy farm. I used the word working because that's what it was about. You know, I describe it to give you a picture. It was very much like 'The Waltons' on TV. That's where we lived. Up on top of a mountain. There wasn't another family around for five years. It was all of us counting on each other to survive and to, and to live. And, you know, we had, a very active farm life is what it was. And it was very much a, a team effort. It was a lot of fun. Looking back on it, I realize that we were very blessed to have that type of opportunity to, to grow up. It was very, very pure environment in terms of a family atmosphere. My father was extremely strict, more than I think he needed to be. But the --We were allowed to watch TV only two hours a week. And you had your chores, you had to do before school and after school, after school. And it was a very clear chain of command. The more junior you were, the less you got to do, (Laughing) The more senior you were, the more privileges you had. And that manifested itself in a lot of ways including how much food you got, how much dessert you got, and how much free time you had. So it was all kind of together. We certainly had, an operation where, where a lot of passing down of clothes and shoes and it was like that. We weren't well off financially. We were doing okay I think looking back on it. But you know, we were doing pretty well. But it was like I said, very much working farm, with you know, milking the cows, feeding the chickens, weeding the gardens, slaughtering the pigs, doing the hay, fishing out in the, in the woods in the streams with, you know, with a stick and a piece of (chuckling), butcher string tied to a safety pin. That's how I learned to fish (laughing), you know. So it was, really a wonderful pure, way to, to grow up. And we learned a lot about responsibility and integrity and teamwork. And I think those characteristics that were instilled in us, really had, had a lot to do with the success that I've enjoyed, throughout my life. Because of the work ethic, the integrity ethic and the, the working together of the family, to get things done and, you know. Me and my brothers were always fighting and playing and everything. You know, but it was, it was, a great, experience. And, as I shared with you the--as I went down to Camden, South Carolina, and I saw what my father was torn away from, what he was thrown out from, and that he kept that in his mind and kept that vision in his stomach and then literally recreated it. It's really a, a powerful thing to have happened. It was very meaningful, to him. And he, you know, he loved us kids, you know tremendously. And, and you know, did a lot for us., his heart was hard, because of what he had been through. He enjoyed us. But I think he could've enjoyed us a lot more if he had been able to some how--And this was popular back in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] to get some professional assistance, I think just in terms of, you know, what he went through. Hey that's over now. Deal with your life going forward. So he, he was hard in a lot of ways but he was, a tremendous, father and a leader and, you know, a good husband to and a, and a provider. And, a lot of times through my career when I came to places where I said I didn't want to go on, this is too hard, this is too much--I often looked back at the price that he paid and what he accomplished with what little he had to work with. And I would use that as a motivation for me to kind of push forward to the, to the, to the next level. And he passed away when I was thirteen. So he passed when he was seventy-three. So I didn't --I didn't spend a lot of time with him. A lot of the critical years he wasn't there. Speaker 2: Now I want to ask one thing. You started to say, that I have questions about. And at what point did he move from you know, your parents got married. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They met in Harlem [New York, New York]. Right? At what point did they move? You know, did he actually move out? Was it--was this 'cause you're the seventh down the line. Was this a move immediately out? Or was-- Speaker 1: No. I, I think the move was, the move was first to the Bronx [New York] and then they moved a little bit further upstate to Peekskill and then finally up to Poughquag in Dutchess County. So it was probably over a three or four-year-period where he finally got to the place that he wanted up in the country. And it's a very, very remote area, (Chuckling). You know, but, we had a lot of--a lot of his friends would come up for the weekends and things so we had a lot of interaction with other, other people. Because my f--my mother [Dorothy Williams] and father--It's really interesting. Neither one of them had any direct family. Neither one of 'em. So we didn't have any aunts or uncles. We really didn't have grandparents. We didn't have any of that. So a lot of my father's friends, his friends more than my mom's friends. Because of the age difference was his friends were really the folks who were our godparents, that were our aunts and our uncles and kind of played that role for us. So it's, it's you know, kind of interesting. That, that is how it all, all manifested you know, later on. And I think you know, it was fine and as adults we've stayed in touch with those, those folks' siblings and children and cousins and things. Story_ID: 10587 Speaker 1: Growing up you've described you know, a lot about growing up. But here you are in a very rural environment, you know, really sort of isolated--with a family that's large with its own you know, internal unit. what--Can you share some other memories of you know, just family life, or school life or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Or you know your early years? Speaker 2: Yeah a lot of good ones and a lot of painful ones. I think the, the, the good ones were really having enough family members that you could have your own football game and your own baseball game and everything and just do everything as a--as a unit. So , and we all enjoyed a lot of time and, and fun together. And accomplished a great deal together. I think that, that was--there was a joy in that, however, it's interesting. The paradox of my father [James McCoy] moving us up to upstate New York and mo, ge--wanting to get us out of the city [New York, New York] the tragedy of it looking back on it, was that he put us into a racial environment that was the same one that he was forced to leave as a young man. In that we were--there were only two black families in the entire school district where we--in upstate New York. So we really caught heck from all these kids up there. You know, with all the racial names and harassment, it was from day one. As a child I, I remember that. And having to go through that, all of the name callings and people trying to put you down for, only because of the color of your skin. So it was--And there's nothing positive that comes out of that. I don't believe people when they said that "Oh it made me tougher." There's nothing positive. And you never really totally heal from, from those wounds. But I look back on it, one of the things that it did for me was it made me want to do better you know, (laughs). Made me wanted to excel more and to prove, prove myself, to these other people. Which in itself I think that type of motivation can work for a while. It's a fire that burns within you. But, unless you can convert it, it burns you up. So you really need to use that, to kind of take it to ano--another level and say, "All right, fine. You know I can't live the rest of my life out of anger and out of proving something to some one else." But--and I, I was able to convert that. Not all my family members were able to. Their scars that they had have continued to affect them. So , that was kind of , irony of being up in that environment. When there was--There weren't any other blacks. There weren't any other Hispanics. You know there was just us and one other family, a West Indian family. We were all the great athletes and everything but the rest of it was, you know, was just the ignorance of racism and bigotry and the mean-spiritedness of people. Story_ID: 10588 Speaker 1: You went to elementary school--. And what, what was the--. It was--, Speaker 2: It's Beekman. Speaker 1: Okay. Beekman. Speaker 2: Beekman Elementary School, which was in, up there in--up there in Poughquag [New York], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And was--do you--what, what type of--describe yourself as a young person. I'm talking about around the time that you were in elementary school. What type of child were you? Speaker 2: I was cute! (Laughing). I always thought I was, I was very thin. I was, very shy, I used to stutter a lot , was --had you know, occasions of being outgoing. But for the most part I was, I think a very quiet child, I have very fond memories of, grade school for the most part. I really enjoyed all the sports and getting to know the girls and you know. I was pretty good at school, school was always easy for me in terms of just my ability to, to read and to remember information and to kind of put the pieces together. Although I was a bit of a mischief I think, as I moved, you know, going forward. And the time I got to third or fourth grade, I was a little bit of a trouble maker, not much of one but a little bit. I think I, I didn't mature, that quickly, you know, growing up. In fact I remember in the fourth grade, we lived about five miles--about three miles from a family down the road that had--an older couple that had, some cows and a few things. And during that one year, there was, a time--Charlie Stewart and that was the gentleman's name. And he used to pay me fifty cents to walk his cow for about a mile down to get some water and bring it back. And fifty cents was a lot of money to me then. And I kind of lost my mind a little bit during that period of time. And kind of didn't pay attention to my homework, everything. And it came time the end of the year I hadn't done really well in my grade. I thought I was a businessman at that point right? So I remember my mother [Dorothy Williams] and father [James McCoy] coming to school towards, toward the end of the year. I didn't see this conversation. But they came and met with my teacher. And they came back and my dad said, "You know they're gonna keep you back this year," which was devastating to me. They're gonna make me stay behind because I wasn't--hadn't done well in my grades. And they just didn't think I was emotionally mature enough to go forward. Boy! That was bad, you know. But, I look back on that as a very positive thing. 'Cause what happened was the next year I knew all the information. So I was like way ahead of everyone else in the class. I had a, a teacher Mrs. Brown who was actually an African American teacher who was--She really loved me a lot. And she and I got very close and I, I did really well. And she gave me an opportunity to excel in the class. I think it really boosted up my confidence. It absolutely did. I remember winning all the spelling bees and the math contests you know, and I was looking--I had gained a little weight so was looking a little bit better to the girls, you know. It was a good year. So I built on that year, so, that was a funny time. But I, I really enjoyed grade school, starting--a pretty good athlete. So all that was--all that was kind of fun. Story_ID: 10589 Speaker 1: You had middle school, or what they called--did you go from sixth grade and then sixth--then seventh to ninth? Speaker 2: Yeah. Seventh, eighth and ninth [grades]. Those were really kind of rough years, for me. My father [James McCoy] had begun getting ill and he, he developed--I wouldn't call it Parkinson's disease. I don't know quite what it was but he had hardening of the arteries, which affected his thinking. And he would wake up in the middle of the night, not know where he was, get up and walk all throughout the house, walk out in the yard. And he really kind of lost his mind from time to time. So it was a very difficult time for us kids watching that. We had sold the farm by then, had moved into another house and, it was a very difficult time as a young person, seeing your, your parent go through you know, these challenges. And his health started to, deteriorate by the time I was in seventh grade. And ultimately he had to be hospitalized. So it was a tough time. Because my mom [Dorothy Williams]--he had never allowed her to get a driver's license, to do any banking, anything. Okay, he really just made her stay in the house back then. So all of a sudden she was having to take responsibility of a real estate portfolio. Which was ten or twelve properties. She didn't know how to drive, didn't know how to transact business. And all this was put upon her. And it was a real challenge for her. We had some friends of the family who helped out. But it was a difficult time. I remember it very vividly, the challenges and the stress that was, was on her. And all the while, his health was deteriorating. He was in and out of the hospital and, it was a rough time. And he got better for a while and then, you know, ultimately he was hospitalized and he passed away when I was in eighth grade when I was thirteen. Story_ID: 10590 Speaker 1: One of the things I'd like to communicate today is just that, "You know what? You are what you are. Be what you are. Be the best that you could be, with who you are. Don't get caught up in that race stuff 'cause it doesn't mean anything." I had a dream not too long ago. And I was up in heaven with, with God and he was talking about the time spent on Earth. And he says, "You know I don't see any--" He says, "I don't see any colors. So all that time you all spent down there worrying about black, white, red, blue. It means nothing to me. It meant nothing to you. Total waste of time." So it's really a--distraction I think for all of us in terms of fulfilling our purpose and reaching our destiny. Just got to go past it. Speaker 2: Right. But when you look at your background, really you are--you are more the other-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You're more Caucasian than you are, you know, black in many ways. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know so-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah I mean I went through that challenge too. You're not really black, you know. You're mulatto you are--It's like who cares! You know, my--It's like leave me alone. And I wouldn't say I haven't taken advantage of it in business. 'Cause there, there, historically there had been some advantages to be a minority. And I've taken advantage of those. Built on those to get to a point where you just--you can execute you know, big business. Nothing's wrong with that. Story_ID: 10591 Speaker 1: Your father [James McCoy] passed away. And I--you know, I was wondering you know what that whole period was like. You know, because you're thirteen at this point. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: You know and he had been as you said, very much the--you know, the ruling patriarch Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. The --I think it was--It was a time of, sadness and also a time of freedom, there--that disci, disci, disciplinary hand wasn't on us any longer. We did have friends of the family who I think stepped in and did a pretty good job in terms of playing that fatherly role and kept a hand on us kids. You know, we never got into any real trouble. But we wer--got to be a bit of a wild bunch up there in the country. You know. But, it was a lot of fun. Drove my mom [Dorothy Williams] a little crazy I think but it was, it was fine. You know we all continued, going to school and getting good grades and doing the sports. So it was, it was okay. But it was definitely a very different type of, atmosphere from, what it was before. A dramatic change. Story_ID: 10592 Speaker 1: Who influenced you most then as a young, young man then? Because , that--You know, those were formative years really around that time-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah-- Speaker 1: --period. Speaker 2: I think, there were several people, one gentleman was a friend of, my sister's and her husband, by the name of Stanley Harris who was, who was a doctor. And, he took a special interest to all of us kids. And he was, you know, used to take us out, do things with us, sports activities and movies, things like that. And that was, you know, very helpful. My sister's [Adrian Gaines] husband at the time, Tommy Gaines, he was, also some one who spent a lot of time with us and kind of ke--kept a hand on us, that was kind of it. And then my--my older brothers, when they were around, they certainly spent, time with us. And the rest was left up to my mom [Dorothy Williams] to try to keep us boys in line (laughs). Speaker 1: And she had boys too. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: And that's the whole thing. Right, right. Speaker 2: Right (laughs). Story_ID: 10593 Speaker 1: What subjects did you like at that point? Speaker 2: I really liked, history, American literature. I really enjoyed anything having to do with that--and you know anything putting concepts together and, business. I was taking an interest in business at that time as well. So those were the subjects that I really seemed to enjoy--and the girls. Speaker 1: You (laughs)--the girls--you started early with the girls! Speaker 2: Yeah I had a lot of girlfriends. I--See I came to realize that my diversity was a wonderful thing. I changed it from being a liability to an advantage. Because I could socialize with the minority community and I could socialize with the, the white community. I could be a jock. (unclear) I was athletic. And I could be, you know, kind of, a swinger type of a guy. So it was--I kind of played both sides of it and--to my advantage. And I gained a lot of social skills I think in, in doing that and really enjoyed I think you know, the high school years, tremendously. I had a lot of freedom, wasn't quite sure what I wanted to do professionally and academically. I ended up going to, school to what--during that time to learn air conditioning and refrigeration. I got a license in doing that as well as doing the academic stuff and running on the track team. So I had a pretty good time. I had two cars and a couple of girlfriends. So it was, it was a good time up there in Poughkeepsie [New York]. Speaker 1: How did you end up with two cars? Speaker 2: Well I was, you know. I had ex--some extra money and my mom [Dorothy Williams] bought me one and I sold one, made some money on it and ended up buying two of 'em. So I was a hustler from way back, way back then. Speaker 1: And what, what sports did you play that you--Were you football or? Speaker 2: No track. Track, was my primary sport. I was too skinny. I was very thin, to play, play football. Speaker 1: And were you--were you a very good--Were you a track star? Or were you-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No. In--only in my mind (laughs). Speaker 1: (laughs). Speaker 2: I was above average I would say. Speaker 1: Did you have a nickname or anything? Did people-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. They used to call me 'Head.' Head. That was my nickname from when I was a little kid 'cause I sa--Whenever I'd injure myself, I always end up hitting my head. So I always had knots on my head one, one place or another. So that was my nickname. I had a very big head. I was skinny and had this you know, large, noggin. So, all my, my brothers and sisters that was my name forever. I don't know when I finally lost it. Story_ID: 10594 Speaker 1: You were in--did you say Lagrange? Speaker 2: LaGrange [Middle School, Lagrangeville, New York]. Speaker 1: New, New York. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And that was the school in the area. Speaker 1: For the area that you lived in. And how--how large was the school? Speaker 2: Oh maybe--not very large, about five hundred students maybe. That was the--that was the mid level school. Seventh, eighth and ninth grade. And then I went on to Arlington High School [Poughkeepsie, New York] which was--which was nearby as well. Speaker 1: And how--what, what size was--You know you said at the beginning there were two black families. So how many black family--You know, how many black students was--were at Arlington? Speaker 2: Arlington, maybe ten out of a thousand student body at that time. Very small. I'm sure today it's much different. That was in you know, 1970. Speaker 1: But you were popular. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Story_ID: 10595 Speaker 1: It's coming time for you to graduate [from Arlington High School, Poughkeepsie, New York]. And so what are your thoughts about what you want to do? Speaker 2: I didn't really have any. I just wanted to have a good time, was in love with a young lady, who, Italian lady--Italian girl who had moved. That's what was on my mind I remember. But you know, I graduated, within a couple months I moved down to Florida trying to find her. And, went down there, found her. And was dating her for a while. And then one day her father came by my apartment and suggested that it was a good idea if I left town. And, so I did and, ended up going to--getting on a bus to, San Francisco [California]. This was in 1974, it was right around the time that Patty Hearst was abducted. I remember I was out there, had this big Afro and everything. And then I went to (laughs), went to San Francisco. And, didn't know anybody. I had a few hundred dollars in my pocket. Had gotten some phone numbers from some friends and went out there to just see--you know, do something different. Speaker 1: And so how long did you stay out there? Speaker 2: About four years. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: I had--It was a great experience, rented a hotel room, out in Berkeley [California], started looking for a job. Ended up, responding to an ad for, for sales selling door to door encyclopedias, for Collier Encyclopedias. I went in there, they said, "Look we think you could do it." They hired me, trained me and I got totally into it. I started reading all the positive thinking books, Norman Vincent Peale, O, O, Og Mandino, the world's best salesman. I just totally saturated my spirit with salesmanship, and positive attitude and really got into it. And, was a phenom for that company. I did extremely well, for them, sold a lot of encyclopedias. Had people underneath me that I was training. Within a year they gave me the opportunity to, open an office in Canada with myself and another gentleman named Ted Lane who is an Afri--another African-American, they financed us to go up to western Canada in the--in the province of Sas--Saskatchewan and I had the office to open in Saskatoon [Canada] and they gave me, the money to go open an office, and (chuckling) and rent furniture, phones. I put an ad in the paper. Hired, hired about twenty college students to come in, trained them and, worked up there for about eight months, up there doing the marketing of, of the encyclopedias up there in, in Canada. So it was a tremendous experience and I did really well at it. Then we ended up coming back down to the U.S. up to, the northwest and I opened an office in Portland, Oregon. And my associate was in Seattle [Washington]. I did that for about another two years and then decided it was time to come back east. I you know really missed my family. So I ended up, coming back to, to upstate New York. Speaker 1: Now did you participate at all at--Well it's a little later in the (unclear) culture at Berkeley? You know Berkeley has always been known as being sort of--No you were very business oriented. Speaker 2: Very business oriented from, from day one was out there. Focused on that and, that's what I did. So I, I, I didn't no. Speaker 1: Okay. Now , what--You know you knew from a young person that you sort of had a, a sense of hustle. You know, in business. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So the market--the sales and marketing was sort of a natural. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 10596 Speaker 1: During that time period, where--you know, between Berkeley [California] and the time that you were in Saskatchewan [Canada]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Canada what that experience--What did you learn you know, during that experience? Speaker 2: I think I learned, that through perseverance and, really increasing your communication skills,, working once again as, as a team, working with people of like mind and vision, you can accomplish a great deal.I look back on. It's probably the, the salient facts of things of what did I learn. And never, ever quit. Get your mind set on something just go ahead and do it. I also learned that I was a leader. And I was a leader who, demanded a lot from people who wanted to follow me and , I learned how to, how to lead. How to-- How to do that and, learned different approaches I think in motivating people in that regard. Speaker 1: So what--Tell me--Tell me a little bit more specifically about you know, what you learned about how to lead people? Speaker 2: I, I think in a word it would be to lead by example, not to ask people to do something that you wouldn't do. And, and recognizing that not everyone has the same amount of fire in their belly. But they can still be successful. And that people have pers--their own personalities and their own motivations and they can still be successful. They may not want to be as successful as, as, as you want to be. But there's still a role for, for them to play. And I learned that the hard way. I remember, training people and working with them. I used to make people cry, you know, trying to get 'em motivated. And my manager would sit down and talk to me (laughs) about it. "Look Richmond you can't, (laughs) can't deal with people this way. You know you got to do a little bit softer." So I, I learned that , and learned it pretty good. I've never accepted it a hundred per cent, so I think I'm still very, hard driver of, certainly myself and people around me and, I, I don't settle for less than excellence. It just not what I'm about. And, so that was my first real experience with it. It was interesting as I look back on it. Because I was so enthusiastic and so aggressive in things that I, I would do and say that I used to hurt people. And I, I always felt bad about that. Because I was--I realized probably was damaging people. And I actually for a time kind of pulled myself back and, that's something that I came out of. But there was a, a course of a couple years where I realized that "You know, I--maybe I just need to do something a little different. I need to change the way I approach things." But I really believe you have to be true to yourself. You have to be who you are. You have to be at peace with who you are. And if you can do that, really you can accomplish a great deal. Don't compromise. You know I have an expression that you know, this is, this is not a practice run. This is your life. These are the cards you're dealt with. Play 'em and you know, you know, play to win. I--in that experience in working in the sales of these encyclopedias, and it was a very, large company, a legitimate product totally on the up and up--but I got the opportunity to work with some--really some master salesmen and some master motivators. And I used to sit un--up underneath them. I used to drive 'em crazy asking questions and taking notes and reading the books and listening to their tapes. And, that--And it really worked. And you, you kind of like build yourself. You build yourself to a point of, being, being successful and being very articulate at what you want to communicate. I learned a lot about selling then. One of the greatest things about selling that I learned was that , you know, you really can't sell anybody anything. You know, you can help them meet their predetermined needs. You not gonna talk anybody into anything. So I remember going out with my sales people in the communities. We used to sell the encyclopedias at night. Go into presentations with the husband and wives. But during the day you kind of go out into the market and see--look at the different houses and things. (unclear) to identify what was a qualified prospect in those communities. You know, what, what did it look like? You know, like people with swimming pools. And they had little bicycles around. They had a new car. You could tell people who really were kind of moving forward and doing things. That was a customer. You're not gonna sell a set of encyclopedias to a senior couple more than likely. You know, you're not gonna sell it to people whose teenagers are fifteen or older. 'Cause they're already going to--be going to college. So you gotta look for that right customer. So I was very successful in that finding a fit with that. And I practiced those same strategies today in the business I'm in in terms of raising capital and doing real estate deals. Just find, find that--where there's a fit. You can't push water up a rope. And that's one of the, biggest secrets I--secrets or facts I would say in terms of, you know, in the marketing arena. It's to find a match for who you are, what you are, what your product is with the customers. Story_ID: 10597 Speaker 1: You lived in Canada-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Speaker 1: You said how many years? Speaker 2: About two years. Speaker 1: Okay was there anything significant about that or? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I think what I remember most about Canada that it's a culture that was ten years behind ours. And that was a great pleasure, just in terms of people's attitudes, how open they were, how honest they were, that was what I recall about that. And, and there was devoid of prejudice. I don't remember ever hearing anything about a person being black or white, the whole time I was up there. Story_ID: 10598 Speaker 1: You come back to New York. And you come back to your town or you go to New York proper? Speaker 2: No I went back to Poughkeepsie [New York] and, decided to go back to school. Went to, Dutchess Community College [Poughkeepsie, New York], did some construction and different things, for a year or so. That really wasn't going very far. And, my sister Adrian Gaines, who's here in New York [New York], was in the broadcasting business. She encouraged me, "Hey why don't you come back to New York? Get back in school down here. Go to--" You know I was gonna go to Fordham University [New York, New York]. "Come on down here, we'll help you get started." So she was kind enough to allow me to come back here and moved into her apartment. And I started, working again. Got back into, into sales, I worked for a company called, PRO-LINE Hair Products [PRO-LINE Corporation] with [Comer J.] Cottrell. And, my responsibility was to market their products to stores in the New York metropolitan area and that, that went--that went pretty well, did that for about a year, wasn't making, really making enough money. I ended up driving a taxi for, for a while. And, put together you know, a, a little bit of money doing that. And ultimately decided to get into real estate--this was from conversations I had with people. I had done some research on commercial real estate, knew I could sell. You know, and felt, you know, to go back into sales, let me get into something that's gonna be successful--I would be able to, you know, make a lot of money at it. So that was in 1979, I got my first real estate license. I responded to an ad in the paper about a company who was willing to train people for commercial real estate. I went in there. They took me on board. I was one of fifteen people, that they trained. And you know, what I did was I drove the taxi at night and did the real estate in the daytime. Just so I could continue to, to, to eat (laughs) you know, until I made my first deal. And I made my first deal within like six months. And then, you know, the rest as they say is history. Story_ID: 10599 Speaker 1: Had you identified that you wanted to go in commercial as opposed to residential? And wasn't that--And I also wanta sort of talk about the time 1979. Was the real estate industry at a boom at that point or was it in a--you know. 'Cause there've been different times. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. No it was, it was a pretty good market. It was, it was--it was an up and coming market at that time. I started with a small company. As I said they, they trained me. I went out and did a couple of deals. I then ended up moving to a slightly larger organization, a company called Douglas A. Edwards, which was run by an Armenian gentleman [Antreas Ghazarossian]. And I say that because he was such a, a very much a European type of a thinker, and, was a real blessing for me. But he took me in and really trained me professionally, in the area of commercial real estate. And how to give service to the customers, how to op--operate at the very high level of service. And to be, be knowledgeable and to really provide a much better type of transaction to the customer than just doing a deal. And I worked under him for two years and he gave me a tremendous amount of training. And also was a, a good--kind of a I would say certainly a role model, fatherly influence at the time. And we became you know, very good friends as well. And you know, I started making a lot of money there, as well. So he was, a person who has had a very dramatic impact on my professional career in terms of where I started out. And then but even as I was working for him I started to think, "Gee I'd like to have my own business." (laughs) You know, I can do this to. I can do this, you know, for, for myself. So I was with that company for two years Douglas A. Edwards. And then I joined another firm, called [CB] Richard Ellis, which is a very, large worldwide real estate investment advisory company based in the U.K. [United Kingdom]. That had open--just opened an office in New York [New York] and was looking to expand their, commercial transaction business. They were doing pension fund work and wanted to do transaction work. So I was smart of a--part of a small group in there, five individuals who were hired to, to do that work representing U.K. based clients that were coming to the U.S. I was only there for about a year, less than a year when stra--on a strategic basis, the leaders of that office decided they didn't want the transaction people in house any longer with the investment people. And came in one day and said, "Look here's a month's pay. We want you guys out of here in an hour, take all the clients, just you know, we don't want to do this any more." And that was very bad timing for me. That was on a Monday, the Friday before, I had just purchased my first house in Maplewood, New Jersey. And the Saturday coming, I was getting married. So (laughs) it was very bad timing, so you know, I gathered it up. I called up my fiancée and said, "Cancel the trip to St. Martin. We're gonna go to, to the mountains in Pennsylvania, to the Poconos, you know." (laughs). We needed to save our cash. But, I left there and, with two of the other individuals that were in that department, and we set up our own company within a month called, Richard Sykes & Partners. And I was--owned 20 percent of that company. And we were able to keep the clients that we had and we, built up that practice to, to be doing three or four million dollars a year in revenue and commission. So we made it a very successful practice. I was the partner that did all the work outside of New York City. So I was, able to gain a tremendous amount of experience doing transactions throughout the United States and California, Texas, Florida, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Boston [Massachusetts]. I would go in and represent those U.K. based clients in those markets. So I, I gained, a lot of very valuable, market knowledge. And developed some techniques that I've been able to use--frankly to use even with what we're doing, today here with UrbanAmerica. Speaker 1: Now who were your--Who were your other partners and --and this--So you kept the same--you kept the clients? You kept the represen--representation of the U.K.- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: Clients so you had (unclear), (unclear) clients-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes. Speaker 1: But who were your other partners and what were some of the techniques that you, you know, say you learned? Speaker 2: Yeah the--My partners one was, the senior partner Richard Sykes, who was a, a British gentleman who had been a partner at Richard Ellis. And he, he and I decided to form this company. Then one other, young man named Patrick Gardner. So there's the three of us. So we, we put our little nickels together and set up a shop and, you know, started, started going for it, some of the techniques that I would use in terms of going into a market was really to go and meet, meet with the political leaders that were in that city. Get an idea of what was happening in the different markets, go talk to the real estate brokerage community. Get a real, very, very clear understanding of what the client's needs were and then try to find the right properties in, in that regard really. And do all the--all the surveys and the information gathering to find the best deals for them and then to--You know, sometimes I'd bring on a local broker to help me. Most of the time we didn't. We just go ahead and negotiate the deal through. We were in a very good position because we controlled the customer. When you can control the customer, you can negotiate a very good deal. I also found that coming in from out of town, very often you could do a better deal because you didn't have the, the prejudiced opinion about what a deal should go for that maybe the local guys did. If you came in, as you know, kind of an outsider, gather up all your information, be very clear about what the market is, and then you know, negotiate from strength. So I was able to do that with a lot of success. And the clients just kept giving us more and more work. And ultimately asked us to do some work for there--for them in the U.K. as well. Speaker 1: So these were really--, just so I understand. These were really--this was a U, U.K. clients who were investing in the United States. Speaker 2: Well the--and investing or operating. We had a cli--uh, British, British Petroleum [Company] oil was a client, Kleinwort Benson [Private Bank] investment bank, was another client. Very big companies that had requirements for their operations in different parts of the U.S. Speaker 1: Okay and how large is--are investments? You know, 'cause I--you know I've been told even that--even the Dutch companies have more investments than even the British company-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: Is that? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah it's true. I mean they have hundreds of billions of dollars, invested in the U.S. , probably you know, maybe a 20-25% of the market in the U.S. is owned by foreigners. Speaker 1: You said a lot of it was you know, sort of political what you know--in terms of, the mayors. Now was your--Did you have any advantages as an African-American--? The market you were dealing with were--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In, in, in those markets, it wasn't as advantageous as it is today, what we're doing today. It's very, very meaningful. But very often the, the government offices know what's going on in the market place. And they kind of give you an over view without a prejudiced opinion in terms of trying to steer you towards a particular deal. So I find that to be a valuable asset, in doing that. So you, you really get the lay of the land, on which developer was doing what, which brokerage firm was the right one, what company is expanding, what's going on. It just gives you a good kind of a, a start going into that market place and certainly today a lot of that information is a--available on the Internet. So you can gather all that. So there's no such thing as going in green and you know, making a big mistake on behalf of the client. Speaker 1: Were these investments--were they mainly--were they shopping centers? Were they industrial properties? What were they? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) At, at, at, at that time, the work I was doing was mainly transaction oriented. Where we would go in, represent a company for them to take a large block of office space, or we might do a development deal, or they may have an asset there that they want to sell. So it's all more transaction oriented. Speaker 1: Okay. And so you were with them you said a--You did-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Okay you were I'm just-- Speaker 2: Sure. Richard Sykes and I we started our company in 19-- Speaker 1: Seventy-nine. Speaker 2: No, no in '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: Four okay. Speaker 2: In '84 we started Richard Sykes & Partners. Built that practice up to be very successful. Ultimately sold that business in 1988. And , I was the partner that really pushed for the sale. Because we were doing a lot of business--. A lot of--generating a lot of commissions but I really wanted to create some more wealth for ourselves and I wanted to expand our product line. Just doing transactions, there was other work that we could be doing in terms of the property management, investment sales, more development. But we needed a bigger platform to do that with. So I felt, you know let's sell this. And the market was red hot then in the late '80s [1980s]. I mean '88 [1988] was great. So we sold the business for six-and-a-half million dollars to a, a U.K. based company that was expanding into the U.S. I served as a managing director in that company, Baker Harris Saunders for three years,, up 'til 1991. And, that was a lot of fun working, you know, back and forth, between the countries. And, ultimately in '91, really wanted to do something more entrepreneurial again and set up my own firm called the R.M.C. Group, which was created as a minority-owned entity to provide corporate real estate services to major, major companies. And I thought that was a good niche market to see that. Where all my friends and colleagues said, "Richmond you're crazy. Why are you doing this? You got a great career going. You'll never find anything in that arena. Don't do it." And when they told me that, I knew I was on to a good thing. So I appreciated that and, started the company, in one of my old client's offices, actually. They rented me a little office in there about 300 square feet. And I started the company, put it together. Hired one person, hired two people, eventually got six people and moved out to the, to the Met. [Metropolitan] Life Building. And Pitney Bowes was a client, Percy Sutton's company, WBLS was, was, was a client. Did some work for Chase Manhattan Bank and the business really started to grow. By 1993, I had an opportunity to do business with Teachers' Insurance and Annuities [Association -College Retirement Equities Fund or TIAA-CREF]. Where they were attempting to do some diversity outreach in the real estate arena they came to me asked--I came to them frankly (laughs). After three or four times then they finally said, "You know we'd like to do something." And Clifton [R.] Wharton [Jr.] was their chairman at the time. And he certainly played a big role I think in getting teachers to a place at that time at least where they wanted to do diversity things. And my family knew him. So we started a company called McCoy Realty Group in 1995. Excuse me, in 1993 that company was started to, begin to provide asset management services to pension funds and large financial institutions. And that was a, a huge development in the real estate industry for that to happen. And I partnered up with another company to provide me back office support. And we grew that business to, nine offices throughout the United States, a hundred employees. And it really, grew dramatically representing Teachers' Insurance, California's Public [Employees] Retirement System [CalPERS], Detroit [Police and] Fire Pension... Story_ID: 10600 Speaker 1: In '93 [1993], I was awarded a contract with Teachers' Insurance and Annuities [Association -College Retirement Equities Fund or TIAA-CREF] to begin providing property management service, to them, on about eight properties in, in Florida and Texas. I then, took that platform as it were and decided to try to get additional business from other pension funds. On the basis that it just makes sense to me at least at that time that the, these pension funds should do business with, with the annuitants, vendors who represent the ownership represented kind of the same ethnic base of the annuitants who put all this money in these pension funds. And I'll tell you that idea really didn't, reach much, reception. It was too early. Today, today it's actually people are starting to buy into it. But at the time, we were focused on building our business, getting additional pension fund clients and growing the business. So I was on the road 75-80 percent of the time pitching for new business, looking at the portfolio. The company was growing. Grew to a hundred employees and we were getting terrific results, for our clients in terms of the work we were doing with the properties. But once again I used a lot of the same you know, marketing sale strategies that I converted from my earlier experience into you know, bringing that type of energy and creativity into marketing our clients' properties. And then I had to develop a whole new skill set in terms of dealing with, you know, the pension fund environment. That corporate environment which I hadn't really done before. And I probably made some mistakes, in that area. Because the--looking back on it. Because the, not recognizing the true arrogance of, corporate America in that arena, just that "Look we got the money. It's our money. Well you can do thin--do things the way we want to do 'em and you're gonna play your--you're gonna play your place and that's kind of it." And I had never really quite, you know, could get with that, having said that, gained a lot of national recognition, received probably four or five different national awards from various organizations for the success of the company, which I, give the credit largely to that to my staff. I had a wonderful staff underneath me and I got the credit and that's nice. But really it was a team effort for us to, to, to build it, my staff always consisted of a high percentage of African American, Hispanics and women, over percent of the employees that we had. And we instituted some other things that we were in the position to do, as being the manager of these properties, I said, "We're gonna do this. Let's make a difference in these communities." So we started a program to hire vendors from the minority community to service the assist. To circle the--to circulate the money better in those markets. And at the time we were able to award over 45 percent of all our contracts went to minority women, women owned firms. And that was great to get them the access into what we were doing. Also in 1995, I had--had a interesting change in my life. I think--I look back on it was I had beautiful offices on Park Avenue and 52nd Street [New York, New York], you know. I had really kind of made it. Getting--You know, making good money, getting a lot of recognition. And I got a call one day from a minister, from Washington, D.C. who owned some real estate in Harlem [New York, New York]. On 125th Street in Harlem [New York] and Eighth Avenue. And had heard about our company and asked if we would be interested in, taking over the management of their properties in Harlem. And I--my father [James McCoy] had owned a lot of real estate in Harlem. It all didn't go well. Some of it did and some of it did--some of it didn't. I certainly didn't want to go back into the neighborhood. It wasn't my plan. I had made it out as it were, but they persisted and we ended up taking on an assignment, with this church to manage and lease their properties up there. And we immediately introduced to them the same type of institutional asset management strategies that we'd been using for our institutional clients, and turned these properties around very quickly. They then asked me if we would take over the construction of a church that they were building in Harlem that they were having problems with and we did that and we got that moving, the same church asked me if I could help them in Washington, D.C. If I had any relationships down there with the development project. And I said, "Yeah I could do that." So we got involved with that. Through that experience, I recognized two things. One, there was a tremendous need in the faith based community, in the not for profit community for real estate expertise. And secondly, there was a great opportunity for our company to go in and really provide that service. So I started a new company at that time in 1995, called McCoy Development Corporation, which was a company created to solely service the faith-based, not for profit entities, in real estate and economic development activities. And I very quickly, got out and was able to penetrate the market. Got into a relationship with some of the largest denominations in the country and largest--some of the largest, ministers, out there that were wanting to do economic development work. We did projects in California, with, with Bishop Jake--Bishop T. D. Jakes. We're doing a project with him now. Did some things in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], in Florida, and it just kind of grew, and through that experience, our company gained a lot of attention. More attention. even with, I think kind of a (unclear) event with, CNN, did a half hour program on our company on, on the Pinnacle program. Which was a widely broadcast, program, really kind of talking about what we were doing, how we were working with the face baith--the faith based entities and how these urban markets were starting to turn around, all of that activity, and attention, ultimately led me to learning about the investment opportunities that exist in these urban markets that were largely being overlooked by the typical institutional, environment. So th--that all kind of grew. I would also say at that time, because of the media attention I was getting, I was--I was, on the cover of Fortune Magazine in 1997, with a new black power, article. And when that article hit the--hit the news stands, several of my former institutional clients really took exception to it. And reacted in a very negative way to, to the whole experience. Which---hmm. Speaker 2: So tell me about that. But I want to go--Who was the minister that--Oh I want to follow that. But who was the minister who first contacted you on the church? You know that you--'cause you said a minister had this property and you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. There was, it's with, Bishop [S. C.] Madison. That's with the United House of Prayer for All People, which is based in Washington, D.C. They have churches all throughout the United States. They have four million members. It's a very large organization. And they are really in the real estate business (laughing). They had a lot of real estate. But that was the first--the first situation that I did with that. Speaker 2: And explain to me what--Because something caught your attention in this whole thing. You know you said it was overlooked. But when you start looking at, you know these churches and their holdings, what, what impressed you about the opportunities you saw then? Speaker 1: One was that, very often these churches were able to, get prime locations in terms of lo--prime in terms of traffic, highway access. And they were able to get this land for free. Because no one else wanted to go there yet. And they had the political cover. Because they're the only ones who stayed there for thirty years. They had the influence that they could actually get those properties from, from the community for the community at a reduced price, sometimes for free. And they were also the entities that could get the cheap debt and grants to develop the properties. So that built in right there a wonderful real estate investment opportunity. And I also found that in these markets, the, the stores--there was not a lot of retail stores, yet they were densely populated. So you put those two together, it's gonna work pretty good. So that was really kind of how I gathered the first concept about putting together an investment fund to, to put money out into these communities. Speaker 2: And did you have any, any resistance on the part of the faith based or have you found resistance at all in terms of you know, that development? Or you--you know, this, this is a personal question. But have you--You've not had any, any resistance at all to that? Speaker 1: No, they've been in--very--they enthusiastically, support your interest. They're not so enthusiastic about always paying you but they'll pray for you (laughing). And ultimately I did a lot of work for these churches and I, I was look--go at it as a business. I was like I wasn't making any money. And finally I said, "You know Lord, this is what you want me to do, it's--just be my ministry. I'm just gonna do this. If I make a dime out of it wonderful. If I don't, I'm just gonna go ahead and do it." And really that's how I, I, I--That's how I dealt with it. And I did end up making you know some revenues from it. But it was really--I have a--I have a gift. You know I have a lot of knowledge and I wanted to share it. They were making a lot of mistakes. They were getting great opportunities some of 'em that didn't know how to--quite how to manage the situation to the extent that I could be helpful to them, I just kind of gave out of my heart to do it. And I think those things always come back to you. Story_ID: 10601 Speaker 1: You said you--when you were on the cover of For-- Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Was it 'Fortune' [magazine, reference to article featuring Richmond McCoy] that--, Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You said that your institutional partners took exception. And I'm curious about that. Speaker 2: Well you know, a lot of times, you know, there's racial issues alive and well. And it's okay if you're kind of their, their in-house Negro. You know they got a program wrapped around you. It's great but you know, how dare you, you know, go do something on your own or be recognized without us. And, that really was the experience I had. And, it was shocking to me. But, it wasn't my problem. It was their problem. They were the ones that were feeling it and dealing with it. But I saw black and white, night and day the change in the relationship after that article came out. So--But that's what time it is to, to some extent. And we've seen that in many of, leaders. You look at [Robert] Bob Johnson with BET [Black Entertainment Television]. A tremendous brain that gentleman has. A tremendous business that he built. But he--when he was public they would never give his stock the same credit worthiness or the same value, for all the revenues he had, that they would a white company. So that that's real. It's what it is and you know, at the end of the day, you have to succeed, on your own basis and, and, you know create what wealth you can for yourself and your investors and let that speak for itself. Speaker 1: So how did that happen? Did--you said relationships changed. Were people pulling things out or were they--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I started losing accounts very quickly. And all kinds of--all kinds of reasons. And it happened all at once. And I realized when that happened that I really felt that, the Lord was really doing something. I thought He was just peeling off things that were in my life, that were in my business that weren't producing new fruit. He was just cutting down those trees. And when I saw it happening so quickly, I just really stepped back and said, "Alright let it happen." I couldn't stop it. And it was just--I thought something bigger was happening. And indeed it was. Story_ID: 10602 Speaker 1: John Utendahl and I started talking about creating UrbanAmerica, the investment fund. And John and I had known each other in passing as business leaders in our community, but never really done anything together and really hadn't spoken. We were both in the Fortune [magazine] article together. And through that meeting, we had a luncheon up at the Time-Life Building [New York, New York] with all the people in the article. John and I had a conversation there. He said, "You know we're thinking about creating this fund." I said, "Well so am I!" He said, "Well we ought to get together." So literally that's what happened and, in the fall of 1997, and a year later we started--September of '98 [1998], we started UrbanAmerica. And, so it all kind of--When I look back on it, it was all you know, destiny that kind of you know, unraveled itself. And in making the decision to do--to join John it was a big decision. Because I was giving up my own company, my own name, my own freedom, to do this. But to come in with him and a lot of other you know, well recognized individuals to, do something that was bigger than all of us. And that was I think, a place of maturity for, for my part. And to get back into another corporate structure, which we have and--but to do something very large. Speaker 2: And so what--tell us about UrbanAmerica and its plans and what you know, sort of a strategic positioning. Because this is the first time that you're part of something where you were ra--you know you actually raised the funds. Speaker 1: Yes it is. Yeah. UrbanAmerica is, it's the first company of its kind. And that's historic and sad at the same time. It's a celebration and it's like, "Why?" (Laughing). But it's really the first time that, a group of people of color, came together and put together a real estate investment company to acquire institutional real estate in a number of different markets. , to really become the preeminent real estate owner in, in our urban ethnic markets. So the concept was, was once again, to, address the need and take advantage of an opportunity. The need being there is almost a trillion dollars of pent up equity, cash, in debt dollars available from, from financial institutions through the Community Reinvestment Act to put money into low to moderate income communities. In 1997, the Federal Reserve Bank, came up with a new regulation to require an investment category for the banks to put money into these markets. The banks have struggled to find qualified investments. So we created our company to be a vehicle for that. And then the--and then the thus the need we're meeting. The opportunity was there's just really good real estate deals out in these markets that we're comfortable with that we feel we could put together a large portfolio to go forward with. So that was the idea. So we got together a great group of people. Included [Kenneth] Ken Chenault, who was the president of American Express, [Richard D.] Dick Parsons of Time Warner AOL [AOL-Time Warner], [Joseph H.] Joe Flom from the Skadden Arps [Slate Meagher & Flom & Affiliates] law firm, John Utendahl, myself I mean a great group of people. Then we had to put together a terrific corporate board with, with Ed Lewis from Essence, Marcus Alexis from Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], the former president of the Federal Reserve Bank in Chicago [Illinois], he's also on the board at Teachers' Insurance [Company], Mario [L.] Baeza, from TCW Capital. Just a great group of people who proved the corporate governments to the activities. We wanted to create a company that looked like the rest of these real estate institutional advisors. It had all the components to it. So we sat out to raise 110 million dollars from financial institutions, to buy a portfolio of properties. So we started, in September of '98 [1998]. --And we've raised sixty million dollars of cash to date. We have soft circles on another fifty at this, this day here, we started buying properties last year beginning in January of 2000. We've bought sixteen properties since then. And we're buying supermarket anchored shopping centers and office buildings that are in these urban markets. 165 million dollars worth of properties and we're we look to be a billion dollar company in five years. So it's been very exciting. We operate quite a bit differently than, I think traditional investors in these markets. We once again have a very aggressive program of putting dollars back into the communities where we invest, and also bringing new goods and services into the market. So over 65% of all the vendors that we hire to work on our properties are minority owned companies that are from those communities. And, we've created over a hundred new jobs in, in the one year that we've been active. And we really see that, continuing to multiply and, and to grow. So we're bringing what's been missing in our m--communities, for many, many years. That's the unencumbered equity. To come in with the cash to do the deals. We control the deals. We hire who we want to hire. We improve the buildings. We increase security and really bring a class a environment into our markets that hasn't been there before. Story_ID: 10603 Speaker 1: In what you're doing, what do you consider--what's gonna be critical for the success? One, it's gonna be critical that you, you know raise your additional money-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: That you have. But returns are gonna be, you know critical over time. So--but there--there probably are some other factors that are gonna be important. Speaker 2: I think, some of the other, the, the factors that are important is our ability to become part of the communities that we invest in. To really become part of that fabric. So that you're accepted and everyone kind of enjoys the success of what we're doing on a--on a, a long-term basis. We've gone a long way to addressing that. I mean we have, partnerships with community development corporations, already in those markets, as well as for now getting into the development area building new product from ground up in the markets that we're investing in. We think that's a crucial part of, of what we have to do and indeed raising, contin--continuing to raise additional capitol. And I think that the general institutional market accepts us as a--as a real real estate entity that is providing very good returns on, on, on good quality assets and that we're in there for the long haul. Speaker 1: And the markets that you're focusing on? Speaker 2: They're--We're--the ones we're focused on are the densely populated, communities that tend to be African-American. At--Atlanta [Georgia], Washington, D.C., Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New York,, Detroit [Michigan], West Las Vegas [Nevada] and parts of Florida. Those are the markets that we're currently in. Speaker 1: Okay. And I had read in the literature, that you gave us that,, [Earvin] Magic Johnson also was you know, involved with a separate group. Were there other contem--it seemed like there was sort of a con--You know, he's doing the same thing you are. Or there--Well at least that's the way the articles read. Speaker 2: Yeah I--Yeah. Magic Johnson is, really an idol of mine. He s--He started this whole urban development business [Johnson Development Corporation] and business enterprises seven years ago. And, he indeed has--is starting a development fund to do projects in the urban corp. And I tell him to come on or anybody else. The more the merrier frankly. The way we look at it. He is a tenant in one of our properties in, in Florida. There's a, a Magi--a Magic Johnson Starbucks Coffee. And, we've talked to him about doing some movie theaters as well. So, there's pl--There's so much work to do in our--in our communities. We welcome any and everybody to come on in. The water's fine. Speaker 1: So if you had your s--you know, a complete idea of success, where would the company--I don't know if it's five or ten years--Where would you want to see you know, the company be UrbanAmerica in that time? Speaker 2: I think in five years I'd like to see at a--at a billion dollar company. A billion dollars worth of real estate. I'd like to see us, us--Sure. In five years that we be a, a one billion dollar, company. I'd like to see us being a dominant player in you know, six or seven key markets, key cities around the country. Where we were the controlling entity of the, the, the retail and office product in, in our communities. I'd like to see for us to be the preeminent vehicle for banks to be able to invest with to get their CRA [Community Reinvestment Act] credit, that we be a mainstay type of an institution that they can be comfortable with. That they can--they can work with, to come in and out. And I'd like to see us to be responsible for creating tens of thousands of jobs for people who otherwise would not have had the opportunity to be involved in, in commercial real estate, involved in our business. Involved in, supporting the services provided to these properties. That would be--to me would be--would be the success, of the company. And that we'd built a platform that the company could sustain itself you know, for another, another twenty, thirty years. Story_ID: 10604 Speaker 1: Why do you think you've been successful to the extent--I mean you know there's several you know, things when you listen to your story. Okay the fact that you, you know, were good at sales. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (Chuckle). Speaker 1: But that wouldn't necessarily you know, account to success. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. Speaker 1: Assuming that you know, there are a lot of people out here Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)-hmm. Speaker 1: --that have been good at sales. You know. Is luck--Did luck play a factor? You know, you have mentioned you know, God in many ways and you know. I mean what are the things that really--Were there contacts? You've not talked a lot--you know, I mean how did you make the contacts? What was the--you know, what was the environment that was sort of really girding you along in many ways? Did you come to New York and, and because you were able to--You know, were you making a lot of contacts? And those contacts moved you forward? That's what I'm-- Speaker 2: Yeah. The--sure. I think, a combination of all those things. The success that I've enjoyed has, come from, a lot--a couple different areas. One, I totally give all the glory to God. He really laid this all out for me, created opportunities and I've been a person that's gone--walked through the doors. I don't just look at the door. I've walked through them. Along the way there's certainly been a lot of individuals, that have been mentors to me, have given me, advice and guidance. My sister Adrian [Gaines] is certainly a person who has been a tremendous influence in my life, Sid Small, who she actually works with, is another person who's been a tremendous influence. I mentioned, another person that, Antreas Ghazarossian who's in the real estate business. He was the person who trained me in that, I think when looking back on it I think my father's [James McCoy] spirit and his influence that he put on me in terms of the work ethic; integrity and pulling your own weight certainly had a lot to do with it. And, I really feel we all have a destiny and a purpose and if you'll rush for it. You go for it. You, you can--you can get to it. , a lot of people say, "Well that Richmond he sure is lucky. Boy that guy steps into everything." And a gentleman said, "No Richmond is not lucky. He just makes the most of the opportunities that are presented to him." And I think that's the one thing that how've I been that successful. I think, I think that's it. I'm also a person who has always learned. I remember from the time I was a little child. I always had tremendous vision. I could look at a situation. I would see it five years down the road. Ten years down the road. Twenty years down the road. I always look at the end of the moment. And that helps a lot in the, I think in, in the decisions that you make and, try to go forward like that. I'm also a person who takes an action. , I think people--a lot of people fail because they don't move. And when they do move, they don't plan. And if you don't plan, you're gonna fail as well. So I think you need to really kind of think out what you're--what, what you're doing and where that is. And in terms of relationships, I don't have that many relationships per se. I'm not a person, that has a lot of friends. My wife says, "Where are your--where are your friends?" You know, (laughing). I mean my wife and I have been married for three years. She says, "Where are all your friends?" I have maybe four or five friends that I stay in touch with. I really have kind of just gone past a lot of people in terms of where they were, where their thought process were, what they did with their life, where they were spiritually. And not that I'm on some high plateau. Not what I'm suggesting but, I think I've been, just--I've seen--I've seen a need to move forward and I, I've taken it. I, I continually do it. I trust heavily on the--on the Lord and the Holy Spirit when I feel things. And the--When I'm uncomfortable with something, and, and I'm uncomfortable for a long time, that tells me it's time for a change. And, I don't believe that--Situations are presented to us. There's always opportunity for growth. And you have to look at it, measure it and, and, take a chance some time. Take a, take a measured change but, but, but take a chance. I think when people, met me and they get--see,, they want something done, they want something significant done, they say, "Well that Richmond I think he could do it. If we give him the tools, he could do it." And I think, that's been part of it. I think the other part is I'm a honest person. I never play around with people's money. Some one's owed money, they've earned some money, give them their money. People--So many folks mess up in that area. You have to operate with integrity. You can't have something come back around to get you. And you, you have to do that. I think I grained--gained a great reputation in, in that regard. And I think that's very, very important. And I try not to burn bridges. I've learned that the hard way too. When I was younger, I think I may have burned a few. But I don't burn 'em any more. So people are comfortable coming back to me with opportunities and ideas. And I believe in people around me becoming very, very wealthy. If you're gonna do business with me, I want you to be very, very successful and very, very wealthy. Then that's gonna come back on me. So I, I try to support people. I'm totally happy for, other people's success and accomplishments. I don't care what field they're in. I'm just totally thrilled with people accomplishing their goals and objectives. 'Cause it just makes the environment that much easier, for all of us in, in that regard. So I think those are some of the philosophical, things that, I look at and, I try to keep my priorities straight, try not to get too upset over things (chuckle). You know. Try and delegate authority. I think that's very important as an executive. , and it's a very hard thing to do. To, be able to you know; carve out an area of responsibility for capable people around you. Give it to 'em and hold them accountable, to it. But I think if you're gonna be really extremely successful, you have to be able to do that. , depends on what, what level you want to play at. I think as you go through different periods of, of your life, you, look at how hard do you want to work? What level do you want to play at? What, what do you want to accomplish. I'm re--I'm re-evaluating that myself, you know, right now. I think that it's something that you continually do, at different stages of, of your life. I'm gonna be fifty years old--in three-and-a-half years. And at that point, I've made a determination that I don't want to have to get on a plane again, unless I want to. Right now the job that I have requires for me to travel at least fifty per cent of the time. Well that's the choice I've made. I'm also making a choice at fifty that I want to be in that position. So therefore I have to make the right decisions today that'll position me financially that I won't have to do that. Shame on me if I don't. So I think, there aren't any mysteries in the world. I really don't think there are. I don't think there's anything new under the sun. I think it's all clear and obvious before us. And life is about making choices. Every moment we're making choices. (Snapping fingers). You make a choice. You make a choice. So what choices are you gonna make? And, that's, that's a good place to--a good place to live. Story_ID: 10605 Speaker 1: I've had several mentors in business. Almost all of those were, were white people. And I remembered when I started McCoy Realty Group, which is a very significant development in, in our business community, to be in that position where I was at. writing to several (laughs) prominent African American people who didn't know me per se and asking them, "Would you please provide me with some assistance? I, I have this opportunity. I don't know quite what to do with it. Would love to just come talk to you for an hour or two." And I remember [Robert] Bob Johnson took a fifteen minute call for me at one time, which was kind of him. But you know, it's a--it's a real struggle. And I think it's starting to get better. There is more communication today than there was historically. One of the s--reasons I think UrbanAmerica is being so successful is that we've been able to gather a group of people out in the field. Real estate people. African Americans that are in many different markets. And for the first time, we're actually working together. And that's never happened before. And the white community has always banked on the fact that African Americans would never work together to do--to, to accomplish something. And it's been true. So that mentality is something I think that we need to continue to work, work on and, and, and stop the old mentality of the--of the crabs in the barrel. Every other ethnic group--I've been--gotten very close to a lot of Jewish families and Jewish business people and that's just how they do business. They teach each other. They do deals together. They train their children from day one. that's what they do. I do the same with my daughter [Daryl McCoy]. I bring her, her up here into my office in the summer. She works for us. She, she, she understands the business. She understands how to get things done, how to structure deals. I've talked to her about it. And from, from the time she was a little child she has been exposed to it. And I think that'll will serve her well. Indeed my father [James McCoy] used to take me to business meetings. That's how I got the idea of one day (laughing) you know, putting on a suit and walking down Madison Avenue [New York, New York] with a--with a briefcase. So that's how, how I got the original image. So that's I think a big challenge. It's a--it's a legacy that is on us as a people. But I think we need to pick up and carry it to a higher standard in terms of helping, helping each other. And I'm seeing a lot more economic summits and conferences and ideas being shared and it's starting to happen. So you know, that, that's exciting. Indeed UrbanAmerica is a reflection of that when you had a lot of very wealthy individuals, African American leaders who wrote checks to say, "You know what? We believe in this. We're gonna put our money in it. We think you guys you know; you guys have the right team. Let's go forward together." Story_ID: 10606 Speaker 1: In terms of the real estate industry, what as an African--you know some one who's really gonna focus on the inner city and the African American community, what do you think--Obviously you see opportunities there. What do you think is gonna be critical for your success ultimately? Speaker 2: Ultimately, I think is that the economic conditions in these markets continue to improve. We, we feel very confident because there are social and economic trends that are really pushing the dollars back into our market. a couple of 'em. One is the whole idea of people commuting out in the suburbs. Just don't want to do it any more. And you can't build in the suburbs like you used to be able to. So the development impact is now back in the urban core. Where the infrastructure is there, the labor is there. Their transportation systems are there. So we think that's a very positive, positive impact. I think we have to stay on top of crime. That, that is no longer--Safety cannot be an issue. Safety is not something that's negotiable. It has to be absolutely you know, totally there. So I think those are some of the conditions. And then we're looking at the whole graying of America and the healthcare system. For the most part many of our hospitals are in the urban core and, and as, as people are getting older, they need to be near the hospitals and the--and the universities for that type of healthcare. Well that's in the urban core as well. So we think all that's working working pretty well. So we, we feel confident that the ultimate strategy is, is a good one. And that the urban market's gonna be rediscovered. People left thirty years ago and now they're coming back again. And the challenge is that some of the blacks will be able to stay. And it won't be a total, you know, switch over again. Story_ID: 10607 Speaker 1: Are there concerns that you have for our community and things that you think need to be put in place? Some people most people talk of the civil rights movement in positive terms. You know, in terms of advantages. but you know, do you have--What do you think are you know, what are your concerns or your hopes for the African American community? Speaker 2: I think a--one of my biggest concerns is, is education. At the lower levels, once you get into college, people can more or less make it, make it out. But I think the tremendous amount of African American students that don't get out of high school is devastating to us as a people. I think the prevalence of drugs is continuing to eat at the core of people's lives and of their hope and that is also a major deterrent in, in our community. That the--The drug epidemic is alive and well and growing in, in, in some ways. And so I think those are real issues. And then that the whole quality of life in terms of health care services being available in our community and, and the, the lack of information in terms of diet and the impact that that has on people's lives. It's just a whole disconnect compared to what the white society gets access to. So there's a just a continuing repetition of generational ignorance that has to be stopped. And as well as the whole access on financial information and investing and taking responsibility for your family and your own financial wellness as you go through life. There's a tremendous void of of intelligence in that regard. And we absolutely have to address that. Or there always will be a subclass in our country. And the gap will just get bigger and bigger. That will never be, never be, never bridged. Speaker 1: So do you think it will be bridged? Speaker 2: I think it's possible. Yes. Yeah. And I, I, I really think that's one of my life's missions. Really is. I love real estate. I'm really good at real estate. But I really feel that my life's purpose is to really to communicate the concepts and principals of wealth creation that I've been exposed to. in all of my experiences in Corporate America, in the institutional market with--Working with government leaders, doing things all over the world that I've gathered all this information. It's not for me. I really feel compelled that I have to find a way to share that information. And I'm and, and I'm doing it. My wife and I have started a--Well she started a new business to do that. To really distribute financial products, services and knowledge through the faith based community to bring these products into our environment. Because people are continually making the same mistakes in terms of not owning property, of having you know, credit cards and this crazy debt and just doing the same things over and over and over. Absolutely putting themselves into a dead end where they can't move forward. So I think that's something I have a tremendous passion for, that needs to be addressed. And I think that the faith-based community is probably the best vehicle to do that through. Because that is the most solid way to penetrate our communities on a--on a broad basis. Story_ID: 10608 Speaker 1: You're a person who did not finish college. And, and yet you've had tremendous success. And I would like--you know, because people come (unclear) Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Sure. Speaker 1: Of different you know, times and levels. And I would like you to, you know, say what has made Richmond, you know, McCoy successful? You know because you know, there are kids out there that may not be graduating-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Sure. Speaker 1: You know but they--you know, they may be labeled a failure. And so I'm just you know. I want you to address that. Speaker 2: I think one you have to find one thing in your life that you have a passion about. I kind of--I call it finding your center. Something that you just totally enthusiastic about. It could be a sport, it could be listening to--It could be listening to music or, or, or, or playing music. It could be writing. It could be caring for a senior person. Something that is totally light your fire. Then take that fire and apply it to a, a business venture. If that's what you want to do. That same passion that you have. Once you find that, you can take it and apply it to something else. And once you start on that course, don't ever quit. I mean that, the, the, the--I think the best thing for me that's given me the most fruit is I just won't quit. I won't listen to negative people. I won't associate with negative people. I totally have, have you know, persevered through obstacles. I just keep on going and, and, and, and keep on going. I think that's really it for me. and I think I've maximized the opportunities that have presented to me. and I tried to get really good smart people around me. People that are s--that are really good at what they do so they can complement what we're trying to do together. And you know find something that you can be, be really passionate about and, and apply it to what you're gonna do. If you want to make a lot of money, then go into a field where if you're successful, the rewards are great. If that--if that's what you want. You know, you don't necessarily open up a grocery store if you want to make millions of dollars. You want to make tens of thousands of dollars, open up a grocery store. You want to make millions of dollars? Get into you know a high trading area in, in, in, in that area. So that's it. And very often the opportunities for you to create wealth to do significant things are right in front of you. Bishop T. D. Jakes has a, a tape series he calls "It's in the house, not out in the field." Very often the, the tools and the talents and the ingredients that you, you need are right around you and, and to do that. And also don't be afraid to take a chance. And sometimes you have to leave the comfortable environment that you're in to put yourself into an uncomfortable situation where you'll be forced to kind of go to another level. And being comfortable is sometimes the worst possible place to, to, to be. Because then you're just--anything can happen. If you're moving forward, they can't catch you from behind (laughs). Story_ID: 10609 Speaker 1: And what do you think your father [James McCoy] would say if he could see you now? Speaker 2: Oh I think he'd be very pleased. He would be I hope so. I'm, I'm sure he would be. He would be thrilled. Because I think I've really tried to pick up the mantle to where he left off with the skills that he had and accomplishments that, that he had worked with in the real estate business to, to accomplish what he did at the time. Which was a tremendous amount. I think he'd be thrilled. "Go on, Rich!" You know (laughing). I'm, I'm sure. And I felt at times the he's--I, I could feel his hand on me from time to time. I really, really believe that. Story_ID: 10610 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I think that I was a pioneer that did things with, with excellence, that--and, and with integrity. And kind of blazed the--blazed the path for others to, to come behind me and some one that was fair, reasonable and you know, created, created a lot of wealth for, not just for my family but also for, for others, others around me. And some one that lived with a lot of--a lot of passion! You know? (Laughing). You if you, if you met Richmond McCoy, you going like him or not. But you know, you may love him or you hate him. But you're gonna remember him. But I think that's im--important to me that I've been able to really touch people and have an affect on people in a positive way. That's, that's my desire. Story_ID: 10611 Speaker 1: You've been married twice is that? Okay the first marriage occurred when? Speaker 2: It was in--, Speaker 1: Nineteen-- Speaker 2: 1978. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Seventy-seven. Speaker 1: Your wife's name then was-- Speaker 2: Tyra. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're married--then you were married again three years ago. Right. Okay Speaker 2: To Anna. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: My friend. Story_ID: 10612 Speaker 1: That's my brother Alan [McCoy], who's a year older than me. That's myself in the middle. And my brother Dennis [McCoy] is a year younger. And that picture was taken in 1969, I think. Yeah. Speaker 2: How old are you, you think? Speaker 1: I think I'm thirteen there, twelve or thirteen there. Speaker 2: Oh, so that's around the time your father [James McCoy] passed away. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: [Richmond McCoy with his two brothers, ca. 1969. From left to right: Alan McCoy; Richmond McCoy and Dennis McCoy. From the collection of Richmond McCoy] Story_ID: 10613 Speaker 1: That's my Mom [Dorothy Williams] on the left. Obviously that's me there. And I'm probably about nine years old there. That's my dad [James McCoy], we used to call my--James--we used to call him 'Mac,' we didn't call him 'Dad 'or 'Father,' we called him 'Mac.' And that's our, our adopted aunt, Blanche. Speaker 2: Okay. Can you do me a favor and give your mother's name--, Speaker 1: Sure--, Speaker 2: And, you know, go from left to right. Speaker 1: That's my mom, Dorothy. That's my father, 'Mac', and myself--about nine years old there. And on the right is, is a Blanche, our aunt. Speaker 2: What was Blanche's last name? Speaker 1: Taylor. Speaker 2: That was up in Poughquag, up in the--at the farm. Speaker 1: [Richmond McCoy with his mother, father and adopted aunt at the family farm in Poughquag, New York, 1963. From left to right: mother Dorothy Williams, father James McCoy, Richmond McCoy at age nine, and adopted aunt Blanche Taylor. From the collection of Richmond McCoy] Story_ID: 10614 Speaker 1: That's my daughter Daryl [McCoy], she's about three years old there. And this was in 1980. And that's myself, that's in our house in New Jersey. Speaker 2: [Richmond McCoy with his daughter, Daryl, New Jersey, 1980. From the collection of Richmond McCoy] Story_ID: 10615 Speaker 1: That's me in South Africa in 1980--excuse me--1995. Capetown, South Africa. Speaker 2: Were you on vacation? Speaker 1: No, I was down there on business. Speaker 2: Oh, so how did you like it there--, Speaker 1: Oh, I loved it. Speaker 2: I hear Capetown is beautiful. Speaker 1: Oh, unbelievable. That's at the horn, you know, that's where I was. Speaker 2: [Richmond McCoy on business in Capetown, South Africa, 1995. From the collection of Richmond McCoy] Story_ID: 10616 Speaker 1: The date on this--this was in Peru. I think it was '86 [1986], is that right? Oh, wait a minute. Ninety-six, I mean. 1996. Yeah, that's about right, yeah. This was myself in Peru in 1996. Speaker 2: And what was the purpose--what were you doing in Peru? Speaker 1: Spiritual journey. Speaker 2: [Richmond McCoy on a spiritual journey in Peru, 1996. From the collection of Richmond McCoy] Story_ID: 10617 Speaker 1: That's my wife, Anna, and myself in June of 1998 in Tampa, Florida where I was awarded an honorary Doctorate in Humane Letters for all of I've done in the faith-based community. Speaker 2: By what institution, you have to say that. Speaker 1: Sure, Destiny Bible College [Tampa, Florida]. Speaker 2: [Richmond McCoy and his wife, Anna, as he is awarded an honorary doctorate from Destiny Bible College, Tampa, Floria, 1998. From the collection of Richmond McCoy]..