 Story_ID: 11127 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. And I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: It's Frances L. Murphy II, F-R-A-N-C-E-S, and middle initial is L for Louise. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: October the 8th, 1922, here in Baltimore, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a retired journalist. I'm editor of the editorial page of the 'Afro-American' newspapers and retired publisher of the Washington [D.C.] 'Afro-American' newspapers. Story_ID: 11128 Speaker 1: Ma'am, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I don't have one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Food is food (laughter). Seriously, I don't have any. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Be strong, we are not here to play, to dream to drift. Story_ID: 11129 Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your family? Speaker 2: I guess here in this house we could go back, oh, boy, back to the 1700s, to my great-grandfather. We have an old cemetery here in the city [Baltimore, Maryland] where most of the older rel-relatives are buried. And so buried there is my grandfather and my great-grandfather, Benjamin Murphy, and my grandfather, John Murphy, right here in this city. So I guess we could really go back that far and maybe more than that, if I really did some digging. Speaker 1: Well, from what is popularly known in your family, are there any stories about your ancestors in the 1700s that have handed down, any stories about what they--how they lived or what they did? Speaker 2: My great-grandfather, Benjamin Murphy was a choir director at Bethel AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church, and I think my grandfather followed him at Bethel. My grandfather was John Murphy, of course, founder of the 'Afro-American' newspapers. And my grandmother was Martha Howard Murphy, mother of ten children, and one of the founders of the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] here in Baltimore. There are a lot of tales about both of my grandparents, but I did not know them. My--both were dead by the time I was born. Speaker 1: Okay, any stories from further back that were handed, that were passed down about ancestors and--? Speaker 2: We heard a lot about grandfather Benjamin Murphy, only because it was a argument about how many Benjamins there were. I have a nephew who is Benjamin Murphy Phillips IV, and they say, oh, no, he's the fifth and so forth. And then they would talk about Uncle Bennie or grandfather Bennie and try to explain the succession. Unfortunately, I can't tell you too many tales about them. Story_ID: 11130 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father. Can you give us his full name and date of birth please? Speaker 2: My father was called James Greenbury Murphy [Carl James Murphy], and unfortunately, off the top of my head, no I can't give you his birth, but it's in the family Bible here. My dad was a very wonderful man. I would describe him as extremely hard worker, someone who knew exactly what he wanted in life, and went after it, studying hard, very hard. He went to Howard University, as did my mother, Vashti Turley Murphy, and went on to Harvard because he could not get into Johns Hopkins. He applied to Johns Hopkins, and they turned him down because he was black. And so at the time, many of the young fellows who, even if they had a job like teaching at Howard University, worked during the summer on the railroad. And he was working one summer and there was passenger on the train, and he was talking about the fact that he wanted to go to Johns Hopkins University to get his master's and he had been turned down. And the passenger who has never been named--it's interesting, Daddy never named him, said "Well, why don't you go to Harvard?" And dad said, "I can't afford to go to Harvard." He says, "Go up there and talk to," whoever was president at the time, "Tell 'em I sent you." And he got into Harvard University, got his degree at Harvard and came on back to Howard and became head of the German department there. He was a professor of German. Speaker 1: And so he got his degree in German? Speaker 2: At--at Harvard University. And he--undergraduate degree at Howard University and master's at Harvard, and came on back to Howard to teach, became head of the department of German at Howard. My mother was in his German class. That's how they met. Speaker 1: Now, it's interesting connection to German and the German language, did he get a chance to travel to Germany? Speaker 2: He went to Germany, got called over there during the war [World War I]. And the family got together to bring him home again because he'd just gotten over there, and the war broke out, and he had to come home. And so he came on back home. But he had gone over there to study at the University of Jena, J-E-N-A, and, as I said, had to come home. Speaker 1: Now, twenty years before he was at Harvard, maybe a little longer, W. E. B. DuBois was at Harvard. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And W. E. B. DuBois, he was a student of German as well. He didn't major in German, but he was a student of German and spent a lot of time in Germany. Speaker 2: He's a--Dr. DuBois was one of our neighbors right here in Morgan Park [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They were good friends. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, so, well, now, he taught German at Howard--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and then he eventually got involved in the newspaper business. Speaker 2: About 1918. My grandfather [John Murphy] got sick or was ailing. And he asked my dad to come home and run the newspaper ['Afro-American']. So dad talked it over with my mother, and they decided that they'd come back to Baltimore. And at that time, he came back editor of the 'Afro', and then when my grandfather died in 1922, he became editor and publisher. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, what was your father like? What kind of a person was he? Speaker 2: Extremely strict, very strict. No nonsense, really no nonsense. He ran a very tight ship. The people at the 'Afro' called him 'the breeze' 'cause you never knew when he was gonna show up. He'd go through that office, and just like clockwork, he expected things to be, right on top of it, you know. And I would say to me, I was the youngest of five girls, much to his disappointment 'cause he always wanted a boy, but that was all right (laughter). He called us boy, but--. Speaker 1: Called you boy actually? Speaker 2: He called us boy, boy, boy. And maybe that's why my nickname is Frankie (laughter). And he desperately wanted a boy. But it was--he, he was just an interesting man, excellent teacher. I remember when I was going for my master's degree at Johns Hopkins, he studied right along with me, read my same books. And we talked on the phone about what we were reading. And in those days, Hopkins gave four-hour, comprehensive exams. And he studied just as if he was taking the exam himself. He enjoyed doing this, and we, as children, in this house would sit around the table and read books and talk about them. It was the kind of household that--it was a learning, always a learning household. My mother also a graduate of Howard University, and, of course, they had done a whole lot of studying together, even through courtship. Their love letters are just delightful where they talked back and forth about the books they were reading and the little, what do you call the Sunday afternoon chat sessions they were having and so forth. And so, he, he was just a good guy. Story_ID: 11131 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your mother. Can you give us her full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: She was Vashti, V-A-S-H-T-I, Turley, T-U-R-L-E-Y. Vashti Turley. Speaker 1: And when was she born and--? Speaker 2: Washington, D.C. She was born in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Do you know her birth date? Speaker 2: No, not offhand; her father worked at the government in the pension bureau. And, of course, my grandmother, Ida, was a housewife. There were, I guess four of them, and there was a epidemic in Washington. And she lost her brother and her two sisters in that epidemic. So by the time she got to go to Howard--she had attended Miner Teachers College and graduated from Miner Teachers College. And so by the time she got to go to Howard University, I think the only person left was her father. And she was teaching school, at the same time attending Howard University. And that's when she became a co-founder of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. Speaker 1: All right, now, I wanted to ask you before we go into Delta or, what does her name mean? What is, what kind of name is Vashti? Speaker 2: Vashti comes out of the Bible. And Vashti was the strong-headed queen in the Bible, and the king must have called her--I'm trying to remember the passage. I wish I'd known you were gonna ask me that. I would have looked it up again. But anyhow, there's a passage in the Bible about Vashti where the king calls her, and she refuses to come, head strong and so forth, mind of her own. And I think that's why she was named Vashti, mind of her own, very gentile, very soft spoken, but she knew exactly what she wanted. Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about the founding of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority. Now, this is a big deal, you know, this is one of the three major black sororities. Speaker 2: And one of the largest in the country today. There was a club at Howard University called AKA. And my mother was a member of the AKA club. Speaker 1: Was that associated with the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] sorority? Speaker 2: Now. Speaker 1: Oh, it started off as the AKA club. Speaker 2: AKA club, A--those were the initials, the AKA, not Greek letters, but AKA. And they evidently, according to the history, decided that one wanted to be a little more social, and the other wanted to be a little more community oriented. And so a group of the women in this AKA club branched out and decided that they wanted to be more socially ord-oriented. And they started Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, a public service sorority, Delta Sigma Theta, a public service sorority. They were the ones who marched in the suffrage parade, and they had decided that they wanted to do a little bit more than just meet and be social. And that's how Delta got started in 1913. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, suffrage was a big issue then. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Women didn't get the right to vote until 1920. Speaker 2: And they weren't allowed off the Howard University campus without a male escort. So what they had to do was get a male escort to go with them to march in the parade, but they were able to do that. Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay. This is 1913. Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, well, what kind of--well, you talked about, some about her personality on some levels. She was soft-spoken, but firm and--. Speaker 2: Gentile. Speaker 1: And a mind of her own. Speaker 2: You know, the hat and glove type in those days in Washington, very strict about things like table manners and, and modulating your voice and being able to look people straight in the eye and talk back to them. And this is the way she raised her five girls. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she was a tremendous companion to my dad [Carl James Murphy] because, of course, she was able to go with him and talk one-on-one with the people as they traveled all over the place. And she was very well read, and so it was interesting to watch the two of them work together. He would write his editorials, and run them past--or he'll say, listen, I'm gonna to do an editorial on so and so. In those days, we didn't have internet to be able to go up on the internet and do your research. So she would do some of the research and read some of the books that he brought home for it. And the two of them would sit up and discuss the things that were going on during that day, as we sat and listened. And then he'd go off and write his editorials, very quietly. Story_ID: 11132 Speaker 1: And growing up in that house in this kind of environment must have been fascinating? Speaker 2: It was. You know you--when you grow up in that kind of environment, you really just take it for granted that this is what's going on, that coming in and out of this door were people of all different statures, from President John Kennedy to Dr. [W. E. B.] DuBois to all the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] heads to Thurgood Marshall, they were in and out of the house. Dad [Carl James Murphy] had what was called breakfast meetings. And he invited people here to the house to try to mend fences, to get people to, you know, work together. And in about 1935, his brother, George Murphy, was working with the NAACP, but it was lagging. And so Dad went in and put his money into it to get it back together again. And he called all the people together here, the Walter Whites and so forth, to sit down and talk about it. And what they said they needed was money. So Dad became the chairman of that committee to raise the money across the country by picking up the phone, and saying I need money for this case. I need money for the--this case is going before the Supreme Court. I got a bunch of kids down here in Mississippi in jail. I need money for that. And all across the country, the money was raised and brought to this house and put downstairs in the safe. And when it was needed, the cash was sent by a white person to the South to bail the kids out. It, it--and as I look back on it now, I'm saying to myself, all this was going on right underneath my nose. I knew it was going on, but it wasn't as significant as it is to me now. As I look back and see what they were able to do and what he was able to do, I'm saying, why can't we do better? They were able to do it with just a telephone call or 'I need' and 'can you do this' and so forth. And he was able to tap the leadership across the country to help. Speaker 1: Now, is this the beginning of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund? Speaker 2: Legal Defense Fund, he was chairman of the Legal Defense Fund. Yeah, and I can almost hear Thurgood Marshall here talking about the case, separate but equal doctrine and how they felt that that wasn't enough; that they had to do better than that and so forth. 'Plessy v. Ferguson', those different cases came through this house or were talked about. Dad wrote the editorials about 'em or, or, or wrote the news stories about 'em in both cases and got a lot of heat, got a lot of heat for it. But at the same time, he stood his ground. Story_ID: 11133 Speaker 1: You were one of five sisters? Speaker 2: Of five girls. I'm the youngest of five. Speaker 1: Can you reflect back on growing up and give us some idea of some of the sights and sounds and the smells of growing up, right here in this house? Speaker 2: Growing up in this house, now that I look back on it, was just fantastic. Here we were in this small community called Morgan Park [Baltimore, Maryland], across from Morgan State College as it was called then, surrounded by white people who hated our guts. Can you imagine that? So we walked back and forth from the car barn because we couldn't go to the schools in the area. So we had to go to East Baltimore. This is East Baltimore, we're on the eastern side. We had to go all the way by trolley to elementary school and to junior high school because we had to pass all these schools to get to a black school. There was--we're half a mile from the car barn and there're five of us. The older girls, of course, were beyond me. They had gone on, my two twin sisters, of course, were my protectors. I had a sister by the name of Vashti who was really my protector, (laughter) all the way through school. She was enough to handle anybody who came after us. Mom [Vashti Turley Murphy], many times would meet us at the car barn and drive us up the place, fifteen--ten, fifteen minute walk. But for our own protection, when things were--we would tell her when things were calling us nigger, as we came up the street, you know, and Mom would come down and sort of meet us. And things would quiet down for a while--oh, they'd set their dogs on us and so forth and so on. So it was interesting as children. Once we got into this little Morgan Park, we considered ourselves safe. We stayed mostly in our segregated community, went away in the summer to--early when we were children, up to the family home in Gaithersburg [Maryland], and then as I got about eight or nine, off to Camp Atwater every summer in East Brookfield, Massachusetts. And as I say, it was a pretty closed society. All of my mother's friends were my teachers. The doctor we went to, the lawyer, the ministers all lived in our own area, and so we stayed pretty well to ourselves. We stayed pretty segregated. And ten to one would have gone to segregated schools or, all of our lives if Morgan had been able to supply us with journalism courses. Story_ID: 11134 Speaker 1: But what happened, and when we hit college, at the college level, my sisters then applied for the University of Maryland, and they wouldn't let 'em in. And so he went to the governor and between the governor and my dad [Carl James Murphy], they worked out a scholarship fund. And any young black graduate of a high school--we only had two at that time, in my older sister's time, only one, who could ask to take a course that was not offered at Morgan [State College], we went away to college, four years, full tuition paid, room and board and two trips home. It was paid by the state of Maryland. So most of my high school class went away to college on the state of Maryland. Speaker 2: The state of Maryland was paying a high price for segregation, was it not? Speaker 1: Wasn't it something? Can you imagine, three of us went to the University of Wisconsin on the state of Maryland. Listen to what I'm telling you. My sister went to the University of Minnesota on the state of Maryland. And a lot of my classmates went every place on the state of Maryland. Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute, now--I could imagine that some--. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, they didn't wake up for years. It was years after I graduated from Wisconsin, they finally woke up (laughter). Speaker 2: Some white students were probably thinking, I can't go to the University of Wisconsin. Speaker 1: I can't go--. Speaker 2: But these people I'm calling nigger, can go on the state. Speaker 1: Because, because, 'cause they can't go to the University of Maryland (laughter). Well, you know, and through the years, I've often laughed about it because I've told people I got a--in those days, the University of Maryland was a little dinky school, you know. And I mean it wasn't really accredited as high as it is now. Wisconsin was the, one of the Big Ten [Conference], and the second top journalism school in the country, which means that we went to the top journalism school in the country to get our degree in journalism, all three of us, because we couldn't go to the University of Maryland. And we left here by train, paid for by the state of Maryland to Chicago and transferred from Chicago going up to Madison, and then back home again once or twice a year. And all Dad had to do was give us an allowance as if, just as if we were home. And that's what he did for four of his daughters, for four years of college; just delightful (laughter). We enjoyed it (laughter). Story_ID: 11135 Speaker 1: Now, just to back track a little bit about--I want to talk about grade school and high school here in Baltimore. Now, what grade school did you attend? Speaker 2: Well, early on, I went to School 112, which was my, my uncle George V. Murphy was principal. That's when we--I think--. Speaker 1: That one had another name, was it Elliott School or something. Was that the same one? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. I called it School 112. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then my dad [Carl James Murphy] transferred us because it was easier for him to get us into the East Baltimore 'cause my two older sisters finally had gone on to junior high school. He transferred me to school over in East Baltimore, and the principal was, I think his name was Clarence Gross. He was a, he was a tremendous man. And then I--from there I went to Dunbar Junior High School. Oh, that was just wonderful. You can imagine many of our teachers had their master's degrees and Ph.D.'s and it was segregated schools, so the only place they could teach was in black schools. So they went away to school and earned their master's and doctorates and came right back here to teach. And I had some tremendous teachers, Kato Anderson, Carrington Davis, the Wharton family, Pauline Wharton and Hermione Wharton and Constantia Wharton, became Jackson, and Pauline Wharton. Oh, I, I really had some tremendous teachers, and I look back on my teachers, and how they were able to help us and so forth. Then I, when I graduated from Dunbar Junior High School--I was valedictorian of my class, I went on to Douglass High School, uptown, only because Douglass High School was accredited at that time because of the many graduates that it sent on to college. Dunbar was brand new. I would have been in the first graduating class of Dunbar Senior High if I had stayed. And dad didn't want to take a chance of me having to, you know, having us to fight to get into any of the colleges cause at that point Dunbar didn't have enough graduates to become accredited. So we went to Douglass. Speaker 1: Okay, the Dunbar started off as a junior high school? Speaker 2: Junior high and then became a senior--. Speaker 1: Sort of grew into a--. Speaker 2: --to a senior high. So my class was the first one into senior high school. Speaker 1: Was Frederick Douglass the first black high school in Baltimore? Speaker 2: Yes. And there was a, there was a Carver Vocational School and Douglass High School, and which, we look back on now was to our advantage cause we--because there were only two schools, and we knew every single black person in the city. So whoever went on to medical school, law school, became a teacher or anything, we knew them all. Talk about a closed community, we didn't realize how fortunate we were at that time because we knew every single person. All you had to do was say I came out of high school in Baltimore, and we knew, either Douglass or Carver. If you came out of Carver, you didn't, you didn't go on to school, to college. Ten to one, you went on to a trade school. If you went on, came out of Douglass, ten to one, you went on to college. Story_ID: 11136 Speaker 1: When you were a little girl, what kind of a little girl were you? What did you enjoy doing? Speaker 2: I had five sisters--I mean four sisters, as you heard me say. And as a little girl, I must have been fairly quiet. I must have read a lot. And being the baby in a large family, you get taken with your parents a lot. And so I went with my parents a whole lot because the two older girls had somebody to go with. The twins had somebody to go with. That left me as the, as the single one, and so I got picked up and taken (laughter), every place Mom [Vashti Turley Murphy] and Dad [Carl James Murphy] went. And my mother was a busy person. She was always doing something. She was working for the Cheltenham School. She was working for these kids over here. She was working for the unwed mothers. She was doing this, that and the other. Mother was always doing something, or she had her ladies here to play bridge. Or they played canasta. And that's how I learned to play bridge, sitting in because somebody was late coming to (unclear). But my mother was a very, very busy person and wonderful person. So I guess as a child, I could say that I must have been fairly quiet. And my father used to say, very easy to get along with because once they had disciplined the older children, I had sense enough to know I wasn't gonna do that. So he didn't have any trouble with me (laughter), none at all. And I, I think as a child, I, I must have been too goody-goody. Maybe that's why I'm having such a good time now (laughter). Story_ID: 11137 Speaker 1: When you were in high school, what activities were you involved in? Speaker 2: Let's see, in high school, let's see, I was in the rifle club. We had a rifle club. I was in the Mask and Wit, which was the drama club. I was on the volleyball team. I was in the French club, the Latin, so very, very busy in high school. Speaker 1: We're gonna pause a second here, but rifle club? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I've never heard of a high school with a rifle club. And--. Speaker 2: We had rifles, which we took back and forth to school in cases slung over our shoulder. And we went to the armory right down here in Baltimore on Howard Street and, what's the name of the other street? Anyhow, right here on Howard Street, had competition, and we had a good rifle club. I was a good marksman. Speaker 1: I have never heard of that before--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in a school and then in a black school. I seems like the school administration with their-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, we had a rifle club. Speaker 1: --with their fear of black people would be afraid to have a rifle club in Douglass High School. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Well, we did, and it's interesting. My dad [Carl James Murphy] slept with a pistol under his pillow because of the times, but people talk about gun control today. None of us would have dared to cuss, and I can remember my mother [Vashti Turley Murphy] saying, when you make up the bed, hold the gun this way, and don't forget to put it right back the way you see it, which I would put it right back under the pillow where it was. We had help, but, of course, each girl here had duties at the same time. And my dad slept with a gun under his pillow as long as I can remember; had a gun in his car and one under his pillow. Speaker 1: Now, suppose--did he ever discuss why--I suppose he felt threatened, I guess, or, or--. Speaker 2: Well, yes, he would--was threatened. He was, he was quite threatened, and these were tough times. We, as children, weren't as aware of it as they must have been. And then don't forget too that where we lived wasn't all that built up. And so there was a rifle which Dad would go and shoot the rabbits and, you know, things, ran on out the back, you know. But guns were here. And nobody paid any attention to them. But you knew they were here, and I learned early how to handle one safely. Story_ID: 11138 Speaker 1: Now, what kind of student were you in school? Speaker 2: Honor student, very good student. And as you say--you heard me say, I read a lot. And I was one of those who liked school. I liked my teachers, and I had a good time in school. Speaker 1: What was your favorite reading material, your favorite authors? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's interesting, but whatever books my father [Carl James Murphy] brought home. When we were children, we used to read the books, 'Up the Down Staircase', and Mother [Vashti Turley Murphy] started off early reading 'Up the Down Stairs--Staircase', and we would discuss those. But as we got older, I guess I'd have to say to you that many of the black authors that we read very, very early, only because those were the books, only the books that Daddy brought home. And when a new book came in, he'd put it down after he finished with it. And we'd pick it up. My sister, Ida, and my sister Carletta, and myself, we were fairly all, fairly good readers and enjoyed reading. And we would just pick up the books and read them. We would enjoy--remember now, there was no television in our younger days, and so therefore, you listened to the radio, 'Burt and Marge', and then you read or you played outside. And so, therefore, we had a lot of quiet time, a lot of reading. So you talk about favorite authors, I can't think of any one particular author, but I can think of a lot of books that we read along the way. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite book? Speaker 2: Ha! You know, no, no. I don't think so. And I'm thinking of some of the recent ones I've read. I just finished reading Paul Emery's (ph.) book, and my niece, Vashti, has some, just tremendous books, Bishop Vashti McKenzie. She has some tremendous books. But here again, it's not a matter of favorite. It's what catches my eye when I sit down and pick up off the shelf. Speaker 1: Is there any particular work that has really made a big impact on you, historically, at a certain period of time when you read it, that kind of defined a period of time? Speaker 2: That would define a period of time? The poetry by Paul Laurence Dunbar. Speaker 1: Did you read that a lot in high school? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you know how it is. We all quote the poem that he talks about Baltimore and how, you know, at the end he talks about that, that, and such. You know, it's funny, I guess maybe I have to honestly say to you, no. Speaker 1: Oh, the Langston Hughes poem you're talking about--. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: --in old Baltimore, and--. Speaker 2: But, no, no. And that's funny too, for someone who does as much reading as I do, I can't really tell you that there's any one particular thing that I would really say that I really liked. Speaker 1: Now, did you all read 'The Crisis' a lot in your household? Speaker 2: Oh, the magazine? Yes. 'The Crisis' is here. I used to be on the board of director of the National Board of the NAACP and also on 'The Crisis' board. But in the days that--the early days that you're talking about, when [W. E. B.] DuBois, Dr. DuBois was editor of 'The Crisis', and then, of course, during Roy Wilkins's time and so forth, that was the key way of keeping up with what was going on across the country, except, of course, for the 'Afro-American' newspapers, 'The Crisis' was very welcome and still is. It still, I still have it here on the table. Speaker 1: Now, did you--I suppose you saw some of the other publications from around the country come through. The 'Afro-American' was widely distributed--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So was the 'Chicago Defender'--. Speaker 2: 'Pittsburgh Courier'. Speaker 1: 'Pittsburgh Courier', right. Speaker 2: There's some brand new young people who are out there. I've just finished looking at Atlanta--'Atlanta Magazine', published by young George Lattee (ph.) and his wife down in Atlanta. There are a lot of new ones all over the country. The National Newspaper Publishers Association has about 200 publications that--publishers as members. And they're getting ready to have a convention here in Baltimore. Yeah, but there are a lot of them, all throughout the country now and doing very well. Story_ID: 11139 Speaker 1: Okay, well, when you were on the verge of graduating from high school, did you know exactly what you wanted to do? Speaker 2: My high school yearbook in there says that I want to be a journalist (laughter). That's what it says; says I'm going to be a journalist and that I wanted to travel, and I wanted to be a journalist. Speaker 1: Okay, now, are you what people would call a daddy's girl when you were coming up in terms of--. Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laugher). Speaker 2: And I enjoyed being a daddy's girl. I used to go to my dad's [Carl James Murphy] office, and sit in on his meetings. And after the meeting was over, he'd ask me what I thought about it, whether or not--and he expected me to be able to discuss the meeting with him back and forth. And we'd come home and to--me to tell mother [Vashti Turley Murphy] exactly went on at the meeting, and to take notes. And to so, that's what I did. If he had a big meeting going on--he had these big political meetings where he brought all the black people in town together to decide on who the candidate was going to be to run for this and who was gonna run for that and so forth. In those days, they got together and decided all the different factions, and they'd fight and fuss, but the got it together. And then they'd put up one candidate, and, of course, we'd, we would single shoot too (laughter), and only vote for that one candidate. But he had these political meetings with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and all the different leaders in town. And they'd thrash it out, and they'd come out with a couple of candidates. Speaker 1: And this is serious business too and how, as you said, they'd come to one accord--. Speaker 2: One accord. Speaker 1: --and the black community would try to vote the same way because we had similar interests, right? Speaker 2: Everybody--we had the similar interests--it was important in those days to understand that you had to have an idea of getting the person in office, that you couldn't get 'em in office unless everyone pulled together. And we weren't the majority in those days. And so therefore, unless you pulled together, you weren't gonna get anybody on the ballot. And people, ethnic groups do that today. We have lost the knack of doing it, but other groups are doing it today. That's why you see these other candidates coming along and getting in. But I, I think it's extremely important for people to remember that if you don't know how to handle politics, you done lost. The political arena and the business arena are two of the most important things for our survival. And we're going to have to go back to the old ways of doing things. Speaker 1: I had something else in regards to that--oh, in terms of political allegiance, I suppose you can probably remember when the black community switched from a Republican allegiance to a Democratic allegiance--. Speaker 2: And back and forth. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Back and forth, because we supported--I remember one of, one of the Republican candidates. I remember that the 'Afro [American'] did not really support Franklin Delano Roosevelt when he ran the first time. But, of course, they supported him on the second time he ran. [Theodore] McKeldin, [Thomas] D'Alesandro [Jr.], I can think of some of those in the past years that we may or may not have supported. And the 'Afro' was independent and said so. It said, you know, we're looking for the best candidate for us. He could be a Republican or a Democrat. We're looking for the best candidate who's gonna help the black community. And there've been some good black ones and some good white ones, and some bad ones on both sides of the fence. Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about the--now, when you graduated, were you the valedictorian or something--? Speaker 2: Valedictorian, no, no, no, not of high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But in, but junior high school, yes, I was--I don't remember. I was an honor student coming out of high school, but no, I may have been fifth, sixth or seventh, something down there. Speaker 1: And when you were in high school, you were editor of the school paper? Speaker 2: Yeah, worked on the school paper, and a lot of things, a lot of things in high school. I was 'Ms. Douglass', which was fun (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, yeah, now, that's quite a combination. Now, you're, you're an honor student and you're a talented editor, and then you become 'Ms. Douglass'. Speaker 2: Well, you run for it. It was a little elected thing, and you run for it. And it was fun (laughter), yeah. And I had a lot of friends in high school. In fact, my high school [Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland] class still meets once a month. We meet for lunch once a month. Speaker 1: And you graduated in--? Speaker 2: 1940 from high--. Speaker 1: 1940, now, you were, that's--you were what? Sixteen? Speaker 2: Sixteen or seventeen, yeah, cause I'm eighty now, yeah. Story_ID: 11140 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the University of Wisconsin [Madison]. What was that like? You went all the way there. That's a long way from Baltimore. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well--. Speaker 1: Madison. Speaker 2: --let me just say first of all that I went well prepared. I came out of [Frederick] Douglass [High School], as you heard me say, an honor student. And I had an English teacher named Ms. Josie Stevens. And Ms. Josie Stevens wanted to make sure that I had no rough edges going to Wisconsin. So she spent the summer with me, tutoring me, getting me ready for the entrance exams at Wisconsin, which I sailed through because of her; may have done it anyhow, but I mean, with that extra help, I was very confident when I took those exams. And when I got to Wisconsin, I had two sisters who had already, who were--one sister who was still there, Carletta, and she's married now and up in Buffalo. She's lived in Buffalo most of her adult life. And my other sister, Ida Murphy Peters, who was just--oh, she was so smart (laughter). She really led the way for us. She, she was a honor student at Wisconsin. She was into everything. And she was just excellent in journalism school. She was into advertising, public relations, promotions and so forth. And she did very well at Wisconsin. So then my second sister comes along, who is also equally smart (laughter), and did very well. And then here I come with an idea that I'm gonna have fun (laughter). And I didn't settle down till the second semester. I didn't settle down till then, but once I settled down I was okay, and made honors. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's not wild, I guess, you settled down the second semester. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I settled down. Well, I settled down the second semester 'cause my dad [Carl James Murphy] cut off my allowance (laughter) and kept me out of Chicago 'cause I would go back and forth to Chicago every weekend, 'cause as far as I was concerned, Madison was not the place to be for me. Here, you take me from this segregated society and put me up at Madison, Wisconsin, where there's six black girls and thirty-six fellows, thirty-six fellows and six girls. So, of course, I had a friend from Chicago, and I had a cousin in Chicago who said, come on down. So we, we'd go to Chicago. So once I settled down and stayed in Madison, it was okay. Speaker 1: Okay, so, yeah, so the--and that's really--there weren't many black students compared to the rest of the population--? Speaker 2: There weren't many blacks in the whole city--. Speaker 1: In the whole city of Madison. Speaker 2: --until the war [World War II] broke out. And then after the war broke out, oh, my goodness, they--I was in the dormitory in my first two years, yes. And then the war came, and they put us out the dormitories. Then we had to find housing other places 'cause the sailors took over the dorms. And then, of course, we were flooded. There were just gobs of black folks everywhere during the war. Speaker 1: In what capacity where they around, I mean what--? Speaker 2: They were in officers' training, many of them were in officers' training school there. And, of course, Wisconsin is right on the lake, right on water. So, of course, it'd be natural, there would be a big Navy base there and so forth. And the campus was ideal for, for the--for them to have a, a camp. So, so we, we got through the war and then came on home and went to work. Story_ID: 11141 Speaker 1: So you were there [the University of Wisconsin, Madison] all during the war [World War II]? Speaker 2: No, the last--I was two years, two years, two years. And then, and then when I came home to, and went to work at the 'Afro' full time, most of the men had gone. Most of the men had either gone over as war correspondents or in the army or in the Navy or the Marines. And the women took over the editorial department. They called us the mosquito patrol, 'cause we were little (laughter), in those days. But during wartime, there were mostly women working at the 'Afro'. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, did the editorial policy change any because women were involved? Speaker 2: No, women had been involved all along. The 'Afro' was one of the few places that I can imagine in the really early days that you'd see the imprint of women. My grandfather [John Murphy] had ten children, five girls and five boys. And he left the 'Afro-American' newspapers equally to his children, girls and boys. Nobody got any more than anybody else, which means that they had a fairly good control of the company early on. And so where in many places you'd see only women doing the society in those early days, they were out covering things and doing things and writing columns. My aunts, who worked, even though they were school teachers, and who worked at the 'Afro' during the summer, were doing just what everybody else is doing. When we came along, and when I came along, I graduated in 1944 from Wisconsin and came back to the 'Afro'. Already there was one of my former classmates who graduated maybe the year ahead of me. Her name was Audrey Weaver and Audrey was covering every beat that I can imagine. My sister, Betty Moss, Betty--she was Betty Phillips then, was the editor, the city editor. And no, there was no difference between men or women there. My sister, Vashti was working on the composing room floor, and then those were the days of hot type and so forth and so on, where you know, you had the hot metal and stuff. So, no, women were everywhere in the 'Afro' then. And I think maybe because of the way my grandfather handled things. And as you heard me say earlier, my dad [Carl James Murphy] called us boys. He expected us to be able to do a little bit of everything (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, well, and how did you like working for the 'Afro' when you came back from the University of Wisconsin? Speaker 2: I grew up working in the 'Afro'. From the time I was in kindergarten--I'll never forget it, and I think I've told this tale a hundred times. I wrote a letter to Santa Claus and gave it to my mother [Vashti Turley Murphy] and dad, and the next thing I knew it was in the 'Afro'. It was my first publication (laughter). And I, oh, I was, I was just so embarrassed 'cause, of course, I--kindergarten, I didn't believe in Santa Claus, but dad insisted, and if you wanted something for Christmas, you write a letter to Santa Claus. And so he published that. And off and on, I was always at the 'Afro'. Story_ID: 11142 Speaker 1: So I came up through the ranks [at the 'Afro-American']. I started off in what was called 'the morgue' in those days, the library, filing and so forth. And then I moved on up--by the time I was out of college, 'cause I worked every summer at the 'Afro'. And I moved on up to the magazine that we had at that time, and then on to the city desk. And then to editor of the Richmond 'Afro American', and then up to editor of the Washington 'Afro American' and then back home on the city desk. And then I decided--I had three children by then, and I got a divorce, and so I--at my dad [Carl James Murphy] and mom's [Vashti Turley Murphy] insistence, they suggested I go back to school and take education and teach. And so I taught for a while. And while I was teaching, I went on and got my master's at Johns Hopkins [University], and taught at Morgan [State College] after that--no, taught elementary school, and then taught at Morgan. And then the--my dad died. And the 'Afro' asked me to come in as chairman of the board, and I went in as chairman of the board. And I must have stayed three or four years as chairman of the board. And I decided that was enough. And then I left--I got married again and moved on to Buffalo, where I taught at the State University College of Buffalo [now State University of New York at Buffalo]. And stayed there until my sabbatical year, which must have been my seventh or eighth year, and decided to take sabbatical and come back and sort my dad's papers out. And at the same time I was doing that, Howard University offered me a job. So I brought the papers to Howard and began--I had ninety-five boxes of my father's letters, and I decided to sort them out. And I did that for a while, while I stayed at Howard. I must have stayed at Howard nine or ten years. And while I was at Howard--. Speaker 2: So you taught journalism at Howard? Speaker 1: Taught journalism at Howard. I was head of the journalism sequence at Buffalo. We started that sequence up there at Buffalo. And then I came down and taught at Howard, and then Art Carter, who was head of the--publisher of the Washington 'Afro-American' newspapers died, and they asked me to come and, and take over as publisher of the Washington 'Afro'. Speaker 2: Now, can we catch up all the years here. Now, when you were at Howard, when did you get to Howard? About what time? Speaker 1: I'd have to look at dates. Dates are not one of my strong points, but--(laughter). Speaker 2: Was that in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 1: Yeah, it must have been in the late '70s [1970s], yes, 'cause I think about '86 [1986]--it must have been late, 'cause about '86 [1986] I took--we went on, I went in as, as publisher of the Washington 'Afro', okay, I really need to get those dates straight. Speaker 2: Now, was Sam Yette at Howard when you were there? Speaker 1: Sam had just left. Sam Yette just left, yeah, he, he, he's great. He's a great, Sam's great. I'm trying to think who was there when I got there at Howard. It'll come to me. Speaker 2: Journalism department? Speaker 1: Who was chair of the department? I don't know. Speaker 2: Was Frances Ward there? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, but, well, Howard University at any time period is exciting. So, I mean, I don't know--what was going on--. Speaker 1: I think really when I came to Howard, they were building, building the department of Communications. The department was in the old Freedman's Hospital. And it was at that building stage where they're changing from typewriters to computers. The--of course, 'Hilltop' was still going strong. They had a community newspaper within the department, which I worked with for a while. And they were building the journalism sequence. We had a good time. I taught one of the mandatory courses. And some tremendous students came through. I can hear them now complaining that they had to take my required course 'cause I was known as a tough, but fair, teacher, very tough, but very fair. And so, yeah, I, I look back on my Howard years now, and they were good years. They were good years. So was Buffalo, the State University College at Buffalo. But they they're two different worlds. Howard is a, more of a departmental college where the departments know each other, but you don't know the overall faculty. And Buffalo State College, it's small enough for you to know everybody in every department. And so your committees are more college wide, and you get to know everyone in the various departments. And I don't say that facetiously. It's just the way Howard is. For instance, unless I knew the people in medical school before I got there, I would not necessarily know who was there, unless I did a story on them. I would not know necessarily, the people over in the music or the arts or any of those unless I was out there doing stories on them, whereas at Buffalo State College, you couldn't miss 'em because Buffalo was small enough to--they were in your group, and everyone went to the president's house together, you know, faculty and department heads and everything. And you got to know everyone. It was more of a home-like atmosphere at Buffalo than it was at Howard. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That--putting it nicely. Speaker 2: All right, so you were at Howard for how long? Speaker 1: Almost, ten years. Speaker 2: For ten years? All right, and you left in what year? Speaker 1: I left in '92 [1992]. Howard was cutting back its faculty, and it did, it did a tremendous service for me. It offered us a easy out, where they gave you a lump sum of money and medical and dental insurance--insurance for the rest of your life. And at eighty years old, that's the best thing I could have (laughter). It was a wonderful, wonderful retirement package. Your retirement monetary was small through the months, but that medical and dental insurance is just out of sight. So I retired from Buffalo State, and I retired from Howard. So the two retirements have been very nice. Speaker 2: So when you retired from Howard, did you work full time from there? Speaker 1: 'Afro'. I went full time for the 'Afro'. Story_ID: 11143 Speaker 1: What have been some of the highlights of the history of the 'Afro [American]' since you've been, you know, intimately involved with it? I mean when you got out of school and started working there, what were some of the--what are some of the stories and situations and, I guess, writers, I guess? Speaker 2: I go back a long ways. I remember William Gibson, men like that, strong men, Dr.--Mr. [William N.] Jones. My sister, Betty [Phillips Moss] and my sister, Ida [Murphy Peters]. These were great newspaper people. [Cliff] McKay, Mr. McKay and his wife. As I look back on the people who've come through the 'Afro', and Sam Lacy who just died--. Speaker 1: In the sports--. Speaker 2: Oh, Sam--many people think of Sam just as sports, but to me Sam was an all-around newspaper man. When I came as chairman of the board, I leaned a lot on Sam because he knew so much. Sam was a perfectionist. And it was very easy to say to Sam, "Take a look at this and let me know what you think about it." And he would, frankly say, "Oh, that's no good" or "Gee, that's great stuff." And, oh, he'd maybe change a little sentence or two just--as we call it, did a tweaking to it, and it, it became first class. He had the ability to go down on the production floor and speak very quietly and settle things down if there was a little disturbance there. Certainly, we had other people who's job was to do that, but if I had whispered to Sam to take a stroll down on the second floor (laughter), Sam would go down and sort of see what was going on and quiet it down and come back and say everything's okay, everything's okay. And so to a lot of people he was just the sports man or the sports editor, but to me, he was just a great guy who was just all around, and a lot of love for the 'Afro', so he helped us out in a whole lot of different ways. Speaker 1: Sounds like he was the dean of the paper or something. Speaker 2: Oh, he was. He was a dean in his own right. And you could pretty well run things by Sam to see if this is the way they should be. And I'd think about an editorial that maybe I'm getting ready to write, and I'd write it, and I'd say, "Hey, Sam, what do you think of this?" And he'd say, "I don't know. That might not be the right angle, but let's look at it another way." And I may go back and rewrite the whole thing for one of Sam's little comments and so forth. And he was--in the earlier days, he was great in a battle with my dad [Carl James Murphy]. And my dad had a office where you went down a couple of steps to his office. And Sam would come up those steps, and his desk was right there. And I'd say, "Did you win?" He'd say, "Not this time." Well, next time, "Hey, I got him this time" (laughter). They were always back and forth about how things should go and so forth. So, so there were some great guys like that. Speaker 1: Did they argue along--did they have like certain lines they'd usually take and argue--how things should be done? Speaker 2: And how things should be done and why they should be done that way. During the fighting period, which I can of the 'Afro', there was a lot of different things that had to be settled. And let me see if I can make you understand what I mean. Say for instance, there was a bill coming before the city council. And, what we were fighting in those days were these clauses that kept blacks out of the neighborhood, restrictive clauses and so forth. And then you'd have to sit down and figure how to make it make sense to the average, everyday person. This is what you were doing. And you didn't want to make it so far out of reach and too complicated that people didn't understand the legal language and so forth. You wanted them to understand what the problem was, right--hit 'em over the head with it, and then make sure they understood why it was wrong. And many of the things that we did in segregated times, people didn't think it was wrong. It was the way things were done and so, what do you want to change them for? I'm comfortable. You heard me say, we were comfortable in our segregated society, but that didn't make it right. That didn't make it right, and you had to convince people, that doesn't make it right, that the fact that you don't have everything that you have--should have in this school, and you're--even though you're comfortable with it, doesn't make it right. And so for, over and over again, this is what we were trying to make people understand, that you're entitled to a fair share of what's here in America like everybody else. And once that's done, then you can do what you want to. It's the same argument we had about the young woman who wanted to play golf in the male tournament. If she can qualify, let her play. But if she can't, then she can't play. And so what we're saying is level that field, and then let's go ahead and everybody have a right to do what you can do. But in order to write that--it's easy to say it, and people hear it when you say it. But you--it's a little more difficult to write and get the language flowing so that the average, everyday, seventh, eighth grader can understand where you're coming from. Story_ID: 11144 Speaker 1: Tell us about that Sweden story. Now, this is what? Speaker 2: Well, what happened was that this was during the time, it must have been in the '70s [1970s]. And the United States was having difficulty with the impression it was giving the world about how, the treatment of blacks. And so they came up with this nice, bright idea to send a bunch of us editors over to Sweden to do some lectures. And I had, I took my young daughter with me. And we went to Sweden. [Jerome] 'Brud' Holland was the ambassador to Sweden at the time. And, of course, he had us going around lecturing to people on relations of the, of the, of blacks in the United States. Unfortunately, even though they briefed me every morning on what I was supposed to say, I had to say what was really the truth about the, the situation in the United States. And the people appreciated hearing both sides. I would do a lecture saying, you know, that, that there's some, a lot of good things here in the United States. But this is actually what is going on here at that time. And then they invited my--I said I took my young daughter with me who was a high school student. And she was invited by the youth to speak. And Susan [Murphy] was extremely outspoken. And she told them exactly what she felt about how things were, that she felt that blacks were being treated very unfairly and that the United States had yet to, to recognize the fact that we were people. And, and that was an interesting way of putting it, that she felt very strongly that the day would come one day that the United States would wake up and realize it was, had lost a lot of talent, of its own talent because its citizens weren't treated fairly. So those were interesting days. Speaker 1: Now, did you get any negative feedback from the statements made there? Speaker 2: Not rigid feedback, but they--there was an effort to rein us in. They, they increased their briefings in the morning before we went out, but other than that, I think--I was very firm on the fact that you brought me over here to tell people what it was like in the United States, and I can't do otherwise but to tell it exactly the way it is. Speaker 1: Okay, now, there's another thing we were discussing--. Speaker 2: I also went, also to the Soviet Union on one of those tours just like that. This time, we went with a group of publishers and not just a couple of us, and went all over the Soviet Union. And that was an interesting trip too because we were able to go into the schools and so forth and really see the Soviet Union as it was. We were invited by the Soviet government to come on this tour. Here, again, as a follow up from going to Sweden, they got the idea, well, hey, let's let them come over here and see what we're like. And so they invited us over there to be their guests and to take us around because those were the days when they were saying how terrible the Soviet Union was, how it didn't have this and how they didn't have that. And this was just a great trip because they told--took us all over the Soviet Union, from one end to Uzbekistan where we had a chance to see the moors and so forth, and, and that was a really great trip. We got a deep appreciation for how hard those people worked, how, really how tight the security and everything was. In the hotel where we stayed, there were people on each floor. They weren't too particular about us checking into the American embassy, but we did anyhow because we had learned that you were--when you're going to a foreign country, it's always best to do that. But this was interesting, this was interesting. Story_ID: 11145 Speaker 1: I think there were two politicians we mentioned off camera. One is Marion Francis Barry [sic, Marion Shepilov Barry]--. Speaker 2: Washington. Speaker 1: --and--in Washington, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, Marion Barry, Marion Barry and Supreme Court justice, Clarence Thomas. Speaker 1: Yes, correct. Speaker 2: A couple of stories that I think we broke on Marion Barry. I like Marion Barry. At the same time, I also like Justice Thomas. I have a lot of respect for both men. Speaker 1: They're controversial men. Speaker 2: Both controversial--. Speaker 1: And not everybody--very few people seem to in public--I mean I don't know how many know him; very few probably know Clarence Thomas, but he's universally probably despised by the black community. Speaker 2: Well, let me, let me tell you an interesting thing about Justice Thomas. I sat behind him at the hearings. And I got a chance to talk with wife, Virginia, and her parents and to talk with him. After he was confirmed as Supreme Court Justice, I'm a friend of Armstrong Williams, who is a columnist. Also another controversial person who I believe has a right to his views. I don't always agree with him, but I publish his commentaries. And I said to Armstrong one day that my club members, my bridge club would like to come and sit down and talk with Justice Thomas. And he said, "Okay, I'll arrange it. Maybe you can come and have lunch." And so Justice Thomas said, yes, we could come. And so about seven of us went over, and we felt that we were going to have a fifteen-minute interview with Justice Thomas. I have to admit we stayed almost two hours. The guard came in one time and said, "What is going on in--are you all right, Justice Thomas" (laughter)? He says, "I'm okay." And it was back and forth, back and forth. It was just wonderful. It was free flowing, off the record, of course, but very free flowing. And we never did have a chance to have lunch, but he took us on tour of the Supreme Court, and when we left all of us, those who were vehemently opposed to him and those who were just sort of in the middle had to agree that he had a point, that sometimes you have to listen to both sides. We don't agree with some of the things he's done, no. But we have to give the fact that this is his viewpoint. And everybody's not gonna agree with us. And we came away with the feeling that he had given us, by saying, if you want to oppose everybody on the Supreme Court the same way you're trying to oppose me, then that would be fair, whether they're white or black. And you have to look at it that way. We don't scream and yell at these other justices who are just as bad or who go against what we think should be on our side. And we're gonna have to learn to look at the total picture and not just one man. No, he's not a Thurgood Marshall, 'cause Thurgood Marshall, I mean I grew up with, I knew him well and so forth. But at the same time, he's on the Supreme Court for the rest of his life. Every single black lawyer who wants to go before the Supreme Court has to go before Justice Thomas. Justice Thomas has an open door for every black lawyer. Listen to what I'm saying. You may not agree with him, but you'd better respect the fact that he's there. And that's what I'd like people to understand. I respect the fact that he's going to be there for the rest of his life. And so as Marion Barry said often, live with it, deal with it. And I have watched him say that there's a young class coming in. And they haven't called me and let me know that they're coming in or invite me to their reception cause there's a little reception for every new lawyer that comes in. They're missing a chance to at least go one-on-one with this man who has an open door. I'm sitting up here, or looking--I forgot my camera. And so when I got inside his office, he said to me, "Oh, you're having trouble with your camera"--no, I had my camera, but it didn't, something went wrong with it. And he offered me his camera to take the pictures and then took the film out and gave it to me. And as I looked on his desk, here were all these pictures of all these different classes that had some to see him. And talking to his, one of his clerks, he says, "You know he's one of the few justices that, when you pick up the phone, he says, 'Yes, bring your class; yes, come on and see me.'" And I have to admit, as well as I knew Thurgood Marshall, as well as my father [Carl James Murphy] knew Thurgood Marshall, when I called Thurgood Marshall and asked him something, Thurgood never returned my call. But Clarence Thomas did (laughter). This is the way life goes sometimes. So I have a deep respect for him in the fact that he's going to be there and that he's somebody you either have to go through or you make your life a little more difficult. Speaker 1: Do you think he realizes that he's there because Thurgood Marshall was there ahead of him or because Thurgood Marshall was Thurgood Marshall in the sense that he fought for--. Speaker 2: Fought for, to open the door. Speaker 1: --for the door to be opened. And then it was Thurgood Marshall's attitude and opinion, which is almost the reverse of Clarence Thomas'--. Speaker 2: Reverse of what he is---. Speaker 1: --that made it possible for Clarence Thomas to be there. Speaker 2: Well, like I say to people, how many people you know who have opinions that's opposite to yours, you know, who when you argue, you respect their opinion. And you fuss at him, but do you really go away hating that person because they disagree with you? Speaker 1: I think the problematic thing is that he's in a position--and this is problematic not just for him, I mean it's not his fault, but the country has allowed for one black justice for the Supreme Court, and it's not--. Speaker 2: Think of what you're telling me, now. Speaker 1: It's not a rule, but everybody knows, and he's sitting in that spot--. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --for the rest of his life. Speaker 2: Okay, you really believe in integration, then you're gonna stop having--looking at his color. He's there (laughter), he's gonna be there. And I would suggest, especially if you're in the law field, you'd better learn to work through him or with him. Speaker 1: Well, see--. Speaker 2: He's not gonna change. And those others who might come on this court, being appointed by President [George W.] Bush, are going to be maybe worse than any Justice Thomas will ever be. So we're going--we have a hard fight ahead of us as far as the Supreme Court is concerned. And we know that. Story_ID: 11146 Speaker 1: Now, Marion Barry is someone who, unlike Clarence Thomas, is probably misunderstood or disliked on some level outside of this area--. Speaker 2: Black community. Speaker 1: --but in terms of this area, Baltimore and [Washington] D.C., you pretty much love him--. Speaker 2: Well respected. Marion has done some things that, you know, we would say he got caught at doing. But at the same time, he got set up also, and if I changed the color of his skin, he would never have gone to jail like that. I went up to jail to interview him and to talk with him to find out the details directly from him. And that was one of the 'Afro's' ['Afro-American'] exclusive stories. And we had been a strong supporter of Marion Barry all throughout his fight. We joined caravan when he came back home in that successful welcome home parade and so forth. And I have always felt that people like Marion Barry were set up to pull down. If he had gotten the support that he needed for the city, Washington, D.C. would be better off today. See, people make the mistake of looking at the man's color of his skin and saying, we're gonna hurt this one, waiting for the next one to come. And all they're doing is waiting, making it harder for the next one to come cause if the city doesn't continually grow day by day, it's going to go down. It's the same thing that happened here in Baltimore. If they had supported Kurt Schmoke when he was here the same way they're supporting the mayor now [Martin O'Malley], Baltimore would not be losing the population it's losing. People don't seem to understand that, that you hurt everybody when you hurt the top person like that by not supporting them. So you take away the money that he needs to work with; you don't give him the things he needs to work with. And the Congress really hurt the City of Washington, when Marion Barry was mayor. And I just think it's just so unfortunate that people aren't intelligent enough to realize that; that you can't hurt a government like that and then overnight expect it to surge back up again. It just doesn't happen that way. So now, Washington, Baltimore and Philadelphia, all the cities that had the, the mayors are now coming back slowing where they would never have been back this far if they had gotten the support they needed back then. Story_ID: 11147 Speaker 1: Can you think of one story that may have been the biggest story the--the bigger or the biggest scoop that the 'Afro-American' had been involved with? Speaker 2: Well, of course, during the early Supreme Court days and so forth, there were a lot of big stories that the 'Afro' had that nobody had. During World War II when we had our correspondents overseas, the war correspondents overseas, we had so many stories about what was actually going on during World War II because our correspondents were right there. And those were the years when the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was breathing down our neck and trying their best to accuse us of being unpatriotic because we published the stories about the segregated troops and what was happening to the black troops over there. All of those stories back there in those days, I think many of them were just exclusive 'Afro' stories. We've had some recent years, and off the top of my head, I can't call any, but we've had some in recent years too. And going back to Clarence Thomas, I think the--one of the headline stories that won an award was written by--let's see, who wrote that? And I better not call his name. I think it was written by James Wright, where he said, "I'm not an Uncle Tom". And that was one of our front-page stories that went to, to win one of the prizes. And we won other stories--prizes like that for stories like that. Speaker 1: What's the biggest crisis that the 'Afro-American' has been through? Speaker 2: Crisis, crisis, crisis, let me just say that maybe in my younger years when they were fighting to have a union at the 'Afro' and the employees went on strike. And that was, oh, a long, long time ago, a long time ago. But we've had crises since then, but I think that was the one that really cut to the quick because the 'Afro' is a, is a business with families, and not just the Murphy family, but there was the Lewis family and other families, the Phillips family, families have, have come generation after generation to work at the 'Afro'. And when you have a labor dispute like that--they wanted to bring in the, the labor union, which they did. And you split that way. It's, it sort of takes a long time to heal. And, of course, we've healed now, we're, we're back together again, but I think that may have been the biggest crisis. There've been others, of course. There've been financial crisis where we've been able to pull back and so forth, but I think there's nothing to compare to that, the labor dispute way back there when, maybe in the '40s [1940s]. Story_ID: 11148 Speaker 1: Tell me what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Hopes and concerns. I guess my biggest concern is that nobody seems to appreciate the fact that if drugs run rampant in the black community today, they gonna take over the white community tomorrow. And it, it's, it's just mind boggling to me to see this thing spread like this from city to city to city. How do they think it's gonna stay contained? And so they put all these black kids in jail. Really? Who's gonna take their place? There's so much money out here involved. It's gonna be white kids. The United States has one of the worst problems in the world. We have more people in jail than any country in the world. Something's got to be wrong with our heads that we don't seem to see this. That's my number one, this--the other one, of course, is the fraud, the identity fraud that's taking place is my other concern. We are the stupidest people in the world to put the social security numbers on drivers license, which is the one thing somebody can steal and steal your identity. But does that make sense? We can't get legislatures to understand that you can't put something out there that people can lose every day. How many times has your license been lost with your social security number on it? You're feeding the criminal element. That's what we're doing, feeding the criminal element, and it just doesn't make sense to me. Some cities have, have recognized it, but others have not. Story_ID: 11149 Speaker 1: There are a lot of joys out here. I'm the grandmother of seventeen children. And I have a lot of joys in seeing them all come along and graduate from college. One, Andrea, my little granddaughter, Andrea, just graduated from Morgan [State University]. And she's about the twelfth member of the family to come out of Morgan. Others are around the country in dental school and medical school and heading toward medical. And, of course, one concern is I haven't one around to be a journalist yet, but maybe one of them will eventually come back. My oldest grandson, Kevin Peck, has done very well as being manager of one of the top music groups, Dru Hill, and hopefully, he will eventually turn around and bring that talent back to the 'Afro'. And he's thinking about it, so. My daughter was president of the company, but she left to--because she got the call to the ministry. So she now has her own church. She's named for me, Frances Murphy Draper. One of my sons is a doctor, head of orthopedic surgery over there at Harbor Hospital [Baltimore, Maryland], Dr. James Wood, and another son, David Campbell is an engineer at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. And then my daughter Susan works for with her husband, Dr. Lance Barnes, down in Biloxi, Mississippi. And it, it's just wonderful to watch the children, despite what's going on in the world today, make it. And I'm just so proud of all of them. They've, they've fought very hard. They have kept their eyes, as we say, looking straight ahead. And they're gonna make it, they're gonna make it. Story_ID: 11150 Speaker 1: Just a, this is a kind of, maybe kind of an odd question, but a couple of weeks ago, Smokey Robinson, the singer and songwriter was on 'Def Poetry Jam'-- Speaker 2: Def--. Speaker 1: --and he delivered a poem where was critical of the nomenclature African American, and he said that he's not from Africa. His ancestors were, and Africans are fine, but he, he didn't like the definition of African American. He didn't like the association. And there's been others who have--there was controversy over--now, it seems to be some kind of backlash against the name, African American for some reason. Some people actually prefer--. Speaker 2: Black, colored. Speaker 1: And some actually prefer the name, the contraction of Negro (laughter) I think others prefer that--and like you said-. Speaker 2: You know that point is well taken. It's, it's, it's an excellent point, well taken. If you're not from, from Africa, why would you be an African American? And I, I think the people need to understand that you need to look at your heritage and find out where you're from and get your name straight, then teach your children where you're from. We can from Africa, but there are other people that I know well did not. They came from all over the place. And so if you didn't come from Africa, why let people label you for something you're not. And so there's a little box that says, 'other'. Check other (laughter), you know. And put in what you are. Nobody would call themselves Chinese American if they weren't from China. Speaker 1: Plus the implication, I think--and one of his comments was that it was some recent thing, but yet, here's the 'Afro-American' started in 1892. Speaker 2: 'Afro'. Speaker 1: The 'Afro-American'. Speaker 2: 'Afro'. Speaker 1: Which basically means the same thing, African American. And, and--. Speaker 2: Yeah, you heard me say, my grandfather was from Africa. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: And so it was natural. And don't forget, the name was there. We purchased the name and the equipment. The name was there already. So--. Speaker 1: So it's even older than that. Speaker 2: Yes, it's older than that. So we are really named for what, where we came from. I think it's extremely important to under--people to understand that in this world where you diversify, you are what you are, and don't let other people name, name you. Who you are and whose you are, you ought to know. And if you don't know it, it's something wrong with you in today's world with all this internet out here. Story_ID: 11151 Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point as your legacy? Speaker 2: Bboy, what is my legacy? In things or in feeling? What do you mean? Speaker 1: In deed, I guess. Speaker 2: In deed, what am I handing to my children? I guess what I'm handing to my children is the sense of family. It's one of the things I've been trying to--and which we do. We practice here. We gather all the time as a family. We get our family together. The need to stick together, how important that is; that if you can keep your family together, you can fight the world. You've got to have support. You can't go it by--alone by yourself. When you have a family that you can help and come back and bring it to the family--don't take it outside. Bring it back to the family. Let us help solve the problems. Enjoy your successes and work with you on your failures. In this family, if you accept the fact that you've made a mistake, bring it on back; let's talk about it. Let's keep on moving. That's all you have to do. You have to recognize that you've got a problem. Once you recognize that problem, and you take it to the family, then we can straighten it out. There is nothing that this family cannot solve, cannot fight back about. I hope I've left them that legacy. Speaker 1: And one final question, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered? That's interesting. I hadn't thought about that. How would I like to be remembered? As someone who really enjoyed life, who took every advantage that came along, who recognized my limitations, but was willing to stand up for what I thought was right. I'd like to be remembered that way...