 Story_ID: 124999 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Inus Ray Miller, Jr. first name is spelled I-N-U-S, R-A-Y, M-I-L-L-E-R, Jr. Speaker 1: All right and is there a story behind the name Inus? Speaker 2: According to my father, there is and he is prone to a little exaggeration, always questionable a bit, but there is a part of a story that is interesting. I'm a junior, so my father's name is Inus. What's interesting is my mother's name is Inez, so the two of them getting together is a little strange, Inus and Inez. But the other part of it is I named my son, Inus Ray Miller, III, and my father said it's West African. I've not been able to find that, but he said that's the derivation. Speaker 1: Okay, now would your father be someone who would have studied West African history or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --My father is a very bright person, was in the military, so he was in the [U.S.] Air Force, always well-read and studied an awful lot and would have us, his children, stand before the officers in our house at Hampton [Virginia] in Langley Air Force base. So he would have the officers to come over and he would drill us. So he would he put me in front of the officers like at five years old. And at five years old, I had to stand there, and he would ask me questions about what was in those big magazines, Look magazine, you know how big those were, Life magazine, right? He'd say, "Read that, boy." So I had to stand in front of the officers and read the stories about [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower, about the Little Rock Nine, about Brown vs the Board of Education and all of that. Then after all of that, he'd say, "What does that mean?" He had a big bear tone voice. He is about six feet four inches, dark-skinned brother, you know, big, very imposing and it was like, "Read that. What does that mean?" So I had to explain to the officers and they're sitting like--I mean he had that kind of presence--they're sitting like we have to be here to listen to Inus's kids one more time. Then I'd be the reader and another sister played the saxophone, the big bear tone saxophone, so she had to sit there and honk out the saxophone, you know, as he is showing out. So, yeah, very well-read, very bright man and he could have known about the continent of Africa and could have done some study there, but he went straight from high school straight into the military, so he didn't go to college. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 6, 1949, Hampton, Virginia. It's actually Fort Monroe, which is right there at Hampton, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Currently, I'm the publisher of a news magazine. It's the 'Columbus African American News Journal' here in Columbus, Ohio, and I also do a little consulting under Ray Miller Enterprises, those are those two primary things. Speaker 1: Okay, you are retired? Speaker 2: Yes, I retired in 2000--at the end of 2010 from the state senate. I served in the Ohio House of Representative for sixteen years and then I served in the Ohio State senate for eight years, so a total of twenty-four years in the Ohio General Assembly and actually before that, in the General Assembly, I served as a staff person, so I began as an intern, then an aide, director of committee, lobbyist, all of those things. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: This is April 2, 2012. Speaker 1: Where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at the office building in which I have my office, 750 E. Long Street, Columbus, Ohio. Story_ID: 125000 Speaker 1: Okay, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we have to ask and they only require short answers. They're kind of like a warm-up. Sir, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food would be pineapple upside down cake. So you didn't ask dessert, did you? So the favorite food really would be fried chicken. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yeah, my favorite color is red even though I don't wear too much of it. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I love the fall. I absolutely love the fall, love the change of the seasons basically and the leaves, everything about the fall, the weather, the temperature and so forth. That is absolutely my favorite time of the year. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The continent of Africa, on my bucket list would be spending my last years in the continent of Africa, just going from country to country. I've had the opportunity to go to a number of different countries, so I would just fulfill those that I haven't had a chance to visit yet. Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Never allow your greatest accomplishment to become your highest achievement in life. There are so many people who live in the past. They may have done something significant in high school or college or whatever, and they're forever known by that and I think one should always look at the next big thing, so it's "never allow your greatest accomplishment to become your highest achievement in life." Story_ID: 125001 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side but we'll start with your mother's side, so we don't get them mixed up. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's name was Inez Smith, I-N-E-Z, S-M-I-T-H, and then married my father, Inus Ray Miller, so it was Inez Smith Miller. Speaker 1: What is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I'll have to get that for you. I'll have to get that for you. She was born in Hampton, Virginia. The date of birth, I'll have to go back and check that. Speaker 1: Would you think it was in the '20s [1920], early '20s [1920]. Speaker 2: My mother had me--I can do a quick calculation. My mother gave birth to me when she was nineteen years old, okay. I am currently sixty-three years old--well, I will be--I will be sixty-three years old on Friday, April 6, so having give birth to me when she was nineteen, I was born in 1949, that would make her birthday, March 2, 1930. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm sorry March 19, March 19, 1930. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That would have been her birthday, March 19, 1930. Speaker 1: All right, so she was born in Hampton? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family--how far back, first of all, can you trace that side? Speaker 2: Oh, most of my mother's family lived in one road--a good part of our family lives in one road in Hampton, on Semple Farm Road, spelled S-E-M-P-L-E, and Ebenezer Baptist Church is on that road. There is a cemetery right next to Ebenezer, the church, and many of my relatives on my mother's side on buried there. So her sister, Elnora Bellhops [ph.], since passed, lived on the road and a number of cousins. So it's the Bellhops [ph.] family, the Winders, Smiths there off of Semple Farm Road. Story_ID: 125002 Speaker 1: Can your mother's [Inez Smith Miller's] side trace their ancestry back to slavery or Reconstruction? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, my aunt has done a pretty good job of that, tracing the family back to the early 1800s. and what's interesting is there are a number of John Smiths. And it's kind of intriguing to me because, as you know, the first Africans to come to the United States in 1619, came to Jamestown, Virginia and the captain of the ship [sic, leader of the colony] was John Smith and I don't know whether it was at that time they were passing this name down or it was just happen stance, you know, that in my family, as I went through the record, great-great-grandfather, John Smith, great-great-great grandfather John Smith. You know, there are an awful lot of John Smith in the family. Speaker 1: Okay, and Hampton [Virginia] is not that far from Jamestown? Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: Interesting. Are there any stories from that era passed down? Speaker 2: You know, the family has not shared a lot of stories. We're just starting to have family reunions. So I went to a family reunion a couple of years ago. They're planning another one that's coming up here in a couple of months in August. So there hasn't been a lot of stories in a historical way. There are stories certainly growing up of my mother, you know, while we were there in Virginia, we had three kids, I'm sorry four of my siblings there. Then there was a divorce. She got married again and two boys, and I'll get to that, no doubt, but her sister, Elnora, also had six kids at the time. So I have plenty of stories of growing up there with my cousins in a little small house. We call it the "homestead" there on Semple Farm Road, and you go back and you look at it--the last time I was there, I took pictures of this little house. We all lived there. My grandfather was there; our family was there. Our cousins would come over. They didn't live there, but they would come over. And we had all these people in this little house with a chicken coop in the back yard and a pump, you know, a well that you had to actually go out and pump the water and an outhouse, right. So, that's what I recall growing up there as a youngster-- Story_ID: 125003 Speaker 1: But the-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I don't want you into growing up yet. I just wanted to ask you--I wanted to maybe find out--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Okay, I'm sorry.--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I wanted to find out if you knew the history of your family's transition from slavery to freedom?--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --good question.--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --of origin and how long they had that property and how they got it, you know, because when you come out of slavery, you don't own anything. So is there a story about how they acquired that property, or how that transition was made from slavery to freedom? Speaker 1: Unfortunately, I don't know that one. I do know that the house was in the family for a long time, so my grandmother, Queen Esther Smith, was her name--so my grandmother, Queen Ester, owned the home--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Did she grow up there? I'm sorry. Speaker 1: She absolutely did, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so, at least, that takes us to the latter part of the nineteenth century or the turn of the century. Speaker 1: Right. And then her husband--was his name Sidney? My uncle's name is Sidney--Walter--other uncle's name is Walter. I'm not sure that her husband's name was Sidney. I have to double check that. As I said, my aunt did a pretty good genecology and has dates, and ages, places of birth and all of that. Speaker 2: Is this your aunt, Elnora? Speaker 1: No, this is--I'm trying to think of her name. She is like in the second. She is in the Winder family actually, but I'll get that for you. Speaker 2: But--okay, so there is no story in the family about the family originating anywhere else in Virginia or moving to there or any kind of story that you know of? Speaker 1: No, all that I know is right there in Hampton [Virginia] and the homestead there. It sits on a probably good fifteen acres, so we did some farming and we had some cattle and all that right there up front. So that was in our family for some time. Speaker 2: Okay, is there any history on that side of the family on Hampton Institute or Hampton University? Speaker 1: Other than working there, no. so the aunt that has done the genealogy has worked at Hampton with her husband and Celestine--Celestine is her name--Celestine Winder, yeah. C-E-L-E-S-T-I-N-E. Speaker 2: Okay, so she worked at Hampton? Speaker 1: Then my uncle, Sidney, worked at the shipyard and he served in the [U.S.] Army. My other uncle, Alton, was--went to the army as well. He died there in Vietnam, of friendly fire they said. So he was killed by--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --his own--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --his own troops. So it was my mother, Inez [Smith Miller], her sister, Elnora, this is on her side, so it would have been Inez, Elnora, Alton, Walter and Sidney, that's her siblings and Elnora, yes, I mentioned Elnora. Speaker 2: And your grandmother's name was Queen Ester. Speaker 1: Queen Esther. Speaker 2: Is there a story about that? Speaker 1: No doubt there is and I just don't know it. How could it not be biblical, but I don't know how she came to be name that exactly other than no doubting they just took it straight from the bible. Speaker 2: Okay. What did your--did your mother [Inez Smith Miller] tell you any stories about growing in Hampton [Virginia]? I mean--I imagine there was segregation there--most of their neighbors were black. I don't know. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. They would've been black. My mother started having children very early, so, you know, she had to grow up pretty fast. So she had her first child, my sister, Olivia when she was fourteen and second child, my sister, Patricia, when she was sixteen and then me when she was nineteen, and then my sister, Cynthia, when she was twenty-three. So there wasn't a lot of, you know, stories that you could share other than stories of the children growing and I think that's why I can only remember like playing with my cousins because we were all so young. She was young. She was still wanting to be a young girl, you know, when you start having children at the age of fourteen. Then with my father being in the military, then he would start moving around, but I guess we'll get to that. I'm getting ahead of myself. Speaker 2: So your mother, did she have a chance to finish high school? Speaker 1: No, no. She finished the eighth grade. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, she finished the eighth grade. For the most part, occupationally, she cleaned homes. She was a domestic. The only other job I can recall her having was at Swan Cleaners. Story_ID: 125004 Speaker 1: Now, okay, well let me go to your father's side. Speaker 2: That is really going to be sparse. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us your father's full name and spell it? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's full name was Inus Ray Miller. Speaker 1: Exactly the same as yours, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Okay, let's do the math--he was born--now, I do have all of that--you know, where I have all of this--gosh, am glad I thought of this, the application that I did for the background check for the staff at Washington. I do have that--I should have pulled that. He was born in Glasgow, Kentucky, so he would have been eighteen when my sister was born--so there is a five-year difference and he would have been twenty-three years old when I was born in 1949, so that is 1926. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was born in 1926 and in Glasgow, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay, what do you know about his side of the family? Speaker 2: He had one-two, he had a brother, Robert, and William, and Lucy, and there is another sister, and then there was Silvalene, [ph.] the one sister I didn't know as well, Lucy and then I can't think of the other sister, but Silvaline [ph.] and they ended up moving--the father moved them from Kentucky to Indianapolis [Indiana], and then he left them, the father left them and supposedly hooked up with another woman, but he brought them all from Kentucky and left them there in Indianapolis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's home for my side of the family. My aunt and uncle are still alive. My mother died at the age of fifty-eight. My father died at the age of sixty-nine years old. So left on his side of the family is my uncle, William, just went to see him. He's in a nursing home and my aunt, Silvaline [ph.], that's all. Everybody else has passed. Story_ID: 125005 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Inus Ray Miller, Sr.] talk about growing up or about the origin of his family or any of that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Oh, my father left us, so I didn't see much of my father after the age of six, after I was six years old. He, as I said, was in the [U.S.] Air Force, so he would be stationed from one base to the next. So when we left Virginia, we went to St. Antonio, Texas and I didn't see much of him. He was a good-time guy. He drank really heavily and he partied really heavily, still young man and played sports, all sports, well. He played baseball. He was boxer and all of that. He's out having fun with the guys and not really taking care of his family at all; and so, you know, didn't have a chance to share many stories. I recall in Virginia, he was good at a lot of things, so he bragged a little bit about it, his boxing prowess, so we went to see one of his fights on the base in Hampton [Virginia]. And he got beat up so bad. He's a tall, dark-skinned fellow, so to have all these bandages on this dark-skinned was just hilarious to me. It wasn't like I felt bad because my dad got beat up. I just thought he looked funny and particularly after he did all this bragging about what he was going to do, he got his behind whipped by this fellow. Interestingly enough even though my father was not around, when he was around, he was a good father. You know? But the alcoholism kind of destroyed things, and I tried to end up trying to do everything that he did, including boxing, which I was a little bit better at than him. Yeah, that's his side of the family. They're in Indianapolis [Indiana], and the two remaining relatives there are my aunt, Silvaline [ph.] and the Uncle William who's in a nursing home. Speaker 1: So there are no old stories on that side either--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --no, they all drink. You know, they drink a lot, all of them, with the exception of my aunt Silvaline [ph.] and my uncle, Walter--Robert, I'm sorry, that was the other one, Robert. And Robert was a minister, a good family man. that was the first clue that I had that something wasn't matching up because they're all so tall, so my father is 6'4", my uncle William's like 6'7" inches-6'6" or 6'7"; my uncle, Robert, was 7 feet and I just knew I was going to be at least 6'4", at least 6'4". And I'm looking at all these tall guys. And I hit 5'11" inches as a senior and I would say "I gotta grow," so I would hang from the monkey bars, trying to stretch out. I think I stretched my arms, but I didn't get any taller. But I just remember all these giants, all these tall guys and looking at my father, saying, "I don't look anything like this guy here." Story_ID: 125006 Speaker 1: So you said that in recent years, you've had a revelation-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in recent years-- Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: I did find out that the person who I thought was my biological father [Inus Ray Miller, Sr.] was not and I don't know who my biological father is and quite frankly I haven't taken the time to do that search. I've thought about it but not too much and I think the reason is here is a person who didn't care enough to ever visit, ever to call, certainly never took the time to make himself known to me, so there is not a driver there for me to find out who he is other than it's important. I know it's important for me to know, you know, your roots. It's important to know who the other half is, you know, I've been blessed to be in prominent positions all my life. The first thing you see when you go into office of a white leader, in particular, whether they're in business, whether they're in politics is you're going to see a picture of their father, or their grandfather, or their great-grandfather. You know, that's really the prominent picture--not really the mother, but it's on the father's side, but I don't know that. So that would be one thing. I know, what's strange is I look at people and I look at people who I have an interest in and I end up looking for resemblances. You know, I'm fascinated by George Washington Williams, who was the first African-American legislator and my wife says, "That's your great-great-grandfather that you're so fascinated by this guy." He might be--he just might be. Speaker 1: Okay, so but your father--Inus Ray Miller was only around for six years. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was active in our lives in Hampton [Virginia], and then he gets stationed in San Antonio [Texas], and he goes first and then we go. The family goes. We join him in San Antonio. He's out partying, having a good time and then he gets stationed in Wichita Falls [Texas], in Randolph [Air Force Base, Texas] and then we move to Randolph. We're not seeing him. Then he gets stationed here at Lockbourne [Ohio] and then we move. Then that's when I think my mother [Inez Smith Miller] got tired of the chase, she got tired of the alcoholism; she got tired of trying to raise all these kids by herself, and then they got divorced. They got divorced when I was about--I think I was about twelve or thirteen years old when they got divorced--finally got divorced, but it was a fairly easy divorce because he wasn't part of the family. It wasn't like he was there and it wasn't contested or anything like that. He was already out of the family. Story_ID: 124107 Speaker 1: Your parents split up here in Columbus [Ohio] in Lockbourne [Air Force Base]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So did your father [Inus Ray Miller, Sr.] come around any after that? Speaker 2: He never did. Yeah, he never did. When he left the military, he went back to his family in Indianapolis [Indiana] and, you know, lived the rest of his life there, drinking badly and would call. He would call. I recall being, you know, out in the streets playing basketball, you know, football with the guys and my mother [Inez Smith Miller] would come to the door and say, "You're father is on the phone," and I knew he would be drunk and so I didn't want to go but I had to because she was standing there saying "Come speak to me." And he'd be totally drunk and say, "I'm going to buy you this. I'm going to buy you a bike. I'm going to buy you a car. I'm going to buy you all these things." I'm there listening and I'm like, "I've heard this before." So he had totally separated himself and was drowning himself in alcohol. Speaker 1: Did you ever see him again? Speaker 2: You know, I was very disappointed in him as a father and, you know, we didn't make very many trips to Indianapolis because we weren't close to his family. We were much closer to my mother's family in Hampton [Virginia], so we had more of a relationship there. We would go there periodically, not a lot. But we had conversations, but that was--we knew that was family. We were close there. But on my father's side, we didn't go. I did go to see him when he became ill. He smoked--both of them--he smoked and he got my mother to smoke when she was very young that no doubt contributed to her health conditions. And so when I went to see him, he had the oxygen tank, he had emphysema and sill very bright, you know, still very bright with sort of a commanding intelligence. So here I was, still wanting his approval, you know, and I think, at the time, I was serving in the [Ohio State] Legislature. And my eldest sister, Olivia, had sent him one of my tapes from one of my speeches and he said, "I listened to that tape." I said, "Really," I said, "so what do you think?" He said, "It was good. It was too long." But, you know, again he was well-read. He would read the newspapers. He was aware of all of the current events, but there he was, retired from the military, living in a little house, you know, having wasted a lot of his years with alcoholism. Speaker 1: I think it's interesting when he would have you all stand and drill you all on what you knew and what you could do. I mean you were very young. Speaker 2: Yeah, very young. Speaker 1: You were drilled on what you read in Look magazine when you were six. Speaker 2: Barely able to look--I remember the stand was the ironing board, so we would lower the ironing board as low as we could for me to put the magazine on, you know, to stand there and read and then be drilled. Um, yeah, he did it early. He pushed us pretty hard to achieve. And I guess what that is evidence of is how much you learn by the age of six or seven years and how your learning style, and all these kinds of things are pretty well developed at such an early age. But he was that kind of an achiever. I think he fashioned himself as being the bright one. I was looking at Morgan Freeman last night in 'The Bucket List.' And I don't know if you remember in that movie, he ended up being the mechanic but he wanted to be a historian, so he would watch these game shows before they could get the question out, he had the answer to all those things and my father looked like Morgan Freeman, number one, only a darker-skinned version Morgan Freeman and that kind of behavior. It was that kind of behavior. It's like, that's easy. I know the answer to that. That's what I mean about his intelligence being so commanding and quite a bit intimidating. Story_ID: 124108 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story about how your parents met that they ever told or any other relative told? Speaker 2: No, but I can imagine that they met because he [Inus Ray Miller, Sr.] was stationed there at Langley Field Air Force base with her [Inez Smith Miller] growing up right there in Hampton [Virginia], they probably went to where the guys were in the military and vice versa. And they probably met that way; otherwise how could he find his way to Semple Farm Road? That would have been like the back woods almost at that point. Speaker 1: Now, when you consider your parents' personalities and disposition, their temperament, their looks, their talents, who do you think you take after the most, or maybe somebody else? Speaker 2: There are some similarities between the two, my mother little five-foot-two, very pretty, very, very attractive woman. I can see how he'd be attracted to her. I mean she was very attractive and a fire-ry kind of a personality. And then here he is, as I have described, the athletic, intellectual type of guy in the military six-foot-four and she is five feet two inches, but both fighters basically, the personality is a fighter's personality, literally, in terms of going--doing what you have to do to take care of family on my mother's side and not backing down from a fight. Both them would say to me as I was coming up--when I had a little scuffle, both of them would say, "Did you win?" My father, when I was a little youngster five or six years old--my mother, he's out of the picture, but my mother when I was thirteen, fourteen, fifteen years old, the most important thing to her was, "did you win, you know, the fight?" What's interesting my mother having to raise all the kids and work, cleaning homes and all that, didn't get a chance to see us grow up, didn't get a chance to go to anything that we did, I don't think any of us--and I did an awful lot of things. I get together with my sisters now for lunch and because of the age difference and because of everything that was happening in the family, we're kind of teaching each about who we are and what we did. You know, I was a musician, a quite accomplished musician and my mother never had a chance to see me play. Again, my father is out of the picture, so I did so many things by myself. When I went to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], same thing--I mean everything I did, they didn't have a chance to share in that because they were not involved in my life. Story_ID: 124109 Speaker 1: Give us the names of your brothers and sisters and where do you fall in the order? Speaker 2: I have an older sister, Olivia, and then next sister is two years older than me, Pat, so Olivia is three years older. Then Olivia is essentially five years older than me; my sister, Pat, is two years older than me and I'm in the middle, then younger sister, Cynthia, seven years younger and then there was the divorce and two more boys, and so my both brothers have passed. One had leukemia and one was shot to death, so the two younger boys, second marriage, Emersons--they would be Emersons. Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother [Inez Smith Miller] remarried? Speaker 2: Yeah, she married George Emerson here in Columbus [Ohio] and he worked at the Defense Construction Supply center. He had been in the [U.S.] Army way back. He was twenty years older than her and he was a musician. You know, he also played the drums and the trumpet. So that's where I learned to play the drums. Speaker 1: Okay, so how old were you when your mother remarried? Speaker 2: When she actually married, I was thirteen. Yep, I was thirteen years old. Speaker 1: But Mr. Emerson had been around before she actually married him. Speaker 2: Yeah, for about one year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, for about one year, he had been around. So, you know, I never liked him. I never liked him. I didn't consider him my father. So he lived on 18th Street over here, 169 North 18th Street, where I pretty much grew up and so he took us all in. He took all these kids in, which I thought was amazing even back then as a youngster. I thought, "Wow, this guy is bringing all these kids into his house." And I still didn't like him (laughter). Story_ID: 124110 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question--what--see you grew up basically in the early days, you were in different [U.S. Air Force] bases around the country, Hampton [Virginia], San Antonio [Texas] and then in Columbus [Ohio], do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory just in Virginia hanging out with my sister, Pat, she is more the tomboy type, and the one thing there, you know, there was a terrible storm and a good friend of mine, young white guy, so we had to be about five or six years old--I think were six, yeah--and it stormed really bad. There was lightning and so ran underneath a tree, underneath the trees, Coke can, he takes the Coke can, for whatever reason and puts it on his head, lightning strikes the can, fries him like right before my eyes, I mean just fries him, and naturally I ran home like crazy. Yeah, that was quite the memory there. Speaker 1: That's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we just ran underneath the trees for shelter because it was raining and he picks up this can--and puts it on his head and lightning just burnt him--just fried him. The other memory when we moved to Texas, there was this huge high school in Wichita Falls, it was Booker T. Washington [High School, Wichita Falls, Texas], and Booker T. Washington had all the grades combined and so you went from the first to the twelfth and it was a huge complex. Everything is big in Texas, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So the first day out, I got to play ball with the guys. I think it was a set up. They kicked the ball to me. I catch the ball, I'm running and the field had all these briers like growing on me, really rough brier-like grass coming out of the--and they couldn't wait to hit me and I got up and I was all scratched up, bleeding, the whole deal. It's a hell of a welcome to Texas, but I was always a loner type, and I still am for a person who is involved in public life and have been involved in public life for so many years, I was a loner because I was the only boy with three sisters, so I would play alone. And I was different. I've always loved newspaper. I'd go down to Rally Randolph newsstand on Mt Vernon Avenue for hours when I was thirteen, fourteen, fifteen years old. Reading the newspapers, the guys were like, "C'mon, Ray, play ball with us." I'm like, "Okay, I'll do that, but I'm going to go down here to read the newspaper." Then when I was a drummer, I'd practice and practice, trying to be the very best, and the guys, "C'mon to play." I'm like, "I will but if you come up to listen to me solo, then after a couple of hours of that." They were like, "What is up with this guy?" And then in college libraries, I just stayed in libraries, so, loner type. Story_ID: 124111 Speaker 1: We ask this question always too, what were some of the sights, sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: That's a very good question. The first sight, for me, was leaving Virginia and going to Texas. I'm young, so I was so excited about seeing the cowboys, you know. It's like, in my head, we were going to arrive, even though we were driving a car, we were going to arrive, in my mind, there's a saloon, cowboys are going to ride up, jump off the horse, wrap their stirrup thing around the little post and go into the saloon. So we arrive in San Antonio [Texas], it's a big city. I'm like, "Where are the cowboys?" The first thing that I wanted were some cowboy boots, which I got, and then we went to the house we were moving to. We were not on the base--were we in the base? Maybe we were first on the base and then my father [Inus Ray Miller, Sr.] left, and we moved into a house. Speaker 1: What [U.S. Air Force] rank was your father? Speaker 2: Well, that was very fluid. That was very fluid. My father was very bright. His specialty was airplane mechanic, right? He was so well known by everybody, by the officers--I mean he was like the guy because of personality, so he would gain rank and lose rank so fast. I remember him being a master sergeant and within a month, he had been busted back down to three stripes, whatever that is [senior airman]. Then he would come right back and become tech sergeant [Technical Sergeant], right? And then he'd get busted again. I remember in Virginia, he was up to tech sergeant, and, you know, we're all proud. And his income went up, you know, we're happy about that. And I remember him coming home and saying he had an accident driving one of the trucks, knocked rear view mirror off the truck, he gets busted once again. So his rank was pretty fluid. The highest I remember him having was the five stripes. You know, you ask yourself, where does this destructive behavior come from? What is the source of all this, all the drinking, even though I think it was almost genetic when I look at his family, you know, how many of them were alcoholics, but you just wonder. Did it have something to do with denial of opportunity, you know? Being so talented, being so bright, wanted to be a Tuskegee Airman and, for whatever reason, probably because he didn't go to college, didn't become a Tuskegee Airman, but he always wanted to be. He worked hard to achieve, but the alcoholism would tear him back down. But I often wonder about him, did the drinking come from the denial of opportunity, maybe some discrimination, questions about his wife [Inez Smith Miller], you know, in terms of my mother, her fidelity, questions about that kind of thing. If I know now that he's not my father, well, he probably knew that he knew that he was not my biological father. Speaker 1: Now, is he the father of your biological sisters? Speaker 2: One. Speaker 1: The older sister? Speaker 2: The older sister, yes, one. So that kind of thing can factor in as well in terms of the drinking, you know?-- Story_ID: 124112 Speaker 1: But that wasn't your question. Your question was sights, and sounds. Speaker 2: Sounds and smells. I'm sorry. I'm the one that got us off of that, but go ahead with that. Speaker 1: So, one was certainly that briar-patch-like football field in Texas, the other was playing around the septic tanks in Hampton [Virginia], which was crazy of us. Sights are just seeing the different areas of the country. Texas would be the most different. Texas, you know, speech, word usage, "pack up the window." What the hell is "pack up the window" mean as opposed to raise the window? Sometimes down south, they'll say, "low it, low it the window down." But in Texas, they would say, "pack it, pack up the window." Strangest thing here [Columbus, Ohio], my stepfather [George Emerson] loved animals, you know. I think he had a lot of love in his heart, but he loved animals. And I would try to kill everything he brought home or get rid of it in some way. He'd bring home hamsters and there would be a cage, nice home, but-inner-city homes that looked like you had a living room in the front, and then you had a dining--second part of living room and then you had a dining room. So in the first part of the living room, nobody could sit there because that's where the nicer furniture was with this little divider. So with this little L, there is the hamster cage, right in the living room, so I'd feed the hamsters pretzels until they couldn't eat anymore, until they dropped, right? Then he would bring up guinea pigs, Abyssinian guinea pigs, very pretty, very pretty mink-like fur and I was like, "how can I get rid of these things?" Then he brought home a monkey, a spider monkey--a spider monkey, "How can I get rid of this monkey? The money, he put a big cage in the living room. It had to be eight feet tall in the living room, okay? And I open up the cage--I had to be maybe fifteen, sixteen, somewhere through there I guess, I don't know, I open up the cage and I open up the front door and the monkey runs out, right? This is in the hood, so these are not nice, suburban dogs. You know, suburban dogs behave differently than ghetto dogs. These are like in the hood-ghetto dogs. They're chasing the monkey like--the monkey is just flying all over the neighborhood. And somehow, he made his way back. They're pretty bright I guess. The monkey mad his way back and came tearing into the house, right. And my father got home and could just tell there was a different behavior with the monkey and all. He was like, "What's going on?" I was like, "I have no idea." So finally he got rid of that thing, but trying to find food for this monkey, insects for him to eat, that was really quite the experience. I used to tell this story to Tracy Heard, [Ohio] State Representative Tracy Heard told me that she had a monkey. I said, "Get out of here." I said, "I thought I was the only person who had a monkey in the family in the central city." She is from Akron [Ohio], but hers was a situation where they all wanted this monkey. It was like the pet that they had. I don't think that there was anybody in my family who wanted a monkey in the house. Story_ID: 124113 Speaker 1: Now, tell us where you started school. Did you start at--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I started in first grade in Hampton [Virginia] on the base, yep. I remember my first grade teacher, Mrs. Hunt and then we moved. What's so interesting about that is when I went to Washington [D.C.] and they did the background investigation--they go all the way back, the FBI go all the way back to birth, and they went to Hampton and they asked all these people about me, they said, "Well, good gracious, he left when he was six years old, how are we supposed to know," all these questions about did he have strange behaviors or any form of perversion. They said, "Get out of here. He was gone." So I went to first grade in Hampton. Second grade, I think I started the second grade there as well and then we moved to Texas, San Antonio and went to a few grades there. Speaker 1: So that's Booker T. Washington, right? Speaker 2: No, that was on the [U.S. Air Force] base there in San Antonio. And Booker T. Washington [High School] was at Wichita Falls, Texas, and then from Wichita Fall, Texas to here, and then I went to Fair Avenue Elementary School [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute, when you get to Columbus, you're about how old, ten? Speaker 2: That's correct, I was in the fifth grade. I was in the fifth grade here. Speaker 1: So what was the name of the school here? Speaker 2: Fair Avenue. No, no, the first school--I'm sorry--was Greenlawn Elementary School [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Is that on the east side of Columbus? Speaker 2: That's on the west side, yep, yep. Speaker 1: Greenlawn. Speaker 2: Yeah, Greenlawn Elementary School--then, wait a minute--was that the first? No, it was Fair Avenue first because I remember coming in the dead of winter. We moved over on Fair Avenue and then we moved on the west side, so Greenlawn was second. So the first school I attended was--gosh, no I was right. It was fifth grade, Greenlawn, Mrs. Bartley, fifth grade, Greenlawn, sixth grade Fair Avenue, seventh grade Franklin Junior High School, eighth grade Champion Junior High School and then graduated from Champion Junior High School, eighth and ninth, graduated from Champion and then East High School [Columbus, Ohio], and all three years at East. Story_ID: 124114 Speaker 1: Well tell us, you moved around quite a bit--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Yes. Speaker 1: --growing up. Now was this like--how did it affect you-do you know--in comparison to other people or do you have a sense of that? I know when you're doing a moving, I mean that's you. Speaker 2: I think without question, you don't get a chance to form relationships. You don't get a chance to form friendships and particularly and when you're the only boy in the family, the girls can kind of get together and play and be in one bedroom and, you know, you're separated out, right? So as we moved around, I was just kind of naturally the loner. And then you're not bonding, you're not forming any relationship. When we moved here [Columbus, Ohio], we moved so many times--I said, "Why did we move so much?" We obviously we were moving because we didn't have enough money to pay the rent, and so I remember living on Fair Avenue, Deckinbock Road, Greenlawn area, Sherman, another street over there and then 18th Street. And periodically, I would drive around and tell my wife, "I've lived in that house, and I've lived in that house." She said, "Wow, you lived all over the community." Speaker 1: So did you have any other relatives in town that your mother [Inez Smith Miller] knew? Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: None, okay. Speaker 2: We came here because my father [Inus Ray Miller, Sr.] got stationed at the [U.S. Air Force] base. So we had absolutely no relatives here. Speaker 1: So you were really isolated. The only male in the household, father is gone, no other relatives in town. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you're moving constantly. Speaker 2: Right. Then couple that with my own personality to kind of do my own thing, you know. I'm comfortable being alone. A lot of people are not comfortable being alone, you know. And maybe that came in the way I was raised and that also impacts the environmental impacts the psychological in a sense. But, yeah, I kind of had grown up to do my thing. And when I sit down and share with my sisters things that I did, they said, "You didn't do that." I said, "Yes, I did. You just didn't know about it because of the little age difference and because of so much happening in the family." My brother contracts, second marriage, and he gets leukemia. Well, that takes my mother out of the picture. My mother is now caring for my younger brother with leukemia. So I'd go with her. My sister, being two older, is finishing high school, right? The other sister being two years older than her, my eldest sister, she's doing her thing. Now, she's out. She already had a child. She is getting married. So she's away from it. I'm the guy is home, going to children's hospital with my mother with my brother going through chemotherapy, through radiation treatment, his face getting all fat, through losing his hair, you know, gaining the weight, losing the weight and losing the hair, and all that kind of thing. So I'm the guy who is counseling my mother through this. She gets married to this guy [George Emerson], but there's no love there. She gets married to him because he can take care of the five kids. He's twenty-five years older than her. There's no love there. So I'm the guy who's--I remember saying to my mother, "Olivia is pregnant." And she said, "What?" I said, "I can tell she's pregnant." I was the person who told her that because she was so busy caring for a child, who was dying. Story_ID: 124115 Speaker 1: And then, you know, immediately then she [mother Inez Smith Miller] has to turn her attention to the next child from the second marriage, who then ends up a tremendous musician. My stepfather [George Emerson] is a musician. I'm a pretty good musician. I worked hard at it, you know. I wasn't the natural, so I worked hard to become all-city, all-state, all everything in terms of being a percussionist. My younger brother was a natural, so they gave him everything--my stepfather, this is his son. Now, he's giving him everything. So he gave him the bass guitar; he gave him the trumpet; he gave him the drums. I had to work for mine. So he gave him all these things. He was an extraordinarily talented musician, and great singer, awesome drummer. I went to hear him play. This guy is good, really good without taking all the lessons, without practicing, and he gets hooked on crack cocaine, and didn't pay his bill. I'm in the [Ohio state] legislature at this point. And my mother would call me and, you know, she said, "I got all these Jamaicans in my house. I don't know what to do with these guys." And I'd come over, two blocks over, 169 North 18th Street, and I'd have to walk out, State Rep [Representative], kick out the drug dealers out of the house because the point--and that's not where he came from. I mean he was the more privileged relatively of all the kids, you know. He was the one that didn't have to want anything and that's what he got caught up in. He got caught up in the drugs, so he got shot to death because he didn't pay his bill. Speaker 2: Was he working as a professional musician at that time? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was. Speaker 2: Was he with a band that we would know anything about? Speaker 1: No, he was just playing around here. I remember going to see him at a club on Main Street [Columbus, Ohio], Utopia. I didn't get a chance to see him play a lot, but had him over my house. We always had block parties and things like that, and he would play over. He was almost born into it. He was good. Speaker 2: Your stepfather was a drummer. Speaker 1: He was quite the accomplished drummer. He was drummer and trumpeter and played them both at the same time. So he would play trumpet with his right hand, drums with his left hand at the same time. So then I would start--he would take me to all these clubs that are no longer around here, you know, as a youngster at fourteen and fifteen, I'm playing in the clubs because he would switch over and just play the trumpet and let me play the drums. "Don't tell your mama what you saw, boy" because of belly dancers and all that kind of thing. "Don't you tell your mama what you saw"-- Story_ID: 124116 Speaker 1: You know what I'm thinking about with him playing the drums and playing the trumpet at the same time, Columbus [Ohio]'s most famous jazz musician, as far as I know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Rahsaan? Speaker 1: Rahsaan Roland Kirk--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he could play five sax [saxophones]--I don't know how he did it, but he could play five different sax at one time. Speaker 1: (Unclear) flute and all that. Speaker 2: He was phenomenal. Speaker 1: Did you father know Roland Kirk, or did you see him growing up? Speaker 2: He was older than Rahsaan and I think Kirk was out of Columbus a lot at that time. He wasn't really playing around here that much. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he would be ten years older than you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So it'd be a generation. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We have a story about from [HM] Bernie Casey about Roland Kirk coming to Columbus senior prom, playing three horns and doing tricks. Speaker 2: Yeah, I saw him play at a club off of St. Clair. I can't think the name of the club. But, yeah, we have so many great musicians around here. There's a lot of talented musicians around here. So as a younger, I'd go into all the clubs and sometimes I'd be playing when I could play with my stepfather and then I would go in and just sneak in and just watch these guys play in clubs when I wasn't even old enough to be there, I'd just find a spot and sit there in jam session on Saturday afternoons and that kind of this. Speaker 1: Since we're on this--I gotta go back to grade school, but since we're on this right now, who were some of the musicians from around here that you remember? Speaker 2: Ernie Brown was great guitar player and he played with the "Ink Spots" later on, Riley Randolph was a bassist and that's--and Riley Randolph owned the newsstand that I would go to. And gosh that was something that I enjoyed more than anything was being able to go to that newsstand and pick up the New York Amsterdam News, the Chicago Defender, the Baltimore Afro-American. You know, he had every major newspaper in that little newsstand at Mt. Vernon Avenue. It was actually a pretty good size place--he had magazines you could buy. He had a soda fountain. It was really a very nice place. So Riley Randolph, Rusty Bryant, Gene Walker played. Gene played the sax and Rusty played the sax. I can't think of the guy's name that played the Hammond B3 organ, he was--Uncle Dave--Uncle Dave played the Hammond B3 organ, Billy Brown on the drums and just awesome musicians. Kurt--what is McMullen's last name-- I can't think of his last name, but, anyhow, he ended up playing with sort of my generation and played with [HM] Jerry Butler and played with Curtis Mayfield. And he lived right across the street from me, kind of catty across the street from me, McMullen did, and Skip Anderson played with me and Skip ended up playing keyboards for a long time with Luther Vandross and Kenny Scott ended up playing trumpet with Tower Power. He played with me as well, so just an awful lot of talent. I could've played professionally, had offers, but I said, "No." I've always been pretty firm about what I'm going to do. "No, I'm going to finish this degree and I'm going to do politics," but you know how music is when the opportunity comes, you either gotta go or not. So we got great people, Jeanette [ph.] Bradley, Bobby Floyd, who kind of stayed around here when they have the ability to go--Bobby is finally stepping out. Now, he told me he was playing with Count Basie's Orchestra. I just saw him last week and a young guy who I didn't play with at all, he's very, very young, Aaron Deal [ph.], his father's funeral home is like right next door. He graduated from Julliard [School, New York City], pianist. There is just so much talent around here. Story_ID: 124117 Speaker 1: Did you like school? Speaker 2: I loved school and was a good student and loved spelling. It was good to have something that you kind of immerse yourself in and was always really good in spelling, did all the spelling bees, won the state, represented Ohio at the national championship [National Spelling Bee] in [Washington] D.C. Speaker 1: That's when you were at what school? Speaker 2: When I was at Fair [Avenue Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio]. And I remember--you were talking about remembrances--I remember my stepfather, who I didn't like, we were living off of Deckenbock Road in Greenlawn and that's now just baseball diamonds. There are no houses over there. They all got erased. They were like projects. They were like barracks. And someone said to me once, "Did you ever live in the projects?" I said, "No." The NAACP was doing something. Then wanted to recognize people who achieved and lived in the projects, and they said, "Didn't you live in the projects?" I said, "No." I just thought not long ago, "Maybe those were the projects. I just didn't know it was the projects over there." I have to go now check with the Columbus Metropolitan Housing Authority to see if Greenlawn really was the projects. But I remember big spelling Bee was coming up and I had the German red measles, and thought I was going to die, man, just sweating, just burning up in fever. I remember my stepfather, George Emerson, standing over me, drilling me with words and all I had was a mattress. I had nothing else in my bedroom, was a mattress, no dresser, no box spring, no headboard, no nothing, just a mattress on the floor and he's standing over me and "spell this, spell this." I got the German red measles and I'm dying, you know, and he's standing there drilling me, yeah. So from there Fair Avenue was the last elementary school--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You went to National Spelling Bee in Washington D.C.? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This is a big deal. How was it done? Did a teacher take all the students on a bus or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, the teacher helped to raise the money for me to go there. Speaker 1: So this is 1961, right, I guess? Speaker 2: It would have been, yep. Speaker 1: 1961. Speaker 2: Yep, 1961. Yeah, that was quite an experience. Speaker 1: How did you do? Speaker 2: I lost. Speaker 1: This was your first time in D.C.? Speaker 2: It was my first time in D.C., yeah. Yes, yes, but it was--I always had a degree of confidence and, as I mentioned, spelling was something that I really enjoyed and back at that time, we used to have spelling Bees where we all had to stand up--I don't know if you remember that kind of thing, but we had to stand up and line the room and so the teacher would give the word and the person that missed would have to sit down. I always knew I'd be the last guy standing. I always knew. I just had this kind of confidence like okay they're all going to fall and I'm going to be the guy, and sure enough, I was. It wasn't so much that I studied so much. It's just I think I was able to sound the words out, figure it out. Speaker 1: I suppose it's the reading too at some level. Speaker 2: Probably. Speaker 1: You were reading newspapers. Speaker 2: Probably reading that my father started, you know, back when I was five and six years old, and he may have started before that, you know, given that we were standing there in the living room of our place on the base. Um, but, yeah, that's always something that I've enjoyed even to this day, having a newspaper, I'm the best proofreader for my newspaper today, and everybody knows that. It's like we can proof this thing but the final proof really should be done by Ray because I'm going to catch it faster than anybody else. Every now and then, you're just going to miss something, but-- Story_ID: 124118 Speaker 1: Let me raise this too--now, 1961, this is--John F. Kennedy is the president. How did you feel about President Kennedy's [1963] assassination? Speaker 2: Wow, you know, Kennedy, you know, I remember the assassination, I remember his brother [Robert F. Kennedy] coming here, you know, in a parade down Mt. Vernon Avenue and I remember Dr. [Martin Luther] King's assassination as well. It was a big loss, you know, you get this young president--I remember being at Fair Avenue [Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio] when. What year did Kennedy come in? Speaker 1: '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: And this big emphasis on athletics and being physically fit, and that was the one thing that I remember as a younger about him, this emphasis about being physically fit. I remember the shelter raid [air raid drills] things that we used to do, and we'd have to get underneath our desks in school and all that, you know, around the time that he was president. So there was--even at that age, there was a feeling of a loss I think because of his age, you know, being a younger, more vibrant-looking person as opposed to an Eisenhower-looking guy, and I was probably more tuned into Eisenhower because my father [Inus Ray Miller, Sr.] is military, Eisenhower is military. They probably all voted for him, even though he was Republican, so then you get this huge contrast from Eisenhower. I remember seeing the pictures from [Adlai] Stevenson and all of that and here you have this guy with a foreign accent, this Boston accent and all of that, and pretty vibrant. So when he was killed, it was like a-a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --I was wondering if you all went to the White House, you know, during this period of time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --No.--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --when you went down for the [National] Spelling Bee? Speaker 2: --No. Speaker 1: Did they do a tour for you all in [Washington] D.C. when you were down for the Spelling Bee? Speaker 2: Yeah, they did, but not to the White House. I would've have remember that one. Speaker 1: I was thinking. We're the same age and I'm thinking the excitement around Kennedy that black people seemed to have in those days, I wonder if you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a period where you had the picture of Kennedy and, you know, King and Robert, everybody had those three pictures and particularly after their death. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's when they all came. Speaker 2: Yeah, we all had those pictures of them-- Story_ID: 124119 Speaker 1: '63 [1963], the March on Washington, you would have been thirteen, did you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I remember watching it on television. I remember watching it on TV and really kind of glued to the TV and, you know, I'm paying a lot of attention to the speeches probably, once again, the introduction that I had from my father back in Hampton [Virginia], the reading of the articles and all that kind of thing, I still have it in my office. I still have the old Life magazine, Ebony magazine. I love reading that kind of thing, so paying attention to the speakers, I mean really not the culminating speech by [Martin Luther] King but really they showed a lot of that in that little black and white TV just watching these guys speak, and starting with A. Philip Randolph and [HM] John Lewis, I mean all everybody who kind of came to the podium and spoke--all these folks out there with their signs and all of that, as a youngster watching that. You see it now as an adult and you have a chance to see it and hear, but as a younger sitting there watching that alone, alone. It's not like I had anybody else watching it with me. Speaker 1: Those are the days, for those who are watching it in the future, those are the days when Columbus [Ohio] had four TV stations, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Likely the three of them would have had the march on the major networks. It's hard not to see it if you're not watching TV, but not everybody even then paid attention. But how did your family dispose toward the movement activities say of 1963 because a lot was going on in 1963? Speaker 2: My mother [Inez Smith Miller] was working and my mother would come home tired and make it to the sofa and the living room and lie down go to sleep every day. She kept us in church, so in Hampton [Virginia] went to Ebenezer Baptist Church, moved to San Antonio [Texas] and she found Ebenezer Baptist Church, moved to Wichita Falls [Texas], Ebenezer Baptist Church, Columbus, Ohio, South Ohio Avenue, Ebenezer Baptist Church; I mean everywhere--she started having kids early, eighth grade education--one thing she knew is that she was going to put her kids in Ebenezer and so we moved here and I was baptized at Ebenezer Baptist Church over on South Ohio Avenue at Reverend Elsie Brown, and then we moved over here on 18th, I started going to Second Baptist [Chuch], which is directly behind my house on 17th there, and once again, I would go to church alone here at Second Baptist, but, as a family, we went to Ebenezer together when we moved here. So my mother, because of education, she wasn't discussing current events. I remember when my mother wasn't working and tired, she'd sit in the front porch and she had this elaborate system for working out the numbers and she would do this incredible formula for what the number was going to be for the day. Then she'd hand me the number and I had to go down to the Chesapeake, it's like a fish place, seafood place, down at Mt. Vernon Avenue [Columbus, Ohio]. She said, "go down here and play this number," and they knew her and they knew how she wanted the number to be played, so I didn't have to remember what had to be boxed and what had to be this and this and that. This is Inez's number. That was quite an honor system they had in terms of playing these numbers when you think about it. You didn't have all the protections of the lottery and all of that, right? If you hit, you got your money. And so that's what I remember in terms of my mother's down time was sitting down trying to figure out this number thing, and then coming home so exhausted. Story_ID: 124120 Speaker 1: So did you have anybody in your family that was--or was anybody around you aware or discussing in terms of what the civil rights stuff that was going down in say '63 [1963] because I think in '63 [1963] the CORE [Congress on Racial Equality] took over the Ohio legislature [Columbus, Ohio] once in '63 [1963] I mean they took over the whole thing. They marched in and stopped the proceeding. In Dayton [Ohio], I know we had a big push by the CORE, especially about the demonstrations in the city. Speaker 2: I didn't know about that. I didn't know about that at all. Speaker 1: That sort of thing. '63 [1963] was a wild year, beginning with the killing of Medgar Evers and the March on Washington, the bombing of 16th Street Mathis Church and then all the CORE demonstrations in the major cities in Ohio. Speaker 2: Yeah, that would have occurred and I would have been, what in the eighth grade? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I got really active. No, I had nobody, not a sister, not a brother, not an uncle, cousin, relative, neighbor, nobody talking about that. What did occur to fast forward a couple of years when President [Lyndon] Johnson came in on the War on Poverty in creation of Offices of the Economic Opportunity and the model neighborhood movement and all of that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Model Cities. Speaker 2: Yeah, Model Cities--that's when I got active right across the street here actually at the Lincoln Theatre is where they had the meetings of the Model Cities--Model Neighborhood Assembly. So I was fascinated by this movement. The first thing is they put in place a governmental structure, the Model Neighborhood Assembly, so our community action agency was flushed in money. We had a guy from Chicago [Illinois], Curtis Brooks, was our director of the community action agency. So you have these guys who I thought were unbelievably cool and conscious. They were talking about rebuilding this community. They were talking about controlling our own destiny and controlling the resources in our community, so they're meeting right across the street in the Lincoln--dashikis, big afros, conga drums, they'd have a call almost when they started the meeting. Tommy Pennel would be playing the congas and I'm the young guy who just turned sixteen, not with any of my friends. I'm the young sixteen-year-old guy in the room because I gotta see this thing, right. And, I'm reading, I'm listening, and I'm thinking, I can represent my community better than the old guys. Story_ID: 124121 Speaker 1: Yes, give us a sense of your perception I guess in those days of the neighborhood and I guess looking back on it, what you've learned from reflecting on it as you've gotten older, what was going on in the mid '60s [1960s] on in the east side of Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Okay now, you mean, give me a year. Speaker 1: I would say in 1966 when you started getting involved in Model Cities [Program] apparently as a need for model cities--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Yeah, absolutely.--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --you know, where they might not have been before. I don't know. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah, when I started getting involved civically, I think I was most impressed with the leadership, and we had an outstanding director of our community action agency. It was called CMACAA, Columbus Metropolitan Area Community Action Agency--Curtis Brooks from Chicago [Illinois]. He was a great idea guy. I mean he was a great idea guy. So, so many people who are in leadership positions even today started their careers working at CMACAA, some of the guys in this building here, working at CMACAA. So Curt could come up with an idea a minute, good, big idea, you know, higher education proposals, economic development proposals, so you got this group meeting here at the Lincoln Theatre, Curtis Brooks, Tommy Dillard, Tom Pennel. I can't think of all the names off the top, Lawrence Awls, you know, I'd go in and listen to these guys talk about improving this community, right, what the community actually needed. They would talk about housing; they would talk about economic development, businesses, and so forth, the reduction of crime, and violence and all of that. So I said, "Well, I know this community better than them," that's what I said, right? I know it better than them, "so I'm going to run." So I ran for district representative to the Model Neighborhood Assembly. Speaker 1: This is when you're sixteen? Speaker 2: Yeah, I lost. I ran and so these guys saw me and I kept coming to the meetings. I liked everything about it. I loved the drum call. I loved Tommy Pennel being such an outstanding conga player. I loved the speeches; I loved the dress and the hairstyle. This was great. I mean this was a great theatre almost, you know, just to be in the room, and Tommy Dillard said to me, who just retired from CMACAA about three months ago, he said, "I got a picture of you when you declared your candidacy to run for Model Neighborhood Assembly." And I said, "Really?" I must have run twice because the picture that he had was when I was a student at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]. I distinctly remember running early but I had forgotten about the fact that I had run for this thing once again when I was a student at Ohio State, so he has a picture of me when I was twenty I believe. I think that's what the article said, twenty, I had my big afro. He has a whole sheet. It wasn't just me. Everybody who was a candidate for district representative for Model Neighborhood Assembly and there I was. So they appointed me to this thing as an at large member and that was sort of the start and they appointed me when I ran the first time after I lost the first time. Speaker 1: Oh, they appointed you to the Assembly anyway? Speaker 2: Yeah, they appointed me to it, you know-- Story_ID: 124122 Speaker 1: And so then I kind of had the bug then, student government at East High School [Columbus, Ohio], student government at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], you mentioned Jerry Friedman, so Jerry becomes the president of the student government, you know, I was a member of the student government at that time. Then Mike White, who became the mayor of Cleveland [Ohio] became our first black president of the student government at Ohio State and I was, you know, again, always been internal kind of guy as opposed to playing outside of the system, I've always played inside the system, starting with the Model Neighborhood Assembly. Speaker 2: So who got you involved in the Model Neighborhood Assembly? I mean was there anyone who drew you in or did you just hear about it and go over there? How did it happen? Speaker 1: No, it wasn't a person. It wasn't a person. It must have been just from reading and paying attention, maybe reading the papers. There was nothing to come over here to this theatre even though it's just a couple blocks from my house. There weren't anything--any meetings that necessarily brought me there before, you know, running, so it probably just came from reading and being aware of what's taking place in the community, and I bet you it was reading the black newspapers. It was probably reading the black newspapers. It may have been reading all the black newspapers, not only here--I'd read the whole paper. I mean I'd read every page of the 'New York Amsterdam News' and, interestingly, it is the size, I mean if you remember the size, it's the size of my newspaper. I remember reading the 'Ohio Sentinel,' and the 'Column Post,' and all those others that I talked about. So if I was reading them, I was aware of what was taking place at the time and in particularly the local paper, so the local paper probably had something about Model Neighborhood Assembly meetings and when the elections are going to be and all that kind of thing, certainly the one that Tom Dillard had me to look back at that had that--had all that in there. But there wasn't an individual. The only individual that I really looked up to, kind of growing up here in Columbus, was my boxing coach, Lee Williams, strong guy. And he wasn't one of those people--you know how some people--you know how folks say, "my mentor told me this," or "My coach told me this and I'll never forget it." Well, he didn't tell me anything. He was just a very strong physically--if he said do it, boy, you'd better do it. You're scared not to do it. If he said, "here's how you throw an overhand right, here's how you throw an uppercut; here's how you jab and so he taught it so well, and I was a good technically with the foot works, with the jabs, I mean with every punch. It was like I was a big, strong guy. As a matter of fact, I look back at those pictures, oh good gracious, I was boney. I was real thin, but I felt so good when he would call me out. He would say, "Miller, go, throw up a cut." That was the extent of his conversation and I felt good because I had a man because I didn't have a father at home, had a stepfather [George Emerson] that I didn't have any relationship, didn't want any relationship with; didn't have uncles; didn't have brothers, the brothers were babies in the second marriage at this point, so I didn't have anybody, any males, so the male in my life was the boxing coach. So, you know, I did a lot of things alone. So when I did the Model Neighborhood Assembly, it must have come from the reading and once I got in, they became role models, even though there wasn't a lot of conversation. It wasn't like somebody took me under their wing. It wasn't like the community action director or any of the other fellows that I mentioned. It wasn't like "Oh, this young guy really has an interest in his community, or in government or in politics, so we're going to make sure that he learns." It didn't occur like that. That came much later when I was a student at Ohio State. I did get that kind of mentorship when I was a student but not, not coming up. Story_ID: 124123 Speaker 1: So, in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], what were you focused on in high school? Was it political--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --music. Speaker 1: Music, okay. Speaker 2: It was politics or anything like that. I was known as the musician. I was know as the drummer. You know, things were happening in the family. I remember when I was in ninth grade at Champion Junior High School [Columbus, Ohio], sitting in the back of the auditorium was not really my style. I do not normally do the back-room kind of stuff. I normally like the front of the room, but I'm in the back of the auditorium and my brother has leukemia and I always wanted a brother. I always had sisters. Second marriages, some people consider like half-brothers, I don't, I never did half-brother stuff, so this was my brother and so he gets leukemia and I'm sitting back there--eighth grade, sorry it was the eighth grade--because my wife--I'll just tell you the whole story. I'm speaking over the King Arts Complex. Right before the speech, a guy comes up to me and says, "I have a lot of materials on your family." I said, "Really?" They've introduced me. I'm getting ready to speak and he said, "I got a whole trunk full of stuff," I said, "Really?" I said, "Where?" He said, "Out in my van." I told the people, "hold up." So I went out to this guy's van. He had moved into the house that I grew in 169 North 18th Street. My stepfather [George Emerson] had all kind of stuff upstairs in the attic, right, the third level--I remember this room. He had all this stuff, so this guy gives me this trunk. I transfer this big trunk from his van to my car. Then I go back and do the speech. It has everything that my mother [Inez Smith Miller] could put into her little carrying cases when we left Texas. Again, you'd have to picture the move. My father [Inus Ray Miller, Sr.] would leave first--he'd come first and leave first at each place we moved. So my mother drove us from Texas to Columbus, Ohio. That's a hell of a trip and you can't put everything, so we left a lot of our stuff in San Antonio [Texas]--no, it would have been Wichita Falls [Texas]. We left a lot of stuff there. So when this guy said he had a trunk full of stuff, I was like, "I want to see this." It was mostly my stepfather's stuff but some of what my mother put in as well. And so an eighth grade report card was in there. So, man, I was terrible. My wife said, "I thought you were a good student." I said, "Let me see that. It was awful. I said, "What the hell could have happened?" Well, that was the year that my brother had leukemia. That was the year I'm going with my mother to the hospital. I'm questioning God in a very serious way. You know, I'm hanging out there. I was like, "Why? This the brother I always wanted. Why, God? Why are you taking him?" And the grades reflected it. I say that to teachers, students when I'm in school. Nobody said to me, not a teacher, a principal, said to me, "Is there anything going on?" I mean, they should have. I'd always been a decent student, better than a decent student. How is it that you end up getting Cs and Ds when you've always been a good student, right? And nobody said anything, and they didn't. Story_ID: 124124 Speaker 1: Was there a mix of teachers in terms of black and white teachers? Speaker 2: Man, I was so lucky at Champion [Junior High School, Columbus, Ohio] and East [High School, Columbus, Ohio]--because of the segregation, most of the teachers at Champion were master-degree-level--because of the segregation, a lot of male teachers and strong disciplinarians. It's not like you had to beat into doing reading, studying and that kind of thing, but I remember these guys just being strong disciplinarians. They really knew their stuff; they were well educated and we benefitted from the segregation of, you know, having a lot of male teachers--maybe because of the number of male teachers, nobody said a word to me about what was going on in my academic life, you know, in my personal life that affected the academics but I do remember them being real strong. It was just good to have good, black male role models around. But I never benefitted, like I said, from having anybody to kind of like take me under their wing and counsel me, and do this--even when I was a student at East High School, I didn't have a counselor to say, "You've done well in a number of different areas and you ought to go to college." I didn't have that. I had a counselor, a very pretty woman, Mrs. Lowry (ph.), I ended up knowing her husband well, Irv [ph.]. It's interesting what they say about you now. We always knew Ray was going to be successful and I could tell by his walk--and I knew--and I'm like, "Yeah, nobody ever told me that." So Ms. Lawry told me when I was in my senior year at East, you should go to the Army. My friends are announcing what college they're going to go to and so forth. And she said, "You should go to the [U.S.] Army." I'm like, "Are you serious? Why?" She was nice, sweet, very pretty woman. I come home and I told my mother. I was really disturbed by this. I said, "Ms. Lawry said that I should go to the Army." I said, "I'm not doing that." My mother ripped me, man. She said, "Why do you think you're so good that you can't go to the Army?" I remember my front room in my little house here on 18th Street and she said, "My brother went to the Army, both of them went to the Army. What makes you think you're so good that you can't go?" I'm like, "because my friends are coming back in boxes, that's why." Vietnam is going on, right? And I just remember leaving. I just walked out of the house and just walked, just walked probably for hours. Then I decided, again, on my own. I said, "I'm going to Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio]," and didn't have any scholarship to go to Kent State, so I'm going to work at Lazarus [F&R Lazarus & Company department store] and I'm going to earn enough money, and I'm going to go on to Kent. Speaker 1: So your counselor didn't give you any clues on how to get loan money or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, none of that, man. And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: This is a black counselor. Speaker 2: --all black. Everything was black-- Story_ID: 124125 Speaker 1: In Columbus [Ohio], East [High School]--we need to establish this is like the--I guess it's the black high school, because it's the first one and the one that is the most well known around the state for basketball championships. They won the state championship like seven times in a row once. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true--the historic East High School and the principal--It's interesting and you've dealt with a lot of history at the time what's really going versus how one gets characterized twenty years later or in death. So Jack Gibbs who was the principal and the truth of the matter is Jack had his preferences and if you lived where I lived, you weren't in the pool of those he encouraged. If you lived in Eastgate, if you lived off in the driving park area, if you lived in the Franklin Park area, in one of the big houses; if, you know, your parents may have been educated, if there was even a look to some of the students--there seemed to be a preferential kind of look to the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: There is an innerness and ranking of black people by other black people. Speaker 2: He did a tremendous job of going out and getting money, getting scholarship money for all of the students. So I'm sitting there and I'm like, "Wow, what is it that distinguishes me? These are all of my friends because I was fairly involved, popular guy, you know, award-wining and all of that. And you just heard my background. I went to the botillion, to the cotillion, not because my family was educated or high income or anything like that. It's just that I was so popular, they couldn't leave me out, so the young girls wanted me to be at their cotillion. They wanted me to be at those things. I'm sorry I was not in a botillion. I attended the cotillion--the botillion is what I'm talking about actually. I mean there would have been some preference if I were in the botillion thing for the boys. Speaker 1: You would have to pay them money? Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but-- Story_ID: 124126 Speaker 1: [East High School, Columbus, Ohio principal] Jack Gibbs--what he did for me was he threw me out of school. That's what he did for me. And my mother [Inez Smith Miller] was amazed. Speaker 2: What happened? Speaker 1: It was a situation--I was president of all the bands, so we were doing this big rehearsal for 'The Sound of Music' and I'm talking to the student and I got my hat on and the English teacher comes by and says, "Take off your hat in the building." I said, "Okay." I'm still there, it's winter time. I'm about to leave but on another conversation, I put my hat back on. She comes by, she said, "I told you to take your hat off, right?" So then she tells the principal that I disobeyed, that I was disrespectful to her. She was a white teacher, young, white English teacher and Jack Gibbs was African American, All-American fullback for Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] when he was in college, big guy, strong guy, tough, really tough-minded principal. He said, "I understand you were disrespectful to Ms. Fisher." I said, "No, she asked me to take my hat off. I did. Then she came by again and asked me to take my hat off." I said, "I was getting ready to leave the building. I didn't even notice that I put it on." He said, "Well, you gotta take some licks." I said, "Mr. Gibbs, I'm not taking any licks. I didn't do anything wrong, right"? I said, "It was just in conversation," and I said, "I was not disrespecting her." He said, "Well, she said, you did." He said, "You're going to take these licks or you're going to go home." I said, "I'm not taking licks." He grabs me--this is back in the day, right. He grabs me--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: This is 1967. Speaker 1: Big guy, big guy and he throws me all the way across the room and I slam into a corner. These guys are rough. I had a similar situation when I was a boxer with one of the boxing coaches who coached over at another school because I had beat up some of his guys in the ring. Anyhow I picked myself up. I said, "I'm not taking any licks." He said, "Well, you're going home." So he suspends me. In the middle of the afternoon, I'm coming home. My mother is at the door and she said, "What are doing home?" I said, I got suspended." She said, "You got suspended?" I said, "Yep, I got suspended." She said, "For what?" I told her. Here's the interesting thing. The band instructor was from Austria, Inre Szekfu was his name--interesting story. So Inre because I was the president, because I was the timpanist-'The Sound of Music' has this big role for the timpanies [sic], and he's like, "Oh my God, how are we are to do this performance without Miller?" So I'm home and he calls. Inre works things out. Mrs. (unclear) works things out that if I come back and apologize to Ms. Fischer, they'll let me go back to school. So I go back. The principal says, "You gotta go back and apologize." I said, "Okay, I'll do it." And I went over to her--couldn't do it, never apologized and never heard anything more about it, and went ahead and did. You know what's interesting about it--now, here's a guy, Inre Szekfu, who was in--escaped a concentration camp and so forth, marries my sister, ends up marrying my oldest sister, Olivia, and he must have been twenty years older than her. This was after--he married her after she had been married before. Speaker 2: That's a strange story. How do you spell his last name? Speaker 1: (unclear) Speaker 2: Szekfu. Speaker 1: S-z-e-k-f-u. First name was Inre, I-N-R-E. He played in the Columbus Symphony for years and he was a very accomplished bassoonist. He played the bassoon. Story_ID: 124127 Speaker 1: I've often thought, you know, being from Dayton [Ohio], that all the bands in Dayton and knowing about all the bands from Cincinnati [Ohio] that have come out that are in our age group, Ohio players, and Bootsy [Collins] is from Cincinnati. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And [Rahsaan] Roland Kirk and all the people, that Ohio has had tremendous music instruction in the public schools. Speaker 2: I played with a group called the Four Mints, and we recorded. We traveled all over the country and that was a good experience, a very good experience. Speaker 1: This happened before? Speaker 2: I started playing professionally, kind of getting introduced to it kind of early but when I was a senior in [East] High School [Columbus, Ohio] and all the way through college--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It's called what? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: The Four Mints. M-I-T-N-S [sic], M-I-N-T-S. Four Mints. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I made a song--"Row my Boat," and "You're my Desire." So that put us on the shows with all the big guys, with the OJs, with the Dells--with the Delphonics, with Curtis Mayfield, so we're like the front act, you know, you're playing when people are getting seated. But we were the front act. Speaker 1: So you were playing drums? Speaker 2: Yeah, and then once we recorded a couple of songs and, you know, we're playing Baltimore [Maryland], we're playing all down the Carolinas, Raleigh [North Carolina], Greensboro [North Carolina]. We're playing in Iowa. We were all over the place, man, but, yeah, I played on shows with the Ohio Players. They would come here to play at the Jamaica. I remember years later because I'm older than Bootsy, not Bootsy, but Zapp [Terry Troutman]-(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Troutman, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm older than him, but folks wanted me to meet this guy. "Do you know Zapp?" I said, "No, I don't know Zack." They said, "No, Zapp." I met him, much younger. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so many groups. Speaker 2: A lot of talent. Players--all the stuff that the Players did is still outstanding. Story_ID: 124128 Speaker 1: Your--during your senior year [1967-1968], I have to ask, did the [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] basketball team win the state championship that year? Speaker 2: We lost. We won when I was in the eleventh grade, but we lost because the guys were because went out drinking wine. That's all it was. They played Linden, Jim Clemens, who ended up playing with L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and coaching with L.A., a good friend of mine, became a good friend of mine at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], but Jim played with Linden and they beat us our senior year. We had an incredible team. Vance Carr, Eddie Ralif [ph.], I mean we were just loaded with talent. We had a Hi-Y team that won the tri-state, our Hi-Y team. Did you guys have Hi-Y? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. So we won the tri-state, Ohio, Indiana, Kentucky and our Hi-Y team had as much talent as much talent as our varsity team. In fact, our Hi-Y team beat the varsity team the year that they won the state. I mean that's how much talent we had, but these were the guys who either would get in trouble for missing school, for drinking wine, for poor grades, they made the Hi-Y team. Then there guys like me who just weren't good enough to make the varsity, so, you know, I made the Hi-Y team, wasn't a starter on the Hi-Y team, but was on the team, but we were loaded, tremendous ball players. Story_ID: 124129 Speaker 1: Okay, so your aspiration as a [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] senior is to go to Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] and your plan is to work at Lazarus [Department Store] and earn the money. Speaker 2: Yep, didn't have a scholarship to go to Kent and quickly learned that there was no way I could earn enough money working at Lazarus in men's alterations, even though I learned a lot about alterations and sewing clothes and all of that. They promoted me in men's alterations I think to get me out into men's suits, where I could earn commission and a little bit more money. They promoted to manager of the work clothes, where the working-the clothes were for the guys who worked in the highways and things like that, I mean really heavy. And I had really no interest in that. Speaker 1: So this is the summer of '67 [1967] after you graduated? Speaker 2: Yes, this is the summer of '67 [1967]. I wasn't making any money, five dollars an hour or something like that. It was something terrible. So I said, "Let me go to Franklin University [Columbus, Ohio] and continue to try to save my little bit of money so I could go to Kent. So Franklin University, at that time, was in their trimester system. And so I started at Franklin and that would have been '60-I guess '68 [1968]--would have been start of '68 [1968] something like that. That was when Franklin University was in the YMCA down here. It didn't even have a real campus and took psychology, calculus and a business course, and it didn't work out. So I said, "Let me go ahead and go to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]." So I transferred to Ohio State in the spring, which is a terrible time to start school, but I transferred to Ohio State in the spring and the calculus course transferred over and the business course transferred, you know, the credits. So because I had these credits, I could pledge, which is a terrible thing, I could pledge a fraternity. So here I come up in the spring quarter and I pledge, right? Oh my gosh, that was not smart. I about flunked out of school in the first quarter. I mean grades were terrible, you know. But I made a good return. Speaker 1: So what fraternity did you pledge? Speaker 2: Alpha [Phi Alpha]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I pledged fraternity there. And then I dropped off the line. I mean I went through the whole process and we're ready to go hell week and I got my grades. This is when they mailed the grades to your home, and I went home every day to try to catch the mailman before my mother saw these grades and I succeeded. So I got the grades and they were awful. So I took them downstairs. We had a big coal furnace. I threw them in to burn them up. So my mother says, "Well, where's your grades? Where is your grade card?" I said, "You don't get on in your first quarter." I said, "You don't get one in your first quarter." I went to work. I never missed another quarter. I went every summer and studied like crazy, which was combined with having a girlfriend who dumped me. And that was the first time that had occurred in my life. So because of her, then I totally focused on the books, you know, straight on through. Story_ID: 124130 Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, Ohio State [University (OSU), Columbus, Ohio], now you're here during a time of big change on Ohio campuses. Now, were you part of the black student organization in Ohio State? Speaker 2: I was. I was part of the black organization, not a leader in the organization. Again, my leadership came through the system--through the student government. I had good friends who were more the student leaders, Ako [ph.] Cambond [ph.], Jeancheana [ph.] Shuma [ph.] or Paul Cook is his name, Machuma Bandale [ph.] I mean these guys were more the activists. Speaker 1: That's Paul Cook, the history teacher, professor? Speaker 2: That's correct, yes, yes, yes. And he's teaching a course over at the extension center, OSU extension center in history. So Paul, Ako [ph.], Bandala [ph.], Ron Cade, I mean guys like that were--I would consider our student leaders, even though there was a whole generation of guys before them, like John Evans, and Mike Williams, and Al--I can't remember Al's last name. So there was a group of seniors when we arrived that were very serious, terribly bright guys, you know, and actually you can't even talk about student activism at Ohio State without talking about them first because they really were trailblazers, very militant, outlined the agenda that we simply picked up on, I mean they outlined the agenda for more black faculty and staff, more black students, you know, better treatment overall of black students there. There weren't that many. There were probably like around four thousand or something like that on the campus. Speaker 1: Out of a population of what? Speaker 2: At that time, close to probably close to forty thousand, thirty-five thousand or forty thousand, you know, students, yeah. Speaker 1: So this is Ohio State University--this is either the largest university in the United States or it's the second largest depending on what time period you're looking at, right? Speaker 2: Exactly right. Ohio State has always gone back and forth whether the University of Texas is the biggest--it just depends on the quarter almost. But Ohio State now has fifty thousand students and they still don't have a large black student population. It probably is in the neighborhood of six thousand African American students. Today, more minority students are coming in but in terms of African American students, it's still about six thousand. So, yeah, I was part of the, we called it, "Afro A and M" and attended all the meetings, periodically had something to say but not much. I--we had a group of guys who were very clear. Mike White was walking around the campus. I'm going to be the first black mayor of Cleveland, and I'm going to be the next Carl Stokes. Adam Clayton Powell comes to Ohio State University and Adam, Congressman, all the stuff he was going through. He was in. He was out. He was expelled. Speaker 1: Censored, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, so when he came to speak at Mershon Auditorium, I was in the student government. I'm sitting, once again, this is interesting, in the back of the auditorium. And I'm watching this guy who looked as much as a white as an African American, flamboyant, confident, arrogant, preacher. I mean this guy is walking the stage, and I'm sitting there mesmerized by all of this that he had, all of this charisma. I mean he had all of that going and I said, "That's who I want to be like. I want to have that degree of confidence." So Mike's walking around, wanting to be the mayor; I'm going around I'm going to be congressman. I left that session that day over at Mershon, I went to our student government meeting that night, and I became Adam Clayton Powell. I'm walking around the room, my arms are flailing, I'm talking about trash pick on High Street; I'm talking about safety in campus and that kind of thing, right? And they're looking at me like, "what has come over this guy?" They said, "It's not all that serious, right?" I'm almost ready to say, "Keep the faith, baby," in the end and throw up the Adam Clayton Powell victory signs, right. But Reggie Wilkerson who ended up being the director of the prison system in Ohio, Reggie was around the campus at the time talking about being a warden. We thought he was the strangest fellow. I mean it was such a political time and here's this guy talking about being a warden, you know. He was a little different. I mean, you know, he pledged Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity]. Story_ID: 124131 Speaker 1: You know, I came back--I don't know if I finished the story. I came back and went in over my fraternity in the graduate chapter right after--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --So you weren't in A Phi A [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] in college [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] as such? Speaker 1: No. I pledged in college and then came into the fraternity in the graduate chapter 1978. Speaker 2: So it's interesting you were involved in Afro-Am politically but you're also involved with student government in the larger picture. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So how many black students were involved in student government in those days? Speaker 1: About four, about three or four out of--I think there were, twenty-six of us. There were twenty-six of us. Speaker 2: Did you feel like you represented the black students? Speaker 1: I did. Yeah, I took that on as that's why I was there to represent the interests of African American students on the campus. I really got totally involved in my major and did everything that my advisor told me to do. That's where I started getting real mentorship was in college. Speaker 2: Who was your advisor? Speaker 1: Jim Kweder. Speaker 2: Jim Kweder. How do you spell his last name? Speaker 1: K-W-E-D-E-R. And this guy, white guy, he was excellent. All of the guys who had an interest in practical politics, he'd talk to us; he'd counsel us; he'd advised us--at campaign politic seminars, he said, "You need to be in that." If there was a job opening, he would say, "There's a job opening over here that fits well for you." We had a campaign politics course and I still remember all the guys who were in it. Everybody ended up succeeding in whatever they went into, business, banking, all those kind of things, politics. So, you know, being in student government was real consistent with that kind of advisor that I had and then later on, I had Dr. William Nelson, Nick Nelson in grad school. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Nick was very helpful. I had a great counselor in the College of Arts and Sciences when I was an undergraduate student, an African American male, Ray Hamilton. Ray had also played football at Ohio State, and was just--he was on our side. He was a good counselor. You know, whatever the challenge seemed to be, he was on your side. You know, he would push. I had a couple of situations. I wanted to get out of my last quarter of Latin, and didn't need the hours and had a professor was a terribly racist professor, wouldn't acknowledge me as a person. I mean the professor would look straight through me. He would not acknowledge me as a person. Everybody was having difficulty with Latin in that class. So we'd go up after class, students would ask him a question, all the white students--I was the only black guy in the class, and so he made me wait until everybody was through with their questions, and then he would just look at me, and he'd just look at me. He'd fold up his stuff, and he would walk away. So I'd go to my counselor and tell him, "I gotta get out of this. This guy is racist." He said, "Here's the process." So we appealed it all the way up to the president, who was Novice [G.] Fawcett at the time, but I went through every channel and it was because I had that kind of support from my counselor, from Ray Hamilton, who said, "Go to the chair, go to the dean," go right to the next step, so I appealed to the president, and I still didn't get out of the course. I still had to take the last quarter. But I felt really good about exhausting all of the possibilities in terms of not having to take this course. You know, it was good to talk to the president about it, and I felt good that I didn't embarrass myself because when I walked in, he had my whole transcript on his desk and it was like, "So you seem to have done okay here, Mr. Miller, what's the problem?" I'm thinking "Gosh, what if I had done really poorly? Here I've appealed myself all the way to the top to the president's office and he would have said, 'get out of here, go take this course." Story_ID: 124132 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] crisis and this reverberations here 'cause I know it stretched all the way to where I was. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Nineteen-seventy [1970], I guess in the spring, the students are shot at Kent State by the National Guard. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I know there were demonstrations in all of the Ohio campuses and around the country too around this before and after this because the big Vietnam push was going on. So what was going on here? Speaker 2: That's when we had the National Guard come in here at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]. Um, we had so many protest movements happening at the same. If you recall, we had the war--you know, the Vietnam War; we had Women's Movement; we had our movement for African American students, faculty, staff and so forth. There was flower power--we had--there weren't heavy drugs other than marijuana and hallucinogens, you know, pills and that kind of thing. But you had all this kind of stuff happening at the same time. Then the Kent State happened and it ignites it on the campus. The National Guard comes in and I remember coming face-to-face with those guys, and looking at them. They're young and they're just young and scared. And many of them probably coming from communities where they didn't have interaction with African Americans. So here we are as African American students, pushing our agenda, protesting the war, all those kind of things, almost simultaneously. And I remember being out behind the union behind the union at that big--I think they still have it there--and the legislature had put in place a new law that said you couldn't assemble more than some number, five or six, couldn't assemble together. So here we had, underneath that big oak tree, five or six folks. The National Guard marching from the Oval over towards the Union and they circle us and they got their guns with bayonets. I told you I grew up with fighters, both mother and father, so, you know, I said--I started challenging them. Then I hit the guy's gun and I said, "We're getting out of here." I hit the gun. I remember this guy's face. He was young and he was scared. He's got the bayonet. Speaker 1: They were drawing down on you. Speaker 2: Yeah, they had us--and I'm like, "Wow, this could be Kent State?"--could have been Kent State. Speaker 1: Did this take place after Kent State? Speaker 2: This was after Kent State. Kent State was what year, '70 [1970]? Speaker 1: 1970. Speaker 2: This was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Kent State was in '70 [1970], I think it was in April. Speaker 2: I think it may have been right before. Yeah, I think it may have been right before. Yeah, because we had protests at Ohio State from '68 [1968] straight up until the end of '70 [1970] pretty active. Speaker 1: That was the year I think they burnt down the National Guard building at Miami University [Oxford, Ohio] in that era. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yep, but the thing I remember about that was how young those guys were, how scared they were, and if you're young and afraid, how easy it would have been for them to just shoot and then, you know, I'm impetuous enough to challenge and raised in such a way that I'm not going to let anybody just disrespect me like that. I had my future wife, you know, I've been married to the same woman for forty years, so there are me and my wife under that tree together, dating. Speaker 1: So they let you walk away after you pushed the gun away? Speaker 2: No, they did not. They backed us right on back down and then they walked away, we walked away. I think people felt--I think the students felt how vulnerable we were and there was some fear. I'm just not that kind of person myself, so I wasn't really afraid, but I think a number of the other students were really afraid. Story_ID: 124133 Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's interesting. So were you all having some kind of meeting that would have--or you were just talking? Speaker 1: We were probably just talking. It wasn't any kind of meeting. We would hang out by that tree before we would go to our next class and that kind of thing. Speaker 2: So it wasn't even in the heat of any kind? Speaker 1: No except for we saw them coming marching down and we weren't going to run. We weren't doing anything, so we just stood our ground, so to speak. But, yeah, we had good student leaders. And we were lucky to have that kind of balance. Like I mentioned, with the older guys, with Mike Williams, with John Evans, with Al, with--then we had a number of guys who were active in their fraternities, who later on went on to become dentists, doctors, Ron Cade and all those guys. Then we had the younger group. We had the Ako [ph.] Cambond [ph.] and the Paul Cook. They were a year behind me, so I was sort of in the middle there. And I'm a year older than Mike White, so Mike was in the same class with Ako [ph.] Cambond [ph.] and I think it was a good mix for leadership and very active leadership. I'm talking brilliant guys--I mean John Evans and those guys. What is so interesting about John, he ends up being a red cap [doorman], you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (unclear). Speaker 1: --Probably one of the greatest minds that we had on the campus--I was in California and I look over to the Ritz Carlton--the Ritz Carlton was right across the street from where I was staying, "Wow, that looks like John Evans, red cap at the door," and it was. To see this guy who was this big thinker, this brilliant black leader on the campus as a red cap, that was--and he has been here. We have had a chance to sit down and talk probably four or five months ago or less. He made an interesting choice in what he wanted to do. Speaker 2: Did he talk about why he was a red cap? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Or why he was doing that? I don't know if he ends up like that. Speaker 1: He did it for a whole career. I think he may have retired. He has earned good money for doing it. You just never would imagine that this is a guy who--who is similar to a John Evans? Huey Newton and Eldridge Cleaver and those guys wouldn't even come close in terms of intellect. They would not even come close. The kind of rhetoric of [HM] Haki Madhubuti, Randall Robinson, I mean big thinkers. Speaker 2: Ron Daniel or somebody like that? Speaker 1: Bigger, bigger than Ron--I mean the last name that I just mentioned, Randall Robinson, that kind of a thinker and he became a red cap. Speaker 2: What you're saying a doorman, a doorman at the Ritz Carlton? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: A bell man, a head guy? Speaker 1: Exactly. I wasn't comfortable enough to ask him, "John, why did you choose this career?" And he has never said--he has never provided that opening for me and he's still a big thinker. He still is. If you ever want to look at the student movement, he would be the guy to talk to. I had a great conversation with him, like I said, a few months--downstairs in Zanzibar a few months, yeah. And that's why I think it would be historically inaccurate and disrespectful not to mention him before you would mention an Ako [ph.] and those guys. Story_ID: 124134 Speaker 1: Well, I know it's a lot of people who have gone through that period of time [late 1960s], who recognize who the pioneers are. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It's like an ancestry--I mean, not an ancestry, they're not dead, but a lineage of leadership the people (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's why I don't put myself in that group. Those guys put themselves in the front line. They got expelled. They got charged; they had to go to court. They had to raise money for their legal defense, and I'm an internal guy working within student government, a leader there who, you know, ended up leading the protests, being involved in negotiations. You know how people are after the fact, I did this and I did that. I have respect for historical accuracy, so I can easily say I was there, and yeah. I knocked a guy out but that was consistent with who I was because we shut the school down. Speaker 1: When was this? Speaker 2: This had to be '70s [1970], you know, right around '70 [1970]. We were not allowing students to go into certain buildings. There was this one student who insisted he was going to go in, and I said, "You're not." So we had blocked all the doors. So consistent with my training, I knocked him out. That became the talk all day long. "Ray Miller knocked this guy out, cold (unclear)." Yeah. Story_ID: 125007 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], so undergraduate years at Ohio State, so--now how many years did you serve in the student government? Speaker 2: Two--two years in the student government. Speaker 1: Those were your last two years? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you went on even though you knocked a man out and pushed aside a National Guard's gun, you were able to go on to graduate school at Ohio State. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I would have to law school but my advisors in political science had filled my head up, you know, so much that I thought I was something special. And this was a time when a lot of people were talking about going to law school, so we went and took the LSAT, the law school exam, and the talk was "what's your score?" I scored well enough to go, so I walk over from the Student Union, where we all met, right next door to the law school. I go to the law school and I remember having--well, I would've been arrogant, I don't know if there's a better word for it. I walk over to the law school and I say to the receptionist, "My name is Ray Miller." And she looks at me like "and," I said, "I think I want to apply to law school." She gives me the process. I remember looking at her like, "You don't know who I am, do you? I'm the star of the political science department, right?" Because Kweder and Ripley and all these guys--there weren't that many of us--there weren't that many black students in political science. It's an area a lot of people talked about but didn't have that many actually majoring in it. So I go back and tell my guys, my friends and advisors, Kweder and company. I said, "I want to go to law school." They said, "No, you don't want to do. You want to go to graduate school. You want to earn a graduate school. You want to earn a doctorate." They gave me some money, so they prevailed. So I went into political science. I got tired of that and I switched over to public administration and because I had taken so much--even as an undergraduate--I had taken so much political science, had taken a number of advanced courses when I was an undergraduate student there. I mean I think I had taken most of the six hundred level courses by the time I had graduated there. Anyhow, I went into graduate school and began work. I came down to the [Ohio state] legislature. They created, and once again this is good advising at Ohio State, they created a legislative fellowship program in the [Ohio] General Assembly, and so when I graduated in '71 [1971], I applied to this legislative fellowship program and got accepted and it was--when it was designed, it was a full-time fellowship for one year. I get accepted into that. They changed it--no, I'm sorry, no, this is the reverse. It was a part-time fellowship and you could go to graduate school. That's what it was. Then when I got accepted, they changed it to a full-time and then it was like having a job. And did that, got married December 18 of '71 [December 18, 1971], and then went on. Story_ID: 125008 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, how did you meet--did you meet your wife as a student? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, met her as an undergraduate student. We met coming off the relationship that I had with the young lady, where I fell head over heels and she obviously didn't, and so I kind of put--I mean it was really interesting and benefited me so much. I simply stopped dating anybody. I mean and I was a musician. I would leave school and go to rehearsals and we would play all over the place. Young ladies would want to talk to me, and I'm like, "No." I was hurt. The brother was really hurt by this experience. So, anyhow, I think it was toward my senior year that I met Marty [Miller]. Then at that time, I had picked up two or three young ladies who I was seeing, and when I saw her, I said, "She's the one." You know, we ended up getting engaged after about a year and married in '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Okay, so did that change? Here you are working with the state legislature, you're married and you're making some money for the first time, well, you're getting--so how does--I mean so what is your goal at this point? Did your goal change? Speaker 2: Here's what happened. I got assigned to state rep [Ohio State Representatives], two--one was William Mallory, out of Cincinnati [Ohio], and he was the majority floor leader, and the other state rep was Richard F. Celeste, Dick, and Dick was the whip. So here I am in the office, working for the majority floor leader and the whip, and I'm fascinated by Dick Celeste. I come into the legislature from the black student days from shutting down a university--I'm still wearing an [U.S.] Army jacket and black tam. I'm not doing a suit, right, Army jacket and black tam, still got the Black Panther look, even though I wasn't in the Panthers, we had the look. So it's a select program; I get accepted, and I'm the intern. And Mallory, even though I wanted to give all my time to him, the African American, but he's not working as hard as Dick Celeste. I'm writing him all these letters; I'm giving him constitute case work and he's not signing letters. I'm like, "What is up with this? What is the problem?" And he said to me, I'll never forget the words, "I have learned that if you don't start this, you don't have to worry about continuing it." You don't have to worry about having to stop doing this at a point in time. All these letters that I had written and typed, proofed, all this; this guy, threw it in the trash, and at that moment, I said, this is the guy I'm going to work with. So I switched all of my--and it hurt, it was very painful. I switched over to Dick Celeste and started to give him more of my time. We had a meeting at the Black Caucus. It was really interesting because this is what had occurred. Prior to 1966, state representatives were elected on a state sheet ballot. They were elected at large, so the court decision, they create these legislative districts, so in 1966 for the election in 1967, that's when C. J. McLin, and a number of these guys, Bill Bowen, Phil Hale [ph.], all these guys come in and they are the most well known people in their community. C. J.'s father had been involved in politics, ran the Democratic Voter's League, had the funeral homes and so forth--funeral home at that time, Phil Hale, a prominent pastor here, Bill Bowen, president NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. So all of these guys came from that kind of prominence. Story_ID: 125009 Speaker 1: At--so they take office in 1967, right? And so they finish their first term, 1969. Then they have a degree of comfort. They're starting to feel this thing. There's never been anybody before them except back in the '40s [1940], you got Jacob Ashburn, one other Democratic elected official, Carl Stokes--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --was when Blackburn from Dayton [Ohio]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Blackburn, yes, but the prominent one was Carl Stokes, who had been elected I think in '64 [1964] or '66 [1966] very astute, very charismatic, knew how to play the game. And then he ran for mayor, lost. Ran again and then won. And so he preceded them. I only remember Blackburn from pictures. He must not have been a major player at all, but I do remember seeing him in photos. So these guys come, and the picture I'm painting is that the first time you got a critical mass of black state legislators. And I come very early on in the legislative history. Again, they get elected in '67 [1967], '69 [1969], boom there I am. Now, I come in that year--at the end of that year, so C. J. [McLin], who clearly is one of the most astute politicians in the country, uses me. He sees, "okay, this guys is smart and likes politics," so C. J. would send me over to meet with [Ohio governor] Jim Rhodes. He had that degree of confidence in me that he would say, "I want you to meet with the governor." He was doing it for this reason. I would go over to see Jim Rhodes. Jim Rhodes was the biggest salesperson that I've ever seen. So Jim Rhodes--I walk in the door and Jim Rhodes would start, "You tell Mack I said," so and so and, "the train is moving out of the station. If he wants to get on board, he better get on board right now because here's what we're doing." I'm just standing there. I'm just taking notes. I can't get a word in edge wise, but I'm the representative. So go back and I tell C. J. and C. J. knew what he was doing. The governor said this--the governor said, "This is what he is putting forward. You want to be on board, this is what you gotta do," and he did that in more than one occasion. It was wonderful for me to be involved at that level, where I'm meeting with the governor and I'm meeting with the most black politician in the state and certainly one of the most powerful black politicians in the country. C. J. is just terribly astute guy, but people had told me if I had met his father, that you would know. I went beyond Dick Celeste [Richard F. Celeste]. Dick was very, very helpful to me. What happened was this, I had done some research at the request of the Senator Bill Bowen out of Cincinnati [Ohio]. Bowen asked me to look in the Department of Youth Services because black folks weren't being treated well in the Department of Youth Services. This is back when I was an intern. And I was happy to do it. It was a black thing, black consciousness. I'm being asked by this black state senator to do this work and the director's name was Joe White, I remember, of youth services. So I look into this whole thing and now I come to present my findings for the Black Caucus. They're meeting upstairs. They're hiding. Remember they came in '66 [1966]. They had been elected two terms and they're just getting comfortable with this place. Stuff is happening like the riots in college campuses and they're having to be the black spokespersons and the legislature on this. So here I come and they asked me to do this research. I'm looking at doors. I'm looking to find the Ohio legislature, at that time, they were called "BEDO," Black Elected Democrats of Ohio. I'm looking to find this plaque outside the door. I can't even find these guys. I can't hear no voices. I'm like, "Where are these guys?" So I found out where they were. I'm getting ready to walk into the room and the guy who I was interning to, Bill Mallory, says, "Hold it, you can't come in here." And I was out done. I was like, I've done all this research. I got this heightened black consciousness because I am not that far removed from the campus and here is this state representative saying "You can't come in." I look at the senator, Bill Bowen, who asked me to do this research. I'm still outside the door. They're sitting at the table. I look at him. He looks away like--and Mallory is from his town in Cincinnati [Ohio] and he's looking at me like, "well, hell, if he doesn't want you here, then I can't overrule that. You work directly with him." I took my stuff. I went downstairs. Dick Celeste, as usual, was working like a madman. And he knew I was unhappy anyhow because I'm fighting to get in with the brothers. And so Dick looks at me, and I said to him, "From this day forward, I work with you, only with you." He said, "Good" He took a stack--because he had already seen the quality of my work, working for both of them even though I was doing more for Mallory. So he gives me all this constitute casework and I became really close to Celeste and part of the "Celestials," as we were called, and went to all the retreats and all that kind of thing with him. I helped him to get elected to lieutenant governor. He offered me a job and I said, "No, I don't want to work with you directly but certainly continue to advise," and all that kind of thing. Story_ID: 125010 Speaker 1: So I developed this really close relationship with him [Ohio State Assembly Majority Whip Richard F. Celeste]. While I'm working with him, that's when C. J. McLin and Ike Thompson from Cleveland [Ohio]--they come into my little space that I had outside of Celeste's office. You know that was my little office and they said, "We want you." C. J. said, "We want you go with us." I said, "Go where?" I'm already bitter because you all kicked me out of your little black meeting, right? I said, "Go where?" He said, "We want to work with BEDO." I said, "I don't want to work with BEDO." I said--here's what I want to do. "I'm going to finish my internship. I'm going to work for the legislative commission and then I'm going to be what you are." And I'm sitting and Ike is like 6'4", big guy, and C. J. standing there; and I went ahead and turned from him. C. J. did not give up. C. J. came back and said, "This will be a good experience for you if you work with BEDO. You need this." We kind of went around about it. I said, "I don't need it." I mean I really was not feeling these guys at all. And I didn't know anything about the C. J. McLin reputation at that time in any depth. I mean I knew how influential he was but I didn't know to what great extent. So in any event, I then get appointed as an aide to the Speaker of the House, Vern Rife, and C. J. comes over the same day that I get appointed as an aide to the speaker and says, "Come with me." I was like, "come with you where?" You know, I've just been appointed AA to the speaker. I'm the man. and we go to the annex where C. J.'s office is and C. J. looked at this office. And C. J. talked almost in these monosyllabic grunts and his big cigar and he said, "How you like that?" So I'm looking at this office that he's pointing me to, it's looks okay. I'm not connecting it to me. So it didn't take me long. I said, "Okay, Vern Rife has done a deal because C. J. is not a chairman. C. J. was the president of the Black Caucus and knew how to put all of his people in his right places, so he had made a lot of chairs, but he wasn't one himself. And Vern hired me on his staff and assigned me out to work with C. J. and then later on I became C. J.'s--it didn't hardly matter whether I was on his staff or Vern's staff. I mean I just worked directly with C. J. from that point. And he became like a father to me that I did not have and I think I became like a son to him that he didn't have, even though he had a son, Joey. Joey, unfortunately, was involved in a lot of negative activity from drugs, drinking, incarceration and all that kind of thing. And so C. J. poured a lot into me. He would stand at my door. He would debrief every night, what do you think about this? What do you think about that? Even when he was considering running for [U.S.] Congress when they created the district and Tony Hall ran for the seat in congress, I mean he really--and I would always play the role of, I guess people call it "the devil's advocate or whatever, but I was always the guy who would question in and maintain my position, so I would say, I wouldn't do. I mean I would intentionally say I wouldn't do that whether it was legislative or political or whatever. So we would have these rich discussions every evening. So he would say to me very calmly like a father, he'd say, "But Ray here's what you gotta consider, if I do this, this is the outcome. Sometimes you can't see why somebody is doing something. The reason I'm doing this," then he'd give me the history, this and this and this to get to this point. So it was the best mentoring. So when I end up going to [Washington] D.C., which I didn't want to do, but it was C. J. who sat down and called my wife, you'll meet her when you leave here, called my wife and said, "I can't get through this thick-headed boy. I want you all to come over for dinner and I need your help." So we go over for dinner because I got my plan. I'm going to do this and this, and everything I said I was going to do, I did. After the internship, I went to work for the Legislative Service Commission, I became the research associate, I did the campaign stuff that I said I wanted to do and then I became the lobbyist with AFSCME [American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees], right, public employees' union. Story_ID: 125011 Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute, now where does Columbus State Community College [Columbus, Ohio] fit in all this? Speaker 2: Columbus State when I got back from Washington [D.C.]--so the sequence would have been--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --okay, so we got it out of order--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah.--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: We have is '75 [1975], but it's not. Speaker 2: Yeah, the sequence would have been from the internship to the aide, legislative aide two years later to work with C. J. McLin to AFSCME [American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees] after working with C. J. working with AFSCME as the assistant director of legislation and then after AFSCME going to Washington. And then when I came back from Washington, I went to work for the Chamber of Commerce, the Columbus area Chamber of Commerce for a year or two or something like that. Then after the Chamber, was Columbus State. I was in Columbus State for five years. I was in Columbus State from 1981 for five and half years. Speaker 1: I thought that was too soon in our outline. We have it in outline as 1975, so 1981. All right, I just wanted to make sure because I saw it there. Speaker 2: Right. And I had another relationship there--mentoring relationship--with the president, Harold Nestor and very good, very close relationship. So I came on as his executive assistant and then I became the vice president of Minority Affairs at Columbus Affairs. Speaker 1: Okay, I want to go back to--all right, so you're working for C. J.. So how do you end up working for the union, AFSCME? Speaker 2: Well, that was one of my plans. I wanted to be a lobbyist. I was just really clear about each thing--all of the experience that I wanted before I became a state rep. Okay, I'm going to do this, and all of these things are going to give me the grounding and the experience that I think I need to be an effective legislator. Speaker 1: Now, is this '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: This is part of '76 [1976], so after I finish the internship and working with C. J., which is hard to leave C. J. because he didn't want me to leave, so he was blocking opportunities as well. But I'm talking to people in the labor movement, Warren Pate, guys like that, saying, "I'm dropping it. I want to lobby for a union." I wanted to lobby for the AFL-CIO, but they bring most of their guys up from the union. So a good friend of mine, Don Day, was with AFSCME, so Don finally said to me, "Well, if that's what you wanted to do, why didn't you ask me?" Because I'm working all around as opposed to going straight to him, and really didn't know how influential Don was within that union. He was the secretary-treasurer in that union. He was the second guy. But sometimes we don't value African Americans to the extent that we should. So, unfortunately, I think I was in that position where I knew Don. I just didn't know how influential he was within the union, so I wasn't going directly to him. So finally, he said to me--I think he saw me out there trying my best to get into a union, to lobby, and he said, "If that's what you want to do, why didn't you just come up and ask me? So he introduces me to the president, Bob Brienza, so I come in as a lobbyist for them. Then I--that had to go from '70 [1970]--that was probably the '70--AFSCME--two and half years, three years--that had to be like in '75 [1975], or '76 [1976], or '78 [1978], or something like that '79 [1979], yeah. Speaker 1: So when you went to the White House, that was like during the last couple of years?--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Yeah, last year, a little over a year. And then came back here after the White House stint, and vice president with the Columbus area Chamber and then with Columbus State Community College in five and a half years. Story_ID: 125012 Speaker 1: Okay now, let--let me just go back to the mid '70s [1970s]. Now what were the, well, issues in the State of Ohio and in Columbus [Ohio] in those days? I know that school desegregation is starting to become an issue. There are other things too, so what were they? Speaker 2: You know I spent so much time at the legislature, so I was more focused on the state issues. What was happening locally that was big was school desegregation and so I was like I didn't talk about that when I was a student, but I was right in the middle of that Penick decision [Columbus Bd. Of Educ. v. Penick, 443 U.S. 449 (1979)] and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What's this? The Penick decision? Speaker 2: Yes, P-E-N-I-C-K. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Judge Robin Duncan was the judge who handled the school desegregation piece and that came after--that came right after my graduation. That had to be actually early '70s [1970s] maybe. Story_ID: 124141 Speaker 1: All right, yeah, tell us what was going on in terms of school desegregation here in Columbus [Ohio] in the '70s [1970s] I guess. Speaker 2: Oh, in the '70s [1970s]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, you were giving us, kind of off-camera, you were telling us the history about how it got started, the school district boundaries being changed. Speaker 2: Right and that would have been right around 1962-'60--it had to be around 1962. Speaker 1: Now, here is a crucial question, why were these boundaries being changed? Were they being changed to integrate the schools or to keep theme segregated? Speaker 2: I think the boundaries were changed to keep them segregated actually. So they had--depending on what side of town you lived, we brought more students to the eastside over here to Champion Junior High School [Columbus, Ohio] and they also segregated the teachers. You had all these superbly credentialed African-American teachers, both male and female, but they were all brought to one school, to Champion, we were the beneficiary of that. It certainly wasn't fair to them, I don't think to the teachers that they were all brought to one school. They certainly could have used their expertise, their perspectives and so forth in a lot of these other schools, but the students were the beneficiaries that we had there. Then the court's decision around busing, I can't remember the year, but that had to be around the '70s [1970s] that this court decision came around busing. And even later than the early '70s [1970s] because I remember coming back from Washington [D.C.] and they said, "Would you speak"--I mean I was coming back to visit family and so forth--"Would you go over to East High School--where I graduated from--and speak?" I said, "I would love to," graduate of Columbus, East High School and coming back. I come back and the school has a large number of white students, which my mind wasn't ready for. I mean I knew that the busing had occurred, I just wasn't ready for that many white students to be at East High School--the class that I went, it wasn't a whole auditorium, I went to a class to speak, and the questions even that I got. One student even asked about the Strategic Arms Limitation Agreement, SALT and I happen to know about SALT because my office is right next to the foreign policy guy and we talked all the time. And you have to be abreast of all the issues there. But I'm at East High School talking about Strategic Arms Limitation, a question from a white student? I thought I was going to come back and get questions like, "What's it's like to have been in East High School and now you're at the White House," those kind of general questions, but that had come about because of the busing. Then when I came back--I guess it was still a very much top-of-mind kind of issue because I remember talking about equality of educational opportunities and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] president, Bobby Durham, calling me and complimenting for the approach that I took to dealing with this whole school desegregation issue, but I never saw it as being a great benefit. I saw it as weakening East High School. I think East High School is still weakened as the result of desegregation that took place. I always said, "If it's a good thing that we have black colleges, like Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], like Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], like Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], like Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I mean, you know, you name it--if it's a good thing to have black colleges, where students are comfortable with other African-American students and knowing their history and getting that kind of motivation and encouragement, you know, one-on-one that you can do this and so forth--if it's a good thing at a college level, why is it such a bad thing at the high school or the primary and secondary level? My thing is if you give equal opportunity; if you have qualified staff; if you have the equipment, the resources, the band--I used to look at the other schools. We barely had enough snare drums, we barely had--we didn't have xylophones. We didn't have a lot of the things that they had in the white schools that were still a part of the Columbus public system, right? So in the All-City band competitions, I'd go and they had equipment that we never had played before and we still won because we had that kind of tradition of excellence at East High School, but it was that kind of disparity that I was fighting against-- Story_ID: 124142 Speaker 1: I have heard people say that it was the desegregation of the school, staff, and administration that really sort of destroyed the inner-city public school--I mean the all-black schools that were in existence and the ones that had a standard of that. Speaker 2: Yep. I think it factored in quite a bit, and it coupled with the demise of your inner cities essentially and not having the kind of diversity that we had within the schools. We had a pretty rich diversity economically. If you leave a school district with all poor kids and today, not only the poverty, but the single female head of households, and not enough men, and not enough teachers and all of those things combined, I think it definitely factors into the academic failure, but we had a pretty rich environment when I was a student thankfully. Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about the White House. Or did I skip over AFSCME [American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees] too fast? Speaker 2: I enjoyed AFSCME but that was tempered by having a boss, who was a much older man. His name is Tom Morgan. And Tom was one of the founders of the union, so he was one of the founders of AFSCME. So he was the director of legislation. I was hired as the assistant director of legislation, and I'm full of energy. And I'm ready to go out and organize the workers to do what workers do--to play a role in bargaining for wages, hours, conditions and all of that. I'm going into the prisons. I'm going into the mental health institutions. And I'm organizing the locals. I'm telling them what they can do. I mean I'm the guy who's empowering them. And my boss the older white gentleman was like, "You know, take it easy" because he was on his last leg. It wasn't what I would call an enjoyable experience. I went to the president Bob Brienza. I went to Don obviously first, Don Day who was the secretary of treasury and I said, "this is terrible. I can't get anything done here." Don said, "Be patient. Go to Bob Brienza, be patient." Patience wasn't something that I had a lot of at that time, particularly looking at the reality of it. I mean you had people putting their lives on the line and working pretty humiliating conditions, I thought, changing bed pans and that kind of thing and guards in prison, those kinds of positions, and here we are in our plush positions. We all got big cars and the first thing they told me when I got here was, "Go get a car." I said, "What kind of car?" They said, "Any car you want," the first day. And so I go out and I pick a new [Oldsmobile] Cutlass, silver Cutlass, red interior, beautiful and I get home and my wife [Marty Miller] says, "Oh, what?" They told me to go get a car, so I got a car, expense account, you got your car, you get your expense account, you get mileage reimbursement, all kinds of benefits and I'm living well. That's why I didn't want to go to Washington [D.C.]. That's why when C. J. [McLin] said, "Here's this opportunity in the White House staff." I'm like, "No, I just built a new house." I mean life is good. But I didn't enjoy that. I can't think anything about it that I enjoyed other than going out and trying to organize the folks but it was frustration being held down by a boss, and I thought being overcompensated for the kind of work that we were doing as opposed to the kind of work that the people were doing that were collecting the membership dues from. Speaker 1: And the union once again is AFSCME--American, what is it? The American--? Speaker 2: American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees. Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay. I just wanted to get that on record. Story_ID: 124143 Speaker 1: So anyhow then the White House starts calling because we had worked very hard. We, meaning the Ohio legislative Black Caucus and C. J. [McLin] was the president. I keep mixing the names. At that time, it was called, "BEDO," Black Elected Democrats of Ohio. C. J. was the president. And C. J. calls in this guy who was a principle in the Carter campaign and we had been out front supporting Jimmy Carter. So he calls in Ben Brown. Ben Brown was a state rep in Georgia, in Atlanta. And Ben comes here and C. J. and Bowen and all those guys, they give him the blues. They give him holy hell about how African Americans aren't getting anything out of the Carter administration after we had done so much work and so Ben facilitates the meeting with Bob Strauss, and Bob was chairman of the Democratic National Committee and major political player out of Texas. So Ben sets up this meeting with Bob Strauss. C. J. goes to see Strauss. So Strauss says to him, "So what do you want?" And C. J. came back and told me--he said, "You know Ray," he said, "I'm talking to the most powerful man in the Democratic Party." And he asked me what did I want and I said, "You know what? I don't know." So C. J. said, "but I'm going back." He said, "And I got this--I got the yellow book." It's called the plum book with all the federal appointments and all that. C. J. said, "I got the yellow book." He said, "I want you go through"--because I'm his assistant at this point--he said, "I want you to go through this yellow book, the plum book, and I want you to identify everything that you think we can get" and I did." I started getting people appointed to boards and I was feeling good about that--getting people appointed to boards and various positions in the federal government. And so they offer--you know, C. J. wants the big one--he wants the big job. So the big job is Director of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance. So C. J. says, "I want you to apply for this job as the Director of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance." I said, "Nope, I'm not doing that." C. J. said, "Ray, we can get this job, and I need you to apply for it." I had the experience. I had worked [Ohio governor John J.] Gilligan's campaign and a number of campaigns and that kind of thing and I saw people who were unqualified for the positions that they held--that they were appointed to--and I saw them fall after Gilligan was defeated. So there were a number of African Americans in the Gilligan administration, high level positions, and when he lost, they were unemployed and unemployable in a large measure. And they had a heck of a time trying to find new jobs and so, "No, I'm not going to take any job as a Director of the Federal Office of Contract Compliance. I don't even know what it is." And C. J. said, "Just do it." I said, "Okay, I'll do it, but I'm not going to take the job." So I do the big federal forms that go from here to the door, and I get offered the job. Now, I'm at AFSCME [American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees]. I'm still at AFSCME. They're calling AFSCME every day from the White House. Initially, my secretary is like, "It's the White House." She's all thrilled they're calling. Then it got to be, "It's the White House again" because I'm like, "I'm not going." So I nailed the position down as I promised C. J. I would do and as I said, "I'm not taking the job." Now, we're in limbo because I've got this job, but I'm not going. In that interim period, they offered the position as deputy special assistant to the president. So C. J. comes to me and he said, "there's a White House position." I said, "I'm not going. Here's my plan. I told you want my plan was. Right from AFSCME to running for state rep," and he said and he's shaking his head. That's when he called my wife. And they kind of double-teamed me and C. J. said--the words that you never forget--he said, "The damn gates to Port Columbus International Airport [Columbus, Ohio] will not close when you leave." You can always come back, right? That resonated. I said, "Yeah, yeah." We were having dinner over at his apartment over there. Story_ID: 124144 Speaker 1: So I went and did that [directed Office of Federal Contract Compliance, Washington, D.C.] and--great experience, great experience. And that's when I really found out how powerful [Ohio state rep.] C. J. [McLin] was because people, in that building, people visiting from other states would say, "Good Lord"--my boss, who was Louie Martin, and legendary Louie Martin. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Louis [E.] Martin. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's who I worked with directly. So I came in as a chief of staff. Louie needed somebody--he needed a man, number one, he had all women, Karen Zanica [ph.], Julia Dobbs, very bright women, University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know who ends up in the White House, a bunch of Ivy Leaguers. But he needed somebody practically who knew politics and a man. So I come in and met with a little resistance, but then you prove yourself. So I showed that I knew how to work the [Capitol] Hill even though that wasn't my job. They had congressional leads on staff. I still wanted to go up and do it because they couldn't get anything done. And [President Jimmy] Carter was fish out of water. In terms of really knowing how to work Washington and the [U.S.] Congress, he was pretty much disastrous almost. That was--you know when you're in a situation and you're afraid and you're not comfortable. Well he surrounded himself with all the Georgia guys, Hamilton Jordan, and Jody Powell, and Rick Hutchinson, so the small circle, talented guys--you know Hamilton had better instincts politically and so did Jody than Carter. Carter didn't have political instincts. He's an engineer. So he would literally come to the meetings--because I was a deputy, I was second level guy, so I'm in all the meetings, so he would literally come into the meetings with gridded, the engineer's paper, gridded paper, you know what I mean, and a portfolio. He's a naval guy. He's on time and I'd set up meetings with the members of the Congressional Black Caucus, and you know how that goes, all the brothers from the Congressional Black Caucus get together and they're talking stuff and they show up late, some, maybe six of them would show up on time, and maybe three of them are coming from some other committee but they're going to get there and they may get there ten, fifteen minutes late, and Carter, being the engineer and the naval guy, man, he was intractable. So, you know how politics go. The first is a lot co-bits and these are people that you don't get a chance to see all day every day, so [HM] Charlie Rangel is asking Lou Stokes [HM Louis Stokes] about something, and Bill Clay about. So these guys are like talking and catching up. And Carter is just sitting there getting hot, and then Charlie Rangel stands up and he does the New York, "The problem, mister president, is that we're like two ships passing in the night, and if you understood what we're trying to do." So he's doing the Charlie Rangel and Carter is sitting there because he could get tight, really tight. He had that big old toothy grin, but he would be really tight inside. And I'm watching him--I got pictures--I could show you some pictures if I could pull them of me standing in the background of meetings that I've convened. And I've been raised in politics, so I have a real appreciation for it. I really enjoy it. I like the give and take of it all. And he didn't. For him, we are here to talk about this and--I remember in one of these meetings, he said--closed his portfolio, he said, "I was here on time." Who cares? "I was here on time and you weren't. I think we have exhausted this conversation. The meeting is over." I was like, "No, you didn't, not with members of the Congress, right?" So I then had to go and repair that. Story_ID: 124145 Speaker 1: Went up with Louie [Louis Martin], Alex Poinsett wrote in his book, Walking--what was his--'Walking with the Presidents' [sic, 'Walking With Presidents'], that's about Louie--that book is about Louie Martin and he describes how Louie--he describes how Louie develops this strategy to go up on the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.] and he uses me to get in to see the [U.S.] Congressmen. The truth of the matter is I outlined the strategy. I told Louie, "let's do it this way,' and use me as the new guy. It's like Ray Miller is the new guy and I gotta introduce him. So we went in to see each member and I--with the experience I had had at the state level, it was natural for me. So I literally felt there like I was going in with two groceries bags of goodies, so the first thing is a member of congress--whether it was Shirley Chisholm, or [Bill] Clay, or Grey, was Bill Gray there yet? I don't think so. Yeah, he was--Bill Gray was there. So you take the butt whipping--what the administration is not doing, and what the president is not doing, so that's the part of the game and Louie is there with me, and so I let them exhaust themselves with the whipping. Then after that, I would say, "Congressman"--because I had already done the research on their district," so, how is unemployment in your district? What's it going to look like this summer for summer jobs in your district? What about economic development activity? We got this program in [U.S. Department of] Commerce; we got this program in [U.S. Department of] Labor; we got this program in the [U.S.] Department of Education," and I knew all the goodies. So I'm feeling again like I got this bad loaded after you've done your thing and you've emoted, now, let's talk business in terms of what I can give--this is lobbying, right? I need your support on these amendments; I need your support on this bill? They didn't know how to do that on the congressional liaison staff. They didn't know how to trade. And I had been taught to trade all the way back with C. J. McLin and Jim Rhodes, right. It was the quid pro quo, this is it, "You tell Mac that he better get on board to support my bond proposals, and if he doesn't support this, then this doesn't happen for him." I'm used to the trade and C. J. was a master at it. So while I wasn't on the congressional liaison staff, and that environment, as you probably know, is very intense and very competitive, where these guys plan to make their career, off of their success in enacting a piece of legislature. So I had guys that pulled me aside, "If you think"--Bob Melson, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] lawyer--Bob said, to me, he pulls me aside, "If you think I'm going to let you come up in here and take this bill that I've been working on for the last two years, The Fair Housing Amendment," you gotta another--expletives--so I pulled him a little further into the corner. He remembered what my background was, coming from two parents who were fighters. I took him little bit deeper in the corner. And I explained some things in some language that I think shocked--I think it shocked him. He had a different level of respect. But I wasn't trying to take his job. I was trying to get the initiative enacted, number one, but also to try to show them, here is what we have. We've got all the resources of the federal government that we can trade with, you know, and it all made sense. Why not help the congressman with jobs and with youth employment, with economic development, with EDA [U.S. Economic Development Administration] grants and all that kind of stuff--why not help them with that?-- Story_ID: 124146 Speaker 1: Part of what I hear you saying is that we have [U.S.] Congressmen that are complaining of what they're not getting, but they don't even know what they can get. Speaker 2: That's right. That's precisely right. They were--you know how it goes in politics. We put you in there. We went out front and we supported you--some of them did--some of them did not. Some of them were with Ted Kennedy [Senator Edward Kennedy] because Ron was so good. Ron Brown was working with Ted Kennedy and that was clearly one of the most astute brothers. His death was way, way too premature. He was just very, very, astute, very strategic. He was a grown man for a long time. He was lawyer, but Ron was quick. Speaker 1: This is Ron Brown who was Secretary of Commerce for the [Bill] Clinton administration who died prematurely in plane accident. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: That would be in 1993 or '4 [1994]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So did you know him then? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ron--when I was in the White House staff, the National Urban League was meeting in New York [New York], and Ron was working with Ted, judiciary committee, Ted Kennedy in the judiciary committee, so he had to represent Ted at the National Urban. Neither of the principles could be there to speak. Carter couldn't be there and Kennedy couldn't be there to speak, so Ron was representing Ted and I was representing Jimmy Carter. We jump on the rapid transit thing from D. C. metro, or whatever, from D. C. to New York. We don't talk to each other. We're on the train together. We know each other, but we're not talking to each other. And we get there and I spoke first. I felt really good. I mean I did my thing. Then he came and he did his thing. So then we're on the same train coming back, and we're not talking. So, finally, Ron comes over and says, "We represented our white men well today, didn't we?" Then we broke down and started laughing. It's like, "We represented our white men well today." Up there debating each other about the administration, but that was a time when we had Iranian hostage crisis and the strategy in the White House, which I didn't agree with, but the strategy was that the president wasn't going to come out campaigning as long as the hostages were in the compound. And so Ted Kennedy was on the outside saying, "Carter, won't come out of the rose garden." It was a constant message that Carter won't come out of the rose garden. Then I was a part of--I was a part of the attempt to rescue the hostages because of [HM] Dick Gregory. So when you're in that building, when you're on the White House staff, it's all day and half the night--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --finish the sentence. Speaker 2: It's all day and half the night. So I decide to walk out of the building one day just to get some fresh air and Dick Gregory was out on 15th and Pennsylvania with a sandwich board. He had just come back from Iran. Story_ID: 124147 Speaker 1: Yes, [HM] Dick Gregory--he's got a sandwich board. He's outside of the White House. Speaker 2: So on the White House staff, everybody comes to you. You might want to meet with somebody, but they don't want you to come and meet with them in some department or some law office. They want to put in their calendar that they have a meeting at the White House. So everybody is coming to you all day. You're in early. The first thing that you have are your deputy meetings and then the senior staff meets. So you're in the building at 5:30 or 6:00, the very latest because you gotta go over everything that has happened the day before, the evening before when you go to those senior staff meetings, it moves; I mean it really moves, so somebody might hit you with a question about something in your area, right? And so my area--particular focus was on small business, economic development and more broadly, everything that was minority, everything that was African-American largely and minority issues in the White House, even though Louie Martin [Louis Martin] was always careful. "We're not the minority office." He made it clear, "We're not the minority office. We deal with every major issue here." And Louie had worked with [Harry S] Truman, with [John F.] Kennedy, with L. B. J. [Lyndon B. Johnson] and he had done all of this from the Democratic National Committee and then he came over on the White House staff with [Jimmy] Carter. So I was really privileged to work with this giant in American politics, who had played such a role with the appointment of Thurgood Marshall, [HM] Vernon Jordan, going to the National Urban League, he's--Bill Hasty (ph), with all of that, Louie was just beyond wise in terms of politics. So I just wanted to get out of the building on this day because, like I said, you're closed in. Out in the corner at 15th [Street] and Pennsylvania [Avenue] is [HM] Dick Gregory with a sandwich board and protesting, you know, the American hostages in the American Embassy in Iran. So I stop out right at the gate there--on the fence, I'm sorry, at the corner at Pennsylvania to talk to him. I said, "What's all this about?" He said, "Brother, I have the answer." I said, "You have the answer to what?" He said, "How to get the hostages released." I said, "Really? Well, tell me about it." And so I'm just enjoying daylight sunshine, just being out there, and he said, "It'll take some time." He opens up his briefcase--and Dick Gregory has got this incredible memory. He can remember dates and times and places--I mean just unbelievable. I wish I had that kind of memory particularly today. So, in any event, Dick opens up his briefcase and there's a picture of him sitting with his legs crossed on a little pillow talking with the Ayatollah Khomeini. I'm like. "Wow, maybe he does have something here." Then he says, "On this date this occurred." And he's pulling out all these newspaper clippings. He was able to meet with [Iranian president Abolhassan] Banisadr and the Ayatollah because he's over there fasting, and this is one of the longest fasts he had ever done. He's connecting with them on a spiritual level. I don't know how he got himself all involved in it, but there he was and he's having a these meetings with the principals that our guys are also negotiating with. And he said, "Meet me tomorrow morning if you would." And I said, "Now, I want you to come into the White House--" Story_ID: 124148 Speaker 1: I bring him in--after several attempts, I tell the Secret Service I want to bring [HM] Dick Gregory in and they said, "Well, Mr. Miller, have you looked at his record?" I said, "No." They said, "Do you know how many times he has been arrested? I said, "No, I don't know how many times he's been arrested." They said, "Like fifty-two times or something like that." I said, "This is Dick Gregory. This is like prot--Yeah, he would have been arrested but for social protests, you know that kind of thing, not as a criminal." They said, "Okay, we'll let him in but only into your office." So my office--we had a beautiful suite right on the east wing, right on 15th [Street] and Pennsylvania [Avenue] there. So right inside the door, our office looked into the Jacqueline Onassis Gardens--so I say this to Dick, "I'm going to set up a meeting for you to meet with the president [Jimmy Carter]." He said, "Oh no, brother, I'm not meeting with the president." I said, "Why," and he said, "I know what happens to black folks when they meet with the president." He said, "A little cavity opens up on the top of your head and your Uncle Tom jumps out," and he said, "Whatever the president says, you say, 'Oh, yes, sir, Mr. President, I agree with you." He said, "I'm not meeting the president." He had me dying laughing. I said, "No, man, you got all this information." He said, "No, I'm not doing it." He said, "You meet with me tomorrow morning at the Hay-Adams Hotel and bring your tape." He said, "You gotta a tape recorder?" I said, "Yep." He said, "You bring your tape recorder," so we meet like 7:30 in the morning. He's doing this Bahamian diet. He's got all these pills and tea. No food. And then he starts telling me all this experimental stuff about your strength that comes from it. Then we get down to the interview, and we sat for about three or four hours, right? I'm popping tapes, man, one after the other. And he was right. I mean the bottom line we had their assets frozen when it was all said and done. It was a sizable amount of money. I can't remember how many millions or billions of dollars it was. But if you recall when [Ronald] Reagan won, it was no time before the hostages were released. We had the failed attempt where they went in and they said that sand got up into the engine of the helicopters and the helicopters crashed into the compound and those guys lost their lives. Speaker 2: Yeah, they called it the "October Surprise,"--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --Yeah.--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --now, or the plotting around that being that-- I know a lot of people--I guess some conspiracy theorists and (unclear) people think it was a sabotage. Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely and I'd be one of those. I'd definitely think it was sabotaged. But I think it goes back--I don't know if I've heard anybody say this, but when the President Carter came in, he did a very foolish thing, in my opinion, he terminated something in the neighborhood of two hundred CIA agents and when you go back and take a look at that--at the very beginning of his administration--and that's the last thing you want to do to have the cloak and dagger guys, you know, on the opposite of what you want to do. There was never much conversation around that, but when I saw that, I was like, "Oh, my goodness!" It would be ten times worse than a governor coming and firing 250 highway patrolmen. They have too much information. It would be that kind of analogy but only a hundred times worse because some of these guys are trained to sabotage, trained to disrupt, and worse. Yeah, that's what he did. So, in any event, Gregory had all kind of proposals about a big prayer vigil on the South Lawn and all those kind of things that he thought we could add in. I'm like, "Okay, I don't think we need to do all that." But because of that, then I was in all the negotiations, all the senior meetings, around the Iranian hostage crisis and I was there when the helicopters went down and I saw Jimmy Carter break down and cry in the Oval office. We were at the Oval Office together when the attempt went off, and Dick Gregory put me there whether he knew that or not because I had all that information--I had all those tapes that I shared with the foreign policy staff. Story_ID: 124149 Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's an interesting story. Speaker 1: Yeah. Quite interesting. Speaker 2: That is kind of post mortem about the Jimmy Carter administration and black people? Speaker 1: Man, you know, I still have a lot of stuff in storage, but I think [President Bill] Clinton said he had more African Americans, but I don't think so. Carter hired more African Americans on the White House staff. Clinton had more on the administration, but Carter had more in the White House staff than any president and that was because of Louie [Louis Martin] and me, and so Louie Martin, because of his experience, he knew the federal government; he knew all the major players, Togo West [HM Togo D. West, Jr.], he was pulling people for the [U.S.] Army and all that. It's like, okay, we can get him, this person, and pull him from this university. These people are high ranking officials within-[HM] Andrew [F.] Brimmer at the Federal Reserve. You know, we had people everywhere. And we had a weekly--I wish President Obama [HM Barack Obama] would do this kind of thing quite frankly--but we had a weekly conference call with all the black leadership, with the Civil Rights Conference, with the Urban League president, [HM] Vernon Jordan, with Joe Lowry, I mean every week we had that kind of conference call, and we would give them a briefing on every major initiative within the administration. And Louie allowed me to do it, so I was the guy who would arrange the conference call, you know, I gave the briefing to [HM Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] and Vernon, you know, [HM] Dorothy Height and Coretta [Scott King] and I mean all these people every week, but we did some pretty smart things. We had our own newsletter that we put out ever week from our office to all the major leaders across the state. We brought them in droves. I mean we brought the leadership in to the White House for all kind of briefings. Then I would just dream. I was looking at Lionel Richie--well I brought the Commodores in and Lionel Richie. I brought the Temptations, Sugar Ray, and Wilma Rudolph. I brought all these people in. Carter would say--sometimes they would say, "Why are you bringing them?" Well, these are iconic people. These are leaders, and quite frankly, he needs it. He needs the association. It's going to be in 'Ebony,' it's going to be in 'Jet' and in all the major African-American newspapers, and here you are with people that our community looks up for whatever reason, you know, whether they're entertainers, whether they're great thinkers. I mean--so I would just sit back and say, "Okay, today I want intellectuals," so I want Charles V. Hamilton, right? I want--One day I brought in Hamilton, Dorothy, Coretta--she didn't have much to say--, Andrew Brimmer. I mean I had them all one day, and we just went up the residence where they stay--went to the residence in the White House and had a nice little sit-down, like a state dinner almost. So, yeah, I would say, "Who do I want to bring today?" There were who could just walk in because of their influence-[Mayor] Coleman Young out of Detroit [Michigan], you know, had done so much, he could just walk in. Daddy King [Martin Luther King, Sr.]--Carter didn't do anything without consulting him. Jesse, to a far lesser extent, Jesse could come to my office, but then we'd arrange meeting with the president. But Jesse, at that time, it didn't quite work as well. I don't know if anything has changed in terms of his style, but Jesse, his style is to beat you up, so Carter didn't appreciate that at all. Carter didn't appreciate somebody to come to his house and beat him up, and then go out on the lawn and have all the press and beat him up to even a greater level. So Jesse wasn't one of his favorite guys-- Story_ID: 124150 Speaker 1: --What about [HM] Andrew Young? I know he had lost his position I think by the time you showed up as ambassador to the U.N. Speaker 2: No. In fact, he was just leaving. He was just leaving and I got a feel for all of that. I see Andrew Young. I got a chance to meet him on a number of different occasions to get a chance to know a bit about him, but I, personally, see Andrew Young as almost a pure, kind of naive, kind-of-a-guy, if it's right, it's right kind of a thing without weighing--not playing games with politics or anything like that, maybe upbringing--I think his father is a dentist, you know, some degree of privilege. So I think he thought what he was doing was right and not recognizing, man if you're in American you don't know the influence of the Jewish community and Israel and what you say and how it impacts, you know, the Middle East, I'm just saying in a broader picture, I think his comments and his conversations doomed him only because he is such a pure and genuine kind of guy. Speaker 1: It's amazing you say that because that's the way a lot of people characterize Jimmy Carter too, pure heart but naive about politics. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Carter had kind of a colder side though, a much colder side. He had a much colder side. Oftentimes, I thought the smile was not a genuine smile. Speaker 1: You saw more the engineer and the naval officer. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, they say he was never portrayed that way. They always said he was a peanut farmer, and here is a man who was a commander of a nuclear sub, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's not an easy thing to do. Speaker 2: Right, terribly bright. He was a much better president out of office, great humanitarian, and on the last point you just made, you've seen evidence of that in the last year or so, where he's made some comments that politicians wouldn't make. Story_ID: 124151 Speaker 1: How was it leaving the White House after the [Ronald] Reagan election? Speaker 2: I had mapped out what I wanted to do when I got back to Columbus [Ohio]. I was still on course in terms of wanting to be the state rep. and it bothered a number of my associates on the White House staff because you can be so immersed in it, that you can't think for yourself, so all these bright people--I mean extremely well credentialed, particular, they had not thought about themselves, and I did. I mean I thought what I wanted to do when I left there. And for almost the full year, I was telling them--a good six months--I was telling them that he [Jimmy Carter] couldn't win. And they didn't want to hear that. I was the guy--I like to go out, so I'm arranging conferences all over the country. I'm doing big conferences. We call them White House Economic Development conferences, I just made it up, so going to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], going to Miami [Florida], just taking these conferences around the country and we did one here [Columbus]--While I was there, naturally, had to do one at home. And we had all of these brilliant African Americans in leadership positions. We had Patricia Harris at HUD. We had Bill Clement over at SBA and Alexis Harman and Ernie Green--I mean we had all these people that I could took out, housing guy from [Washington] D. C. there, [HM] Sterling Tucker. I mean I had all these guys that I could take out across the country. Politics is what I know, so I said, "We're going to do these White House conferences across the country" and, man, we would go into a city--Dave Richardson in Philadelphia, before he passed, Dave had a big old Malcolm X medallion, but going into a big conference in Philly, take all these people and I still saw the reaction coming from the folks. And I'd go back and tell the guys. I said, "You know what? We'll do fine amongst black people, but he's not going to make it." It wasn't a question of loyalty. Sometimes I think they questioned my loyalty--I said, "None of you guys are working as hard as I am. None of you guys are working in the building and outside of the building like I am, right? You guys are right here in D. C. And I'm telling you, he's not going to make it," so knowing that, I had made my plan to come back and what I was going to do. So I'm flying back and forth and meet with my advisors and one of my key guys, Gilbert Price, with 'The Column Post,' he said, you want to be at the Chamber of Commerce. I said, "Why, Gil?" He said, "Because it's quasi-public-private and you'll develop the relationships you need for the political thing on the business side in the community, governmental side." I said, "It makes sense," and so, leaving--I hated to see all these guys at the end--on the last day, well, what am I going to do. So we're down in the White House mess--the White House dining room, and we're all talking, all the deputies, and they said, "What are we going to do?" I said, "Well I got all these offers." I mean I had Nationwide and Borden's and all of these offers, and I said, "I think I'm going to do the Chamber of Commerce." And they had nothing, and I could feel the resentment, like "God, this guy has got himself taken care of. "We've been working hard for the president." No, I've been working hard for the president too. It's just that I had a bigger vision. You know, they're all so bright. I'm sure they all did well, but it was kind of sad in the last days, it's like the reality had hit them that the president had lost. They didn't have a job. Story_ID: 124152 Speaker 1: Now what was your position--the name of the job when you were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Deputy Special Assistant to the President. Speaker 1: Okay, what was Louis Martin's title? Speaker 2: Special Assistant to the President. Speaker 1: Special Assistant to the President. Speaker 2: Yep, he was a step above me. He was like a hundred steps above me, but that was his title. Speaker 1: How many assistants did he have? Speaker 2: He had one, two, three, four--one, two, three, four--five. Speaker 1: Five. Speaker 2: And--but I was the only deputy. I was the only deputy special assistant. The others I guess they would have been--I don't know what their title was, like administrative. Speaker 1: Is there anything in particular that you can think of that you were able to get the Ohio Black Caucus as a result of being in that position? Speaker 2: A number of appointments, we had Ryan appointed to major board--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(unclear). Speaker 2: We mostly delivered money, and that's far more important than the appointments. So it was on in terms of the economic development, funds, the education funds, the employment funds, I mean I just, I had it going. I tried to do--I kept black books on every state that-- I told them that I would cover every region and so I tried to ensure that we were moving those resources around the country in a fair way. I think we did a pretty good job with it. the communication--man, this administration, I have no relations, none, zero. And I don't think there's ever been another person from Ohio to serve on the White House staff ever, let alone at the level that I was. Not bragging, but I was fortunate to have some really good experiences, so you would think that the president would want to tap into that, but he hasn't done that--not only with me, but people like me across the country. I know the guys. I've served with them in National Black Caucus at state legislatures and National Council of State Legislatures, and all of that. President Obama [HistoryMaker Barack Obama] has his own group, and seemingly, if you're not Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you're not included. That's pretty limited experience. That's very limited experience but it worked for him. He's got smart guys around him. So it worked for him the first time and I hope it works for him this time. But, you know, we were really able to do some things to help people. And the criticism I hear from Congregational Black Caucus directed toward his administration is that they have not done enough specifically. It's not enough to talk generally about, you know, we all benefit if we have a healthcare policy, we all benefit if we improve education. What I hear the members of Congressional Black Caucus say as politicians is, "You need to give us something so we can go back our people and deliver." Story_ID: 124153 Speaker 1: What I hear you say is that [Jimmy] Carter actually--and he was able to do this through Louis Martin--was keep in contact with all the black organizations that were working on behalf of the black community on a weekly basis, you said. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you going out in the community all over the country--do you think maybe the rhetoric of race divisiveness in this country has kept [HM Barack] Obama from doing the same thing even though he is a black president? Speaker 2: No, I just don't think it's the kind of person that he is. Sometimes you can be too careful about race. I think you can be too concerned about how it's going to be perceived--that you're doing too much to help African Americans or whatever. I think you should step back and say, "Am I doing as much as [Bill] Clinton did? Am I doing as much as Carter?" And I think the answer to the question is "no" that you're not doing as much specifically. You're not hiring as many people. When you look at his administration--if you look at President Obama's administration, you just won't find the kind of representation that we had at the secretary level or the undersecretary level, right. And if you were to go and ask Ernie Gray and Alexis [HM Alexis Herman] and all of these people, they would have to affirm just what I just said. They couldn't make it up. There is a sister in our administration who's over at EPA. There's somebody in some off-brand title. I don't know what he does, but I know all the major positions in government, in federal government, and he doesn't hold one. But the big ones, we had Ron Brown in [U.S. Department of] Commerce under Clinton; you had Alexis at Labor, so we don't have an African American at Commerce, Labor, in Education, at HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], none of them. Speaker 1: Hazel O'Leary. Speaker 2: Hazel O'Leary in Energy, you're right. We've had opportunities twice for Supreme Court and Lord knows we could use a very strong ally right now there, and that particularly bothers me quite frankly. We have had one African American in the Supreme Court in the history of the country, and then Clarence Thomas, who is not, other than skin color, not really an African American in terms of advocating for black people in any kind of way. I mean he opposes most of the issues that come before the court that has an impact on African Americans. He's on the opposite side. [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson gave us Thurgood Marshall with a lot of help from Louie Martin and many others. So to have an opportunity to appoint a Supreme Court judge--I mean you can't say, particularly today, that you can't find qualified people. I mean you just can't say that. There are superbly qualified African Americans--I mean if you were to say, "I want top of the class, academic experience, appellant experience, you can say every credential you want, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], then bang, there is the person. I mean we've got people, and not to select one when you have two opportunities because you may not get to the opportunity again...